TUNISIA
Technical Assistance: Enhancing the
Social Protection and Labor System
while    promoting    Socioeconomic
Inclusion of the Poor and Vulnerable
(P158129) Completion Report FY16-17




June 15, 2017
                                                                       Tunisia
  Technical Assistance. Enhancing the Social Protection and Labor System
   while Promoting Socioeconomic Inclusion of the Poor and Vulnerable
                                                                       P158129
                                                   Completion Report FY16-17
                                 Final Revised Post Decision Meeting. June 15th, 2017

                                                                   CONTENTS


Acronyms and Abbreviations .................................................................................................................. 2
Acknowledgements ................................................................................................................................... 3
1.       Background and Overview ............................................................................................................. 3
2.       Program Progress & Achievements, March 2016 – March 2017 .......................................... 5
     Component 1: Jobs profiling of SSN Beneficiaries ....................................................................... 7
     Component 2: Assessing Job Creation Opportunities in Social Care......................................... 8
     Component 3: Policy Dialogue on the Role of Social Safety Nets in Human Capital
     development.......................................................................................................................................... 10
3.       Lessons Learned and View toward the Future ......................................................................... 11
Team Composition and Budget ............................................................................................................ 12
Annex 1: Abstracts of Notes ................................................................................................................. 14
Annex 2:Key issues, Limitations and operational implications of the TA Social Care Report:
A Technical review ................................................................................................................................ 20


Tables
       1. TA Delivered and Filed Outputs, with Key Achieved results
       2. Target audience for the TA and dissemination
       3. Team and Budget




                                                                              1
                             ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS

 AFD       Agence Française de Développement/ French Agency for Development
 ALMPs     Active Labor Market Programs
AMG        Assistance Médicale Gratuite
ANETI      Agence Nationale de l’Emploi et du Travail Indépendant
CERES      Centre d’Etudes et de Recherches Economiques et Sociales
CRES       Centre de Recherches et d’Etudes Sociales
CPF        Country Partnership Framework
CSO        Civil society organization
FDI        Foreign direct investment
FY         Fiscal Year
GDP        Gross Domestic Product
GoT        Government of Tunisia
GP         Global Practice
ICR        Implementation Completion Report
ILO        International Labor Organization
IMF        International Monetary Fund
INS        Institut National de la Statistique
MAKS       Multi-Year Advisory and Knowledge Service
MENA       Middle East and North Africa
MOE        Ministry of Education
MOH        Ministry of Health
MSA        Ministry of Social Affairs
MVTE       Ministry of Vocational Training and Employment
NGOs       Non-Governmental Organizations
          National Observatory for Employment and Qualifications-ObservatoireNational de
ONEQ      l’Emploi et des Qualifications)
PMO        Office of the Prime Ministry
PNAFN      Programme National d’Aide aux Familles Nécessiteuses
SCD        Systematic Country Diagnostic
SPL        Social Protection and Labor
SSN        Social Safety Net
TA         Technical Assistance
TND        Tunisian dinar
UGTT       Union Générale des Travailleurs Tunisiens
UTSS       Union Tunisienne de la Solidarité Sociale
USD        United States dollar
UTICA      Union Tunisienne de l’Industrie, du Commerce et de l’Artisanat
 UNDP      United Nations Development Program
 UNICEF    The United Nations Children's Emergency Fund
 USAID     United States Agency for International Development
 WBG       World Bank Group
 WFP       World Food Program
 WHO       World Health Organization




                                          2
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

This completion report was co-authored by Carine Clert (Task leader, GSP05) and Angela Elzir
(Junior Professional Associate, Jobs Group), core team member (GSP05). Key contributors to the
different tasks and activities conducted under this TA include: Mayalen Claire Iron (Consultant,
Social Protection), Geneviève Sempere-Briand (Consultant, Social Care sector), Malek Garbouj
(Consultant, Econometrics), Sami Bibi (Consultant, Senior Economist). Supporting consulting work
was undertaken by the CDCGE (Society of Consulting in community Development and Business
Management - Consulting en Développement Communautaire et en Gestion d’Entreprises ). The
initiative was supported by dedicated efforts of Suzanne Essama (Operations Officer) and Maya El-
Azzazi (Operations Analyst) GSP05 as well as of Uma Balasubramanian and Astania Kamau
(Program Assistants, GSP05), as well as Rekaya Ben Mahmoud (Team Assistant, MNCTN).
This Technical Assistance (TA) was conducted under the guidance of Setareh Razmara (Jan-July
2016), Hana Brixi, Practice Manager (starting July 2016) and David Robalino, Practice Manager
(Jobs Group). Country Director Marie Francoise Marie Nelly provided guidance at Concept Stage as
Chair. Peer reviewers Joana Silva, Senior Economist (LCRCE) and Ana Maria Munoz Boudet, Senior
Social Scientist, (GVV03) provided valuable insights.
The team would also like to express its deep thanks to the Government of Tunisia and especially core
directors and technical specialists from the Ministries of Social Affairs, Employment, Women,
Childhood and Family, Youth and Sports, and Development, as well as from the following public
agencies: CRES (Center for Studies and Socio-Economic Research - Centre d’Etudes et de
Recherches Economiques et Sociales), ONEQ (National Observatory for Employment and
Qualifications - L’Observatoire National de l’Emploi et des Qualifications), and INS (National
Institute of Statistics - Institut National de la Statistique) for their support and engagement in the
preparation of different activities supported by this TA.


    1. BACKGROUND AND OVERVIEW

1.      This completion report reports on completed deliverables and related results by
the advisory and knowledge service “Enhancing the Social Protection and Labor
System while Promoting Socioeconomic Inclusion of the Poor and Vulnerable in
Tunisia? over the period March 2016 - March 2017. This Advisory Service and Analytics
(ASA) aimed to “improve the capacity of the relevant Tunisian ministries to design programs
and policies to promote socioeconomic inclusion of disadvantaged groups, including the
poor, the vulnerable and youth?. At the request of the Government, targeted ministries
included the Ministry of Social Affairs (MSA), Employment and Vocational Training
(MFPE), Women, Family and Children, as well as Youth and Sports. Initially conceived as a
flexible and programmatic instrument 1 , the ASA was redefined as a discrete two-year
Technical Assistance program on two grounds: (i) selectivity, with focus on informing the
forthcoming operation on jobs and youth agreed between the Government and the Bank in the
context of the CPF2 and (ii) limited resources allocated for fiscal year 20173.

2.     The selection of TA areas stemmed from the country context, counterparts’
interest and strategic Bank priorities. The Concept Note pointed to the well-known issues
of high unemployment, limited growth and job creation, as well as to worrisome trends in
vulnerability and inequality, with strong intersections between these socioeconomic trends.

1 To allow for flexibility and continuity in a shifting environment, the team proposed that the TA be
implemented in a two-year period: (i) March 2016 - April 2017; and (ii) May 2017 – May 2018.
2 See Decision Note of April 6, 2016.
3 US$ 50,000, as opposed to 150,000 US.


                                                  3
For example, low levels of labor participation exist but with marked gender differences
(under 26 percent for women compared with 71 percent for men). Among workers living in
households in the poorest decile; for instance, the average unemployment rate is more than 30
percent, while among workers living in the richest households, this proportion falls below 15
percent. Among youth (15-24 years old), the unemployment rate is 2.5-3 times higher than
that of adults. The Concept Note also highlighted serious deficiencies in job-related policies
and programs that were contributing to worsening of the employment situation. One
particular case in point is the fact that Active Labor Market Programs (ALMPs) lacked proper
targeting and profiling systems to better assess constraints facing beneficiaries and the types
of support they needed to access wage or self-employment. In the area of social protection,
there were also serious inadequacies with Social Safety Net (SSN) programs that required
addressing in order to improve effectiveness and impact. Issues of targeting and improvement
in coverage were of paramount importance. Also of concern was the lack of proper attention
to the increasing number of school drop-outs, as well as missed opportunities to improve
design of SSN programs or rethink social protection in this area altogether.

3.      The Government and the Bank agreed to focus the TA on informing the
forthcoming jobs operation for “vulnerable Groups?, with particular areas of interest.
Two main points of context are noteworthy. First, at the time of Program Design, the Client
had also requested the development of an inclusive jobs operation to improve the
Government’s capacity to better address in improving the efficiency and effectiveness of
ALMPs and set up a mechanism to better understand the heterogeneity of constraints faced
by job-seekers. Key target groups for the operation at the time were work-able members of
SSN beneficiary households and disadvantaged youth not served by SSN programs. As lead
counterparts at the time, both the Ministry of Development and Cooperation (responsible for
human development policy) and the Ministry of Social Affairs highlighted the benefit of
learning from valuable international experience and seeking ways to gain a better
understanding of employment barriers among beneficiaries of SSN. Second, Government and
social partners were interested in investing in new ways of boosting job creation at regional
and sector levels, including through value chains and frontier areas such as social
entrepreneurship and the solidarity economy (économie sociale et solidaire), under
discussion at the time in the context of preparing the Five-Year Plan. With respect to value
chains, a Bank-supported TA was already under way to boost growth of private sector
MSMEs in lagging regions (Let’s Work TA). Regarding the solidarity economy, different
partners were engaging in supporting policy and legal framework, while a joint Bank/IFC
diagnostic of the ecosystem for social enterprises was also underway. The Bank and
Government teams decided to use the TA specifically to explore the feasibility and value of
social care type services as a potential source of job creation rather than the still undefined
broad area of solidarity economy. Two main factors led to this choice: (i) Tunisia’s
development trends (aging population, youth exclusion, and significant coverage gaps in
childcare, among others) pointed to the need and potential demand for social care type
services and (ii) international evidence4 suggested that reducing service provision gaps in the
area of social care could reduce women’s constraints to accessing productive jobs and/or
skills building opportunities since women tend to be responsible for caring for children and
other household dependents (elderly, People with Disabilities). Since the Five-Year Plan had
highlighted the goal of increasing women’s labor force participation and employment
outcomes, the latter focus was all the more relevant.


4 See, for example, World Bank Group Renewed Gender Strategy, 2015; AFD, Concept Note for the
Roundtable on “Women’s access to and retention of decent work in Turkey.?

                                                    4
4.      In this context, the decision was made to focus TA activities on three series of
activities, or components: (i) Jobs Profiling (Component 1); (ii) Assessing Job Creation
Opportunities in Social Care (Component 2); and (iii) Policy Dialogue on the Role of Social
Safety Nets in Human Capital Development (Component 3). The following section
summarizes the key list of activities completed under each component, outlines any changes
from the Concept Note’s stage, and outlines key results. Table 1 summarizes key activities by
component, delivered products as filed and attached to this Completion Note, and results
achieved. Table 2 lists key expected results for outputs, targeted beneficiaries as detailed in
the CN, and how they were engaged in the TA approach. The completion note ends with a
section on key lessons learned and potential implications for the future.

   2. PROGRAM PROGRESS & ACHIEVEMENTS , MARCH 2016 – MARCH 2017
This section summarizes progress and achievements on Technical Assistance and
Capacity Building deliverables by TA component between June 2016 and March 2017.
In this regard, all deliverables laid out at the CN stage for the first phase have been
delivered. Table 1 below summarizes delivered and filed outputs, as well as key related
results. Results relate to enhanced knowledge and capacity of the TA’s primary audience (see
Table 2), as well as the extent to which TA outputs and processes have been able to inform
Government interventions/strategies as well as WBG interventions, with particular focus on
the Tunisia Youth Economic Inclusion Operation. Each section reports how the TA target
audience was involved in the design and/or production of ____activities, and provided
feedback on the outputs.




                                              5
    Table 1: TA Delivered and Filed Outputs, Initially Expected Results and Actual Results
    TA AREAS: Delivered and Filed Outputs                         Achieved results as of March 2017
Component 1: Jobs Profiling of SSN beneficiaries
 Awareness-raising and capacity-building:             Knowledge & Capacity:
   knowledge-sharing sessions on benefits and          The Ministry of Social Affairs (MSA), the MFPE and
   methods for jobs profiling, and international       other relevant ministries and partners in Tunisia have a
   experience                                          better knowledge and understanding of factors behind lack
 Technical note including (a) descriptive data on     or low labor market integration of work-able beneficiaries
   key labor market outcomes of MSA                    of social safety nets.
   beneficiaries; (b) a profiling methodology for      Improved capacity of CRES team, who now can own the
   the categorization of SSN beneficiaries in          methodology, and strong awareness-raising within ONEQ,
   groups facing similar employment barriers           the agency associated with MFPE (Employment Ministry).

Filed outputs:                                         Future Government Interventions/Public Policy:
(i) Technical note mentioned above (French and         The jobs profiling tool has a strong potential to help
English versions) – already shared with                improve targeting and effectiveness of ALMPs to each
Government team                                        category of individuals facing similar constraints to job
(ii) Powerpoint presentation during validation and     access.
dissemination process with client (in French)
                                                       WBG Interventions:
                                                       Awareness of relevant ministries regarding the advantages
                                                       of the jobs profiling tool illustrated by the request to
                                                       finance the system and its operationalization in the IPF
                                                       Youth Economic Inclusion Project (P158138)
Component 2: Assessing job creation opportunities in social care
 Completed: Assessment of social care needs           Knowledge and Capacity:
      and job creation/employability opportunities in The four key ministries with high stakes in the TA area
      a sample of selected governorates                (Ministries of Social Affairs, Employment, Women,
 Creation and regular meetings of the Inter-          Family and Childhood, Development and Cooperation)
      Ministerial technical group with relevant staff  now have a better understanding of the potential of the
      from different ministries working on social care social care services sector to be a source of job creation.
      in Tunisia, which has yielded technical inputs   The pilot assessment in two diverse governorates
      on methodology and findings                      (Manouba in Great Tunis and Kairouan in the Center-West
                                                       lagging region) has also yielded lessons learned in
Filed outputs:                                         conducting such an assessment and the challenges
(i) Full local consultancy firm CDCGE Report associated with it.
(PDF) on the Job Creation Potential of Social Care
Services in two selected Governorates – in French      Future Government Interventions/Public Policy:
(ii) Abbreviated version (Synthesis) of the Report     Reference to the importance of social care and public -
(ii) PowerPoint presentation by local consultancy private partnerships in the Government’s early childhood
firm on key findings and options presented in the development strategy, following discussions of the Group
report, as presented to the inter-ministerial group    Options for investment in the social care sector could
(iii) Minutes of one of the meetings with the Inter- inform Government’s strategy for Social Business
Ministerial Group on Social Care                       (Economie Sociale), jobs, and gender

                                                     WBG Interventions. Social care not included in IPF Youth
                                                     Economic Inclusion Project to avoid adding complexity
Component 3: Policy Dialogue on the Role of Social Safety Nets in Human Capital development
Low-key preparatory discussions and exchange of For future work (for discussion)
information with influential decision-makers, social
                                                     Increase the WBG contribution to current policy and
stakeholders and donor partners (UNICEF, ILO,
                                                     technical debates on SSN reform, with a focus on
UNWOMEN), as well as a roundtable with
                                                     enhancing SSN effectiveness in promoting human capital.
Copartners at the WB office (Oct 2016)
                                                     Complement current Education TA and forthcoming IPF
Not delivered/pending for future policy dialogue:
                                                     Potential positioning of the Bank for SP-related
Small Workshop with UNICEF and other partners
                                                     multisector DPL on social sectors, to take place in the
and GoT on these issues
                                                     outer period of the CPF (FY18)



                                                       6
       Table 2: Client and Partners Involved in TA Areas/Engagement and Dissemination
                      Government Counterparts (Primary              Influential Partners/Social Actors in Civil
    TA Areas
                                    Audience)                             Society/ International Donors
                    Centre de Recherches et d’Etudes              UGTT (Workers Trade Union)
                    Sociales (CRES) - affiliated with MSA         UTICA and other employers’ associations
                    MSA; in particular, its Direction de          (CONECT)
                    Promotion Sociale covering the SSN
                    program                                       EU (IRADA program)/ AFD (PAFIP
                    Ministry of Development and                   program)/ILO
Component 1:        International Cooperation
Jobs profiling of   Ministry of Employment (MFPE)
SSN                 National Institute of Statistics (INS -              Dissemination/engagement mode:
beneficiaries       Institut National de la Statistique)                  Team made presentations on overall
                                                                          approach during TA development
                    Engagement: All associated through IPF
                    productive inclusion meetings of the
                    multisectoral Technical Committee and
                    bilateral discussions/presentations/
                    Final validation of profiling Technical
                    Note (January 2017)
                    Primarily [?] at Central level: Ministry of
                    Social Affairs (MSA) in particular:           UGTT (Workers Trade Union)
                          Direction de Promotion Sociale         UTICA and other employers’ associations
                              covering the SSN program            (CONECT)
                    Ministry of Employment:                       EU (IRADA program)
                          Directorates                           AFD (PAFIP program)
                          ANETI (Agence Nationale pour           ILO
                              l’Emploi et le Travail              UNWOMEN
Component 2:                                                      UNICEF
Assessing job                 Indépendant)
creation            Centre de Recherches et d’Etudes
                    Sociales (CRES) - affiliated with MSA                Dissemination/engagement mode:
opportunities in
                    Ministry of Development and                           Team made presentations on overall
social care
                    International Cooperation                             approach during TA development but
                    The Tunisia National Youth Observatory                more can be done next FY with UN
                    Ministry of Women and Family Affairs                  Group on Social Protection
                    Engagement                                           Specific discussions took place with
                    Final validation of Social Care Report:               UGTT, UTICA, and CONECT
                    October 2016 with Inter-Ministerial
                    technical group on social care and jobs

Component 3:        Ministry of Social Affairs in particular:     CRES think tank
Policy Dialogue                                                   UGTT
on the Role of           Direction de Promotion Sociale          UNICEF, UNDP, ILO, BAD, UE
Social Safety       Ministry of Education; Ministry of Health
Nets in Human
Capital             Prime Minister’s Office
Development



COMPONENT 1: JOBS PROFILING OF SSN BENEFICIARIES

5.      Objectives. As stated in the approved Concept Note (CN), the proposed profiling
activity aimed to develop a tool to categorize the targeted disadvantaged population into
homogenous groups demonstrating similar constraints to accessing jobs. This tool would help
improve targeting and cost-effectiveness of productive inclusion programs and/or
employment services by allocating more resources and/or prioritizing the hardest-to-place


                                                       7
individuals. The targeted population includes the work-able beneficiaries5 of the Ministry of
Social Affairs’ (MSA’s) Social Safety Net programs.6

6.       Delivered Outputs and Comparison with CN plans. In the CN, three outputs were
proposed under this activity: (i) capacity-building activities; (ii) a technical note including
descriptive data about key labor market outcomes for MSA beneficiaries, a profiling
methodology including results and a qualitative assessment of each profile; and (iii) a Jobs
Profiling methodology that would be able to draw on a larger sample (starting April 2017),
using data that will have been collected by the MSA for the social registry. Two of these
three expected outputs were satisfactorily achieved: (i) capacity building of MSA staff and its
statistical agency: CRES; and (ii) the profiling note detailing key labor market outcomes of
MSA beneficiaries as well as its profiling methodology and results was developed, shared
and discussed with the MSA in January 2017 (see Annex 1 for a summary of findings). The
results were also discussed with the broader multi-ministerial preparation team of the
Government of Tunisia in the context of the IPF operations focused on jobs currently under
preparation, entitled: “Tunisia Youth Economic Inclusion Project - (P158138)?. Instead of
conducting the planned qualitative assessment (as part of the technical note mentioned above)
and due to limited time and budget, the team decided to include a section in the technical note
that provides recommendations for operationalizing the profiling system in the afore-
mentioned IPF pipeline operation.

7.      Key Results. The results of the profiling exercise and technical note were well
received by the Tunisian counterparts, who requested that development of this type of system
as part of multi-sectoral IPF job-related operations be included. In fact, this system will be
developed with a phased approach and will be used to profile beneficiaries of the project. As
a result of this exercise, each beneficiary will be categorized in a given “profile? depending
on the constraints to labor market faced and be assigned a relevant and adequate package of
employment services to connect them to jobs. More importantly, in the first phase of the TA,
capacity was built within the CRES for developing the methodology. In recent months and as
part of the IPF preparation, the team has started to build awareness and capacity within the
ONEQ (National Observatory for Employment and Qualifications - L’Observatoire National
de l’Emploi et des Qualifications).

COMPONENT 2: ASSESSING JOB CREATION OPPORTUNITIES IN SOCIAL CARE

8.     Objectives. As described in the CN, in the context of insufficient job creation in
Tunisia, there is scope for assessing job creation opportunities in frontier areas like social
care, which would also reduce gender-based constraints to accessing jobs. Therefore, this
component was intended to provide support to the Government in assessing job creation
opportunities in the field of social care by building its capacity to (i) develop a methodology
and mechanism for conducting social care needs assessments to determine the required
services needed at the local level; (ii) identify the subsequent potential number and types of

5   Individuals of working age [15-64] who are neither disabled nor enrolled in education or training
6The two main SSN programs in Tunisia consist of the National Assistance to Needy Families Program (Program National
d’Aide Aux Familles Nécessiteuses - PNAFN) and a free health card (Assistance Médicale Gratuite – AMG). A total of
235,420 households benefit from PNAFN and 578.000 households benefit from AMG2. Eligible households for the PNAFN
programs received a cash transfer of 100 TND per month in 2013, which increased to 130 TND per month in 2015.
Eligibility criteria for the PNAFN program include: (i) self-declared (unverified) household revenue falling below the
poverty line, defined as 585 TND per year (US$1.25 per day); (ii) household size; (iii) number of household members with a
disability and/or chronic health condition; (iv) household living conditions,such as dwelling and assets; and (v) the head of
household’s inability to work due to an impairment (physical or mental).

                                                                8
jobs (and type of skills) that could be created to deliver those services; (iii) identify and
address any obstacles to job creation strategies in this field (safety standards, existing
curricula and opportunities for certification of competencies etc., demand solvability for the
poor); and (iv) draw operational implications for the Productive Inclusion Program.

9.      Delivered Outputs and Comparison with CN plans. In the CN, two outputs were
proposed under this activity: (i) a technical note including methodology development and key
findings of an “Assessment of Job Creation Opportunities in Social Care? in an illustrative
sample of geographic areas covered by the future project and (ii) an action-oriented note
highlighting operational options. The technical note was delivered by a competitively
contracted local firm who developed and conducted an assessment in two very different
governorates of Tunisia: Manouba, a disadvantaged periurban area in Greater Tunis, and
Kairouan, located in the lagging region of the Center-West. The assessment covered the
provision of social care services for (i) the elderly, (ii) children aged 6 years old or under, and
(iii) people with disabilities (See Box 1). For each of these services, the following was
analyzed: (i) legal framework, (ii) current programs available at the local level (supply of
services available), (iii) advantages and disadvantages of current service provision, (iv)
analysis of potential demand and proposals on potential jobs created, and (v) a few proposed
investments to develop those services.

10.     A technical multi-ministerial group was also set up to discuss and validate the initial
Terms of Reference, methodology, choice of governorates and final report, including key
policy recommendations. The last meeting with this group was held in October 2016, during
which the recommendations and findings were largely agreed upon. Given the complexity
and necessary prerequisites for developing such services (for example, a legal framework,
dedicated financial arrangements, strong quality assurance, etc.), the team has agreed not to
proceed with specific interventions in the upcoming IPF operations. Thus, the second
expected output, “an action-oriented note?, was deemed unnecessary at this point. Annex 1
provides a summary of the firm’s report while Annex 2 provides a technical review of the
report, with inputs from the Bank team and an international expert.

11.     Key results. The results analysis of the technical note confirmed the important job
creation potential of the social services sector, given the high demand for these services
(especially amongst the poor) and the lack of good quality services at the local level. A
number of challenges to ‘successfully’ implementing and developing such services –
including affordability and quality standards issues – were also identified and discussed (see
Annex 2). Given the afore-mentioned challenges and complexity, the Bank and GoT teams
agreed to drop this type of initiative as part of the upcoming project currently under
preparation.

12.     Nevertheless, it should be noted that the four key ministries with high stakes in the
TA area (Ministries of Social Affairs; Employment; Women, Family and Childhood;
Development and Cooperation) now have a better understanding of the social care services
sector’s potential as a source of job creation. It was the first time in Tunisia that such an
assessment was carried out, one that looked at the critical issues of social care, job creation,
and female employment (given its potential to reduce care constraints for women). The
assessment in two diverse governorates (Manouba in Greater Tunis and Kairouan in the
Center-West lagging region) has also yielded lessons in conducting such an assessment and
its associated challenges. Finally, the social care assessment was discussed in the
Government’s early childhood development strategy and there is a great potential for the

                                                9
Government’s strategy on social enterprises and solidarity economy to adopt this agenda (see
3, View toward the Future).
 Box 1: Linkage between this TA and the Youth Economic Inclusion Project (P158138)
 The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve economic opportunities for targeted
 vulnerable youth, and businesses in selected governorates of the Borrower. The primary targeted
 population are disadvantaged youth aged 18-35. For the purposes of this Project, the notion of
 “disadvantaged? responds to the Government’s request to ensure that intensive assistance be
 provided to young population segments facing special economic and/or social barriers to job
 access. These barriers may include poverty (including being member of a household benefiting
 from social safety net assistance), education levels, place of residence (living in lagging regions or
 marginalized peri-urban areas) and/or gender-specific obstacles. The project will use a regional
 approach and focus primarily 7 of the lagging region(s).

 To reach this objective, the proposed project would be composed of three interrelated
 components. Component 1 will support the shift from large untargeted ALM programs to tailored
 support services that address barriers youth face to accessing jobs. It will also improve
 Government’s results by relying on private providers that are paid by performance to connect
 beneficiaries to wage and self-employment opportunities (some of which will be created by the
 private sector in targeted value chains under Component 2). On the demand side, Component 2
 will support private sector development within specific value chains to create jobs and improve the
 quality of existing jobs, while encouraging youth – especially targeted disadvantaged youth – to
 develop economically viable businesses. Recognizing the multi-sectoral and experimental nature
 of the Initiative, Component 3 will strengthen the capacity of the MFPE and other partner
 ministries involved in project implementation in the selected governorates, in cooperation with the
 private sector, stakeholders and beneficiaries.

 This TA contributed to informing the design of activities under Component 1 (in the case of
 profiling) and Component 2 (in the case of the assessment of Jobs Opportunities in Social
 Care). Concerning the Jobs Profiling as part of Component 1 of the project, the Bank and
 Government teams have agreed to established a unit at ONEQ with dedicated staff to work on the
 establishment of the profiling system. This will require hiring and training the personnel by an
 international specialized firm, developing the model, creating a database with detailed labor
 market information for each beneficiary (collected at enrollment once the individual is selected),
 raising awareness at the Ministry of Employment both at the central and local levels to ensure
 ownership and appropriation of this new system, amongst other activities. As for TA activities on
 the job creation potential of social care services, it was envisaged to establish a dedicated sub-
 component to provide a framework and proposed interventions to identify, select and fund social
 enterprises. The results of this TA hveas shown that a number of steps need to be taken at the
 institutional, legal and operational aspect before such an area could be further developed (see
 previous section). In was therefore agreed with the government team not to include such
 interventions as part of this project.

COMPONENT 3: POLICY DIALOGUE              ON THE    ROLE    OF   SOCIAL SAFETY NETS         IN   HUMAN
CAPITAL DEVELOPMENT

13.      Objectives. As described in the CN, the main objective of this last component was, in
its first phase, to resume our policy dialogue on SSNs, with a focus on sensitizing decision-
makers and stakeholders to the need to enhance SSN effectiveness in promoting human
capital (see context in Section I and the CN for full rationale). This policy dialogue aimed at
complementing our current Social Protection Reforms Support Project. The latter is
implemented by the Ministry of Social Affairs and is funded by the MENA Transition Fund.
In its second phase, an expected result was to see some deeper technical work reflected in

                                                  10
Government policies and/or in a multisector DPL on social sectors, to take place in the outer
period of the CPF (FY18).

14.     Outputs and Comparison with CN plans. In the CN, three outputs and/or processes
were proposed: (i) low-key technical enhancement of the MSA’s Directorate for Social
Promotion around approaches to preventing and/or reducing school drop-outs, using lessons
learned from international practice to stimulate a technical discussion on relevance and
feasibility in the Tunisian case; (ii) cautious engagement (an iterative process rather than a
one-off engagement) with various stakeholders and partners through discussions, convening
services and international experts in order to contribute to debates on enhancing effectiveness
of SSN in promoting human capital; and (iii) a small seminar with GoT and UNICEF/other
partners on the same issues. The team faced two sets of challenges that prevented them from
advancing as hoped in this area. First, as a result of political economy challenges that
emerged in July 2016, they encountered resistance from social workers toward updating the
social registry to allow for improvements in targeting accuracy. This took center stage and
hindered dialogue on broader topics. A change of Minister and hence strategic vision also
took place. The team therefore used Trust Fund resources to advance capacity and knowledge
on targeting and social registries instead. Second, budget constraints for Fiscal Year 2017
made it impossible to fund higher-level seminars.

   3. LESSONS LEARNED AND VIEW TOWARD THE FUTURE

15.     This completion report has shown that core expected outputs - as agreed at CN
stage - were adequately finalized and that those results have largely been satisfactory.
Success in building capacity and informing an important operation on Youth and Jobs has
derived from a systematic engagement of the primary target audience in the development of
TORs, outputs and discussion of results. This has applied both to the jobs profiling and social
care reports.
16.     TA findings and the specific strategic Tunisian context point to several key areas
for the future.
17.    Securing a wider adoption of the jobs profiling approach will require a strong and
broad policy dialogue, beyond the planned IPF Youth Economic Inclusion Operation (due to
Board the First Quarter of FY18). Venues such as the joint ILO-WB support to the
Government’s employment strategy (with involvement of social partners UGTT and UTICA)
should provide a potentially useful avenue.
18.     The encouraging findings on the promise of social care for job creation and
enhancement of female employment (a major challenge in Tunisia) require more data and
technical work, as well as innovation and testing on the ground. Innovation includes testing
mechanisms for affordability of these services and the right balance in terms of basic
standards. The report is groundbreaking in extending attention beyond childcare to include
care for dependent adults; namely, elderly and adults with disabilities. This is also consistent
with other findings elsewhere (Turkey, Chile) and with the WBG strategic engagement on
care as the frontier area for boosting women’s access to more and better jobs. It is also
consistent with Tunisia’s commitment to the Sustainable Development Goals and to inclusion
(Tunisia 2020 and Five-Year Plan), as well as to the Convention on the Rights of Persons
with Disabilities. Should there be resource constraints in the Bank program, avenues should
be explored with IFC (the emerging agenda of employer-supported childcare), donor partners


                                              11
such as UNWOMEN and key trust funds supporting the Jobs and Female employment
agenda.
19.     As highlighted by a recent IFC/WB report on social enterprises (Agapitova et al,
2017), social businesses hold great promise for Tunisia in a context of limited job creation.
Social care is an important element of this strategic direction and the forthcoming
Government strategy on the Social Economy, led by the Ministry of Employment. Although
limited and imperfect, the assessment of Job Creation Opportunities in Social Care completed
under this TA lays out a compelling case for government support to market activation of
social care services. As part of the forthcoming government dialogue, it would be important
to deepen the analysis of market and institutional constraints and have a more systematic
approach to selection, prioritization and customization of demand and supply side policies for
social care delivery in Tunisia by public and private sector.
20.     The next Maghreb Social Protection TA, scheduled for FY18, could take on some of
the activities and policy dialogue initially envisaged as part of Component 3 on SSN and
human capital promotion. In addition, strong partnership within the Human Development
teams, especially with the Education GP on the ECD strategy and the forthcoming education
operation (scheduled for FY18), will be needed.
21.     Specifically, synergies with the forthcoming Investment Financing in Education,
which is planned for delivery in FY18. A serious challenge exists of disorganized and/or
unregulated spaces “espaces anarchiques? for childcare (aged 0-5) although the government
has tried to shut most of these down. The fact remains that there is an unmet demand for
affordable childcare services (especially in poorer urban areas). To meet this demand, while
ensuring the quality and safety of all childcare facilities, one of the priorities of the multi-
sectoral ECD Strategy is to improve the quality and performance of professionals and
paraprofessionals working in ECD through the creation / strengthening of training and
certification programs. While it should be recognized that childcare does represent a
promising opportunity for income generation, there needs to be capacity building and quality
assurance for providers, along with other types of microenterprise support.

       TEAM COMPOSITION AND BUDGET
Team Composition
           Name                                           Position
Carine Clert                   Task leader, Lead Social Protection Specialist, GSP05
Angela Elzir                   Junior Professional Associate, Jobs Group
Mayalen Claire Iron            Consultant, Social Protection
Geneviève Sempere-Briand       Consultant, Social Care sector
Malek Garbouj                  Consultant, Econometrics
Sami Bibi                      Consultant, Senior Economist
Suzanne Essama                 Operations Officer, GSP05
Maya El-Azzazi                 Operations Analyst, GSP05
Uma Balasubramanian            Program Assistant, GSP05
Astania Kamau                  Program Assistant, GSP05
Rekaya Ben Mahmoud             Team Assistant, MNCTN
Setareh Razmara                Acting Practice Manager, GSP05
Hana Brixi                     Practice Manager, GSP05
David Robalino                 Practice Manager, Jobs Group

                                              12
Budget

         Fiscal Year       Amount
FY16                   200,000
FY17                   50,000




                                    13
                                     ANNEX 1: ABSTRACTS OF NOTES

Note on Profiling of Social Safety Net Beneficiaries in Tunisia

    1. Key findings
              a. Labor market outcomes
The technical note first outlines the key labor market outcomes of the targeted population for
this analysis – i.e. the work-able beneficiaries of social safety programs of the Ministry of
Social Affairs (MSA). The key findings are the following:
      i. The majority of SSN work-able beneficiaries are jobless, i.e. unemployed or inactive.
     ii. Joblessness is highest amongst women.
    iii. The labor market outcomes of SSN beneficiaries are more or less similar across
         geographical locations
    iv. There are important variations in labor market outcomes by age group, amongst SSN
         beneficiaries.
     v. In terms of education attainment, inactivity is significantly higher amongst those
         without any education degree while unemployment is higher amongst those with
         tertiary education.
    vi. Amongst those who work, the majority of SSN beneficiaries are in low-quality jobs.

              b. Statistical profiling
A latent class methodology has been applied to categorize beneficiaries of SSNs in
homogenous groups facing similar labor market barriers. This multidimensional
characterization aims at classifying SSN beneficiaries into groups that share common features
in order to design tailored policies that seeks to alleviate social and economic challenges
these groups are facing. The results of the analysis reveals that the targeted population can be
grouped in the following 10 groups or “profiles? (also illustrated in Figure 1 below):
        Profile 1: Extremely poor inactive rural women with low education (18 percent).
         All individuals in this profile are inactive and extremely poor 7 , the majority are
         women (82 percent), living in rural areas (64 percent) and married (63 percent).
        Profile 2: Non-poor inactive women with low education (12.7 percent). All
         individuals in this profile are inactive and non-poor. It is the profile with the highest
         share of women, at 85 percent.
        Profile 3: Poor inactive women (12.3 percent). All individuals in this cluster are
         inactive and poor. The majority are female (84 percent, one of the highest share,
         closely following the previous profile), living both in urban and rural areas (50
         percent each) and married (68 percent).
        Profile 4: Extremely poor informal wage-employed men with low education (10.5
         percent). All individuals in this cluster are very poor, wage-employed and the
         majority (84 percent) are in the informal sector. It is the cluster with the highest share
         of men.



7
 The “very poor? are defined as those below the lower poverty line (consumption per capita< 70 TND per month); the “non -
poor? those above the upper poverty line (consumption per capita> 110 TND per month); the “poor? those for whom
consumption per capita stands between the lower and upper poverty lines. The calculation of the thresholds was based on
2010 household budget survey and adjusted with 2014 Consumer Price Index.

                                                          14
       Profile 5: Extremely poor unemployed youth (10.3 percent). This is the youngest
        and one of the most educated groups, yet all individuals belonging to this profile are
        unemployed and very poor.
       Profile 6: Non-poor informal wage-employed men (9.6 percent). All individuals in
        this cluster are not-poor and wage-employed, the majority work in the informal sector
        (75 percent).
       Profile 7: Poor informal wage-employed men (8.6 percent). All individuals in this
        profile are poor and wage-employed, the majority work in the informal sector (78
        percent). Except poverty levels, this profile is similar to profile 6 described above.
       Profile 8: Poor unemployed educated youth (8.2 percent). This group is composed
        of poor and unemployed individuals. It is the profile with the second highest share of
        youth (69 percent).
       Profile 9: Non-poor unemployed educated youth (5.5 percent). All beneficiaries in
        this profile are not poor yet unemployed. It stands out as the second one with the
        highest education attainment – 55 percent of its members have secondary education or
        more, out of which 14 percent (the highest share) have a tertiary degree.
       Profile 10: Informal self-employed adult men with low education (5.1 percent).
        All individuals in this profile are self-employed, the majority are informal (89
        percent). Slightly less than half (45 percent) are not poor and the rest is evenly divided
        between extremely poor (26 percent) and poor (29 percent).

           Figure 1: Profiles prevalence among the work-able SSN beneficiaries in Tunisia
                                                                          Informal self-
                                          Non-poor                    employed adult men
                                         unemployed                    with low education
                                        educated youth                         5%
                                             5%
                      Poor unemployed
                       educated youth                            Extremely poor
                             7%                               inactive rural women
                                                               with low education
                                                                       18%

                    Poor informal
                   wage-employed
                        men                                                                  Non-poor inactive
                         9%                                                                  women with low
                                                                                                education
                                                                                                   13%




                   Non-poor informal
                  wage-employed men                                     Poor inactive
                         10%                                              women
                                                                            12%

                                                                                          Extremely poor
                                Extremely poor                                            informal wage-
                               unemployed youth                                         employed men with
                                     10%                                                   low education
                                                                                                11%
    Source: Author’s calculations using CRES survey implemented with a representative sample of SSN beneficiaries

Activating the work-able SSN beneficiaries from those profiles will require a personalized
combination of services, given the complex barriers to employment faced. These tailored
combinations can be divided into four categories of activation packages: (i) market ready, (ii)
intensified activation, (iii) hard-to-serve, and (iv) special support. The profiles described




                                                         15
above are categorized into four types of packages, as shown in Figure 2 below.8 The types of
services that could be offered for each of those groups are proposed below:
     Market-ready: the profiles in this quadrant are essentially composed of individuals
       that are easily activated. Individuals in those clusters face relatively lower labor
       market barriers than the other clusters as they are more experienced, educated and live
       in households with lower caretaking duties. For those groups, interventions that would
       enable to improve their productivity or move to higher productivity and formal jobs
       are key – such as trainings, intermediation and job-search assistance, counseling
       services, etc. Some clusters, such as informal self-employed adult men with low
       education (Profile 9) would require interventions to improve the earnings and
       productivity of the individuals’ businesses. Such interventions could include access to
       finance, equipment and/or markets, advisory services, training, etc.
     Intensified Activation. The cluster in this quadrant face high labor market barriers
       due to their low employability. This young cluster would benefit mostly from
       interventions that would increase their level of education or provide them with job-
       specific skills, as well as intermediation information on how to find job opportunities.
       Given that this group is composed of extremely poor youth, additional potential
       interventions to incentive them to attend trainings would be to include some
       conditional cash transfers to avoid them taking low quality and informal jobs, below
       their productivity potential, to support the household/family income. Youth are in
       general at a disadvantaged when accessing the labor market due to their lack of
       experience, limited job search skills, low social capital and limited information about
       self-employment. Wage subsidies could also be offered to temporarily reduce their
       labor cost and incentivize employers to hire them by offsetting the risk they incur by
       hiring young workers with low productivity levels.
     Special Support. Profiles included in this quadrant not only require services to
       improve their employability but also services to increase their participation in the
       labor force. Barriers to participate in the labor market and be active could be multiple
       including, but not limited to, caretaking duties and household work, limited
       geographical mobility, low motivation or any disincentive in general. Individuals in
       this cluster would benefit from services that would lighten their caretaking duties
       (child-care and disability centers and services), improve their mobility (half live in
       rural areas where transportation might be barriers), improve their incentive to work by
       providing flexible work arrangements (part time or home based work,
       entrepreneurship package, etc.). As these groups also face high labor market barriers,
       they would also benefit from intermediation services, job-specific trainings coupled
       with some conditional cash transfers to temporarily support household income.
     The Hard-to-Serve. Profiles in this quadrant are composed of individuals with high
       labor market barriers (low education, lack of experience) as well as high social
       barriers (high dependency and caretaking duties needs, gender barriers, high poverty,
       etc.). The services that would be offered to this quadrant would be similar to those
       listed in the previous section (Special Support), however with higher intensity of the
       services to improve employability (training, job-search assistance, counseling, etc.).9
       For the poorest segment of the population, currently excluded from services provided
       by micro-finance institutions, a special package of integrated services are could also

8
  It is important to note that all barriers may be capable of being overcome through one ALMP program alone. For example,
employment opportunities for women can be limited by laws regarding night work.
9
  More information on the length of inactivity and if previous jobs were held before, number of household members
contributing to household income (financial dependency), skills level, etc. would be useful to provide more granular service
recommendations.

                                                            16
          be provided – inspired by the “graduation? or “progressive? approach (CGAP model),
          successfully implemented in Latin America and Asia.

                                               Figure 12: SSN beneficiaries’ profiles and activation services
                                          20                                                                                               Extremely poor inactive
                                                    Intensified activation                                         Hard to serve            rural women with low
                                                                                                                                                  education
                                          18
                                                                      Extremely poor
                                                                     unemployed youth                           Non-poor inactive
                                          16                                                                    women with low
                                                                                                                   education
                                          14
                  Labor market barriers




                                          12                                  Extremely poor informal
                                                                               wage-employed men
                                                            Non-poor unemployed with low education
                                          10
                                                               educated youth

                                          8            Informal self-employed                                Poor unemployed
                                                         adult men with low                                   educated youth              Poor inactive women
                                                             education
                                          6
                                                                                              Poor informal wage-
                                                                                                employed men
                                                   Non-poor informal wage-
                                          4            employed men

                                          2
                                                           Market ready                                            Special support

                                          0
                                               0       1         2        3       4       5        6        7          8       9     10     11      12          13
                                                                                                 Social barriers




    2. Operationalizing a profiling system in Tunisia
Operationalizing the data-based profiling system requires a number of steps to set-up the
system, collect data and build capacity required for such a system. More in-depth discussions
with the GoT should be undertaken to tailor, adapt the proposed system to the Tunisian
context It is important to note that capacity building activities for all stakeholders involved in
the development and implementation of the profiling system should initiative from the onset,
including caseworkers whom will be involved throughout the process.

     i.   Step 1: Set the objective of the profiling.
    ii.   Step 2: Identify the target population and define the outreach strategy to find them.
   iii.   Step 3: Design questionnaire to collect necessary data.
   iv.    Step 4: Build the system and launch registration.
    v.    Step 5: Run the profiling statistical model to cluster the targeted population.
   vi.    Step 6: Install profiling software in all decentralized locations.




                                                                                                  17
Note on the assessment of the job creation potential in the social care sector
   1. Approach and Key findings
A local firm piloted the assessment piloted in two governorates which are also part of the
geographic scope of the Productive Inclusion Operation that is under preparation: one peri-
urban in Greater Tunis - La Manouba and one rural in the Lagging Region of the Centre
West-Kairouan. The assessment covered the provision of social care services for the: (i)
elderly, (ii) children aged 6 years old or less; and (iii) People with Disabilities (PWDs). For
each of those services, the following was analyzed: (i) legal framework; (ii) current programs
available at the local level (supply of services available); (iii) the advantages and
disadvantages of current provision; (iv) analysis of potential demand and proposals on
potential jobs created; and (v) some proposed investments to develop those services.

Qualitative and quantitative information was collected through: (i) available documents from
relevant ministries, institutions, international and local organizations; (ii) meetings with
relevant stakeholders at the central, regional and local levels; (iii) questionnaires conducted
with around 20 public and private institutions as well as “associations? who provide such
social services; and (iv) 10 focus groups in both governorates with the more relevant social
actors on the ground.

Across those three social services, the common findings were:
    i. Lack of availability of services at the local levels – those available are not of high
       quality
   ii. Lack of funding and, thus, personnel available for the services available at the local
       level
  iii. Inadequate availability of investment modalities for private providers
  iv. Lack of adequate, certified and quality training for staff required for such
       medical/social field
   v. Limited availability of services affordable for low-income groups
  vi. Important potential for scale up of those social activities to meet unmet demands of
       the local population.

   2. Discussion and Validation of the Assessment with Government Counterparts
A meeting was organized with the inter-ministerial group established for this TA component
in October 2016 (Groupe de Travail sur les Services de Proximite) to discuss key results and
potential implications for the Productive Inclusion Operation. The analysis and report was
well received by the group who agreed on the report’s key conclusions above, the potential
for job creation and the urgent need for overall conclusion that the coverage of such services
is insufficient to date and, as a result, there is a need to expand the provision of a high-quality
services at the local level.

The main recommendations expressed by meeting participants can be summarized as follows:
    i. Requirement for the services to be provided in line with the strategies of different
       ministries in the area of social services (especially those of the Ministries of Social
       Affairs; Investment, Development and International Cooperation; Women, Family
       and Childhood)
   ii. Need to establish an adequate financial mechanism for such services, including ways
       to ensure affordability. A “check service? or voucher was discussed as a good option.
       The latter would benefit from targeting mechanism. The benefit of such mechanism


                                                18
     would be to develop a relationship of employer and employee between social care
     providers and users of social care services.
iii. Requirement to improve the legal framework
iv. Need to establish a mechanism or scheme to attract more youth in establishing
     enterprises/firms that would offer such services at the local level and as a result,
     create jobs
 v. Requirement to ensure quality skills and certificate for the provision of such services
     as well as ensuring strong inspection and quality assurance control




                                          19
     ANNEX 2: KEY ISSUES , LIMITATIONS AND OPERATIONAL IMPLICATIONS OF THE TA
                    SOCIAL CARE REPORT: A TECHNICAL REVIEW 10
   Technical Review of the Report on the Assessment of the Job Creation Potential of
social care services in Tunisia and of the Validation’s Discussion with the Government’s
                           Inter-ministerial group on the topic

Broadly speaking, the local consultancy report addresses the specifications as defined in
the Terms of Reference, and the sequence of phases aligns with the methodology
proposed: collect and analyze data, hold meetings with social sector authorities at national
and local levels, managers of social structures, and a focus group comprised of social workers
and users of social services. The study’s approach focused on the populations most likely to
need local social services – adults with mobility issues (seniors, people with disabilities) and
children at ages requiring options for childcare or supervision. The study ended up exploring
job creation potential for a range of needs, from individual care services to sports clubs for
children.

This assessment remains empirical, and at this stage provides no quantitative measurement of
the need (dependents in the governorate, children of child-care age). The study does not
pretend to make any projection of numbers of jobs possible.

Further work would require more in-depth assessments in all categories covered by the study,
and the methodology to do so would need to be systematized. Service allocation to each of
the governorates also needs to be spelled out, since service delivery to urban and rural zones
would typically take place under different conditions.

Furthermore, certain benefits identified in the report that households would likely find useful
extension beyond the scope of definitions of local social sector jobs [ emplois de proximité
sociaux] as defined in this study.

At the outset, it should be remembered that the point is to respond to a demand by
households. This calls for the supply of services or benefits at or close to home, to be
paid for by household users of services. Included within these bounds are:
       Childcare services: these cover home care for young children, with distinctions in
          certain countries between sole custody before mandatory school age and childcare
          before and after school for those above the age of 6. These services are intended
          principally to enable working mothers to balance their time;
       Social services to assist and support seniors or persons with disabilities. These are
          intended to permit “aging in place? (at-home care for dependent persons) rather
          than in specialized residences. The services involved are care, assistance with
          activities of daily living, and assistance with reduced mobility. These services
          could also help encourage mothers or young women to find work, given their
          traditional role as caregivers.

The development (and construction) of retirement homes or centers for persons with
disabilities, and to a lesser extent clubs for seniors or sports equipment for children,
extend beyond the parameters of the study and its operational implications . This is


10
     This review was written by Genevieve Sempere Briand (WB consultant) and Carine Clert, Task Team Leader.

                                                      20
because these types of investments typically require meeting heavier financial demands in
terms of investment and operation.

During the implementation of this technical assistance program of World Bank and in
discussions with the Government Inter-ministerial Group created for this purpose, the
question of extending Project’s interventional scope was up for discussion. The Bank
team clarified that the objective of the study was not to assess needs for and demands of
social care services in a broad social policy sense. The Bank team also clarified that the TA’s
specific objective was to examine the extent to which sources of employment could be
detected within the social care area, and whether this would be worth pursuing in the context
of the Productive Inclusion Project. This was well understood at the final validation meeting
of the TA study in October 2016. Key stakeholders – especially the Directorate for Human
Development at the Ministry of Development, Cooperation and Investment –acknowledged
the intended scope of the study but stressed that any investments in social care would need to
be aligned with the orientations of the Government Five-Year Plan, which focus on personal
autonomy and quality early childhood services. These orientations, it was argued, would
make any public investment to build or finance retirement homes inconsistent with
supporting the elderly to remain in their homes. Similarly, any public investment in childcare;
for example, would have to meet basic standards as defined in the Strategy on Early
Childhood under development at the time. This multisectoral strategy has been led by the
Ministry of Women, Family and Childhood Affairs, and received the support of UNICEF and
the World Bank (Education Team).

Another point made in discussions was whether coaching services (to support the
unemployed, and especially the hard-to-serve) could be regarded as a social care service
under this TA and further work. This point was made by the General Director for
Employment at the Ministry of Vocational Training and Labor

From a supply standpoint, the study provides a comprehensive assessment of existing social
structures in order to respond to the needs of populations previously identified in each of the
selected governorates- Manouba in Greater Tunis and Kairouan. The country does indeed
have multiple categories of institutions and services, but as the report shows, they are of
insufficient number and uneven quality, as well as poorly diversified. The situation;
therefore, is unsatisfactory not only within the governorates surveyed, but also seemingly
throughout the country. Social workers and service consumers criticized this situation in the
focus groups held.

At the very least, not one social care service as defined by the study exists at the present time
in selected governorates. This observation regarding existing offerings opens prospects for
service implementation and development, either in addition to as mitigation for the flaws in
the system.

With regard to the needs previously mentioned, the study could not determine the number of
services or employees, since no standard exists for elderly persons or persons with
disabilities. Only the question of care for children 0-6 years of age is being considered in
depth at present by the Ministry of Women’s, Family and Children’s Affairs.

From the demand standpoint, as expressed by some households interviewed in the focus
groups, the study provides evidence that families are ready to pay for quality services. They
appear to consider that free services sponsored by government and civil society associations,

                                               21
which in any event were largely ineffective, were reserved for needy families under the
Social Safety Net (SSN) Program PNAFN. An example of this is the development of various
types of private childcare as a consequence of the unavailability of TUSS (Tunisian Social
Solidarity Union) kindergartens designed for use only for needy families.

In the same vein, the report points to the few private facilities that were established by
families either on their own or via associations, who set up both retirement homes (two
institutions in Manouba) and centers for autistic children (one in each of the governorates).
These initiatives confirm that the most affluent segments of the population are in search of
solutions, even costly ones. This position is important with respect to the concept of social
care service jobs (emplois de proximité de type social), because it stands in opposition to the
requirement for universality on which social policies are based in many countries. This
clearly signifies that affluent families are not willing to wait for public assistance.

If this demand really exists, it has not been formalized, inasmuch as no revenue collection
system has been organized in the country. Only the mechanism of the PNAFN registers this
type of information for needy families.

Satisfying this demand through privately paid services assumes purchasing power. Yet
the study provides no evidence regarding the solvency of the residents in the two
governorates. It appears that this data is difficult to access; it would nonetheless be essential
in order to measure the demand (calibration of services, geographic location, determination of
pricing). Communicating specific information as to the nature and level of population
incomes in the different governorates will become essential to run simulations based on
market assumptions.

With respect to resources needed within the framework of the project as an incentive to
encourage development of social care services, the study identified three types of measures:
       - Vocational training activities (with proper certification) in the area of social care.
       - Grants for support to necessary investments and service operations. These could
          apply to small private enterprises with a social benefit in mind and therefore to
          social enterprises – an emerging area that attracts major interest from the
          Government and social partners at the moment.
       - Support for project developers/promoters.

Regarding training activities, the well-structured Tunisian vocational training system in
the social sector professions is mentioned as a possible anchor for all action plans . This
system may be managed publicly or privately. Professions in the social care service sector
are varied and of different training levels. They would vary according to the type of service.
The positions of nanny (Level VI) and caregiver (level IV) would be the most numerous.
Workers could practice either as employees or self-employed. When new businesses are
started up, administrative jobs and managers in smaller numbers will be affected. On current
information, their number cannot be estimated.

One option would be to involve the project not in initial training but in complementary
targeted training tailored to young graduates seeking jobs in certain professions. Shorter
training could be designed for positions that require fewer qualifications. The report’s
conclusions emphasize that all training needs to be officially certified. In this vein, the project
would benefit from relying on the existing institutional arrangements. As a matter of fact, it
seems that many associations in experimental projects have developed training the Tunisian

                                                22
government does not recognize, which has not helped mobility. Without information on the
geographic location of this apparently highly centralized arrangement, its use by any potential
World Bank project will need to integrate deconcentration requirements for its retooling
training or for brief childcare training.

Concerning the project’s implementation and institutional responsibilities, it will be
important to keep a close eye on the Ministry of Vocational Training and Employment’s
emerging strategy for promoting socially responsible businesses. The goal of this strategy is
to provide a methodology for business start-up designed for new entrepreneurs in the sector
of socially responsible organizations. Essentially, this involves training activities targeting
management (finance, human resources, legal framework) on one hand and establishing
support arrangements during the process of project set up on the other. Indeed, even if the
project chooses a shared management structure, it would make strategic sense for the same
process to take place.

Another clear conclusion of the Inter-ministerial discussion on the study and its
operational implications was that in the specific case of caregivers, only the basic
quality standards currently under development by the Ministry of Women’s, Family
and Children’s Affairs could serve as a guide.

In terms of financial support for investment or operations, we conclude from the study
that:
     Investment support for equipment whose importance in value and size varies
       according to the nature of the service – investments in a kindergarten or in individual
       care services are inherently different from one another. The report doesn’t make
       explicit distinctions among types of support. This needs further elaboration.
     Operating support. This must not be a question only of ad hoc, non-renewable aid
       (start-up assistance, financing a working capital fund, for example).

Testing of the methodology needs to be refined and codified with the perspective of
replicating in other governorates in the context of a joint effort:
    A more exhaustive list of targeted data to be collected would need to determined;
    A potential collaboration with the National Institute of Statistics and of regional field
       directors would help validate the relevance of the tools to be further developed.

In conclusion, the study confirms initial hypotheses: Social care services open broad
possibilities for job creation in the form of businesses or self-employment. However,
launching any mechanism assumes obtaining targeted data on needs requested by households.
Further refinement should allow, in addition to designing practical methodology, the
modeling of a proposal comprising these services. A concrete operational option would be the
development of these local services as social enterprises in Component 2 of the economic
inclusion project for vulnerable populations or through other instruments if this operation
cannot contain this intervention at this stage. Competitive business plans attributing points to
promising businesses in this area would be one possibility.




                                              23
