                                                       WPS8223


Policy Research Working Paper                         8223




 Background Paper to the 2018 World Development Report



     Introducing a Performance-Based School
                 Grant in Jakarta
    What Do We Know about Its Impact after Two Years?

                               Samer Al-Samarrai
                                 Unika Shrestha
                                  Amer Hasan
                               Nozomi Nakajima
                                 Santoso Santoso
                             Wisnu Harto Adi Wijoyo




Education Global Practice Group
October 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 8223


  Abstract
 This paper evaluates the early impact of introducing a per-                        on better performing primary schools. Overall, the pro-
 formance component into Jakarta’s school grant program                             gram reduced primary examination scores albeit by a small
 on learning outcomes. Using administrative data, it applies                        amount. In contrast to the results at the primary level, the
 difference-in-differences and regression discontinuity                             performance component improved examination scores in
 approaches to identify the impact of the grant by exploit-                         government junior secondary schools. However, the impact
 ing differences in program coverage over time, as well as                          seemed to be greatest among better performing schools
 by comparing changes in test scores between schools that                           and has therefore widened performance gaps. The find-
 received the additional performance award with schools                             ings also suggest that program impact was largely through
 that did not. The paper finds that the introduction of the                         competition between schools to receive the performance
 performance component had different impacts on govern-                             component. There is little evidence that the additional
 ment primary and junior secondary schools. The program                             resources schools received from the award had any additional
 improved learning outcomes for primary schools at the                              impact. The evaluation utilized preexisting administrative
 bottom of the performance distribution and narrowed per-                           data and the paper offers some suggestions on how edu-
 formance gaps across schools. However, improvements in                             cation information systems can be strengthened to create
 equity were also driven by negative impacts of the program                         more robust feedback loops between research and policy.




  This paper—prepared as a background paper to the World Bank’s World Development Report 2018: LEARNING to Realize
  Education’s Promise—is a product of the Education Global Practice Group. It is part of a larger effort by the World Bank
  to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions around the world. Policy
  Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The authors may be contacted at
  salsamarrai@worldbank.org.




         The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
         issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
         names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
         of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
         its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                       Produced by the Research Support Team
    Introducing a Performance-Based School Grant in Jakarta:
       What Do We Know about Its Impact after Two Years?

    Samer Al-Samarrai*, Unika Shrestha*, Amer Hasan*, Nozomi Nakajima, Santoso Santoso* and
                                    Wisnu Harto Adi Wijoyo*




JEL classification codes: C21, D73, I22, I28
Keywords: Education, quality of education, results-based management in the public sector, education
funding formulae




*
  Education Global Practice, World Bank Group, 1818 H Street, NW, Washington, DC 20433

  Harvard Graduate School of Education, Harvard University, 13 Appian Way, Cambridge, MA 02138
Acknowledgements: The data on the UN examination scores was provided by PUSPENDIK (Pusat Penilaian
Pendidikan) of the Ministry of Education and Culture (MoEC). The authors are grateful to Professor Ir Nizam and Dr
A. Suprananto of PUSPENDI for providing and aiding the team’s understanding of this data. The data on education
indicators for metropolitan areas was provided by the PDSPK (Pusat Data Statistik Pendidikan dan Kebudayaan) team
in MoEC. The authors acknowledge the enormous amount of help provided by Dr. Ir. Bastari, Ir. Siti Sofiah, and
Watik Sudarwati. Information on school grants and additional information on Jakarta schools was provided by UPT
PDSIP Disdik of the Jakarta government. The authors are grateful to Kadarwati Mardiutama in facilitating this process
and to Harry Patrinos and Shwetlena Sabarwal for providing comments on an earlier draft of the paper. The authors
gratefully acknowledge financial support from the REACH Trust Fund at the World Bank. Corresponding author -
Samer Al-Samarrai (salsamarrai@worldbank.org). The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this
paper are entirely those of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for
Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of
the World Bank or the governments they represent.
1. Introduction

Children growing up in many developing countries today start school earlier and stay longer than
their parents and grandparents. Average levels of educational attainment in developing countries
rose from 4 years to 7 years between 1980 and 2010 and over the same period many countries also
narrowed the attainment gap with more advanced nations (Lee and Lee 2016). These
improvements have come about through significant increases in government investment in
education. For example, government spending on education in low- and middle- income countries
doubled in real terms between 2000 and 2014 (Education Commission 2016).

A substantial proportion of these additional resources have been allocated to building and
equipping new schools and hiring teachers. Increased funding, has also been used, particularly in
basic education, to reduce the costs of schooling through targeted cash transfer schemes and school
grants. Typically, governments have provided grants as part of fee reduction policies and to
compensate schools for the associated revenue loss.

However, despite increased spending, student learning outcomes remain low in many countries.
Recent evidence shows that in many countries, overall increases in public education spending are
only loosely related to improved learning (OECD 2013). Moreover, impact evaluation studies
across different countries have also shown that increases in spending that merely provide more
school level inputs frequently fail to improve learning (Glewwe, Hanushek et al. 2011, McEwan
2013).

Indonesia is no exception to these broader global trends. Between 2000 and 2012, the number of
years of schooling the average adult obtained increased from 6 to 8 years (World Bank 2013). The
government tripled education spending in real terms between 2001 and 2011 and used part of these
increases to introduce a nationwide school grants program in 2005.1 While attainment has
improved, the 2015 OECD PISA results show that almost 70 percent of Indonesian students fell
below the basic level of proficiency in mathematics required to participate fully in modern society
(OECD 2016). Moreover, there has been no significant change in learning outcomes since 2006.

In the nation’s capital, Jakarta, the low returns from large increases in public education spending
have led to a renewed focus on the effectiveness of school financing. For many years, the Jakarta
city government has provided per-student operational grants to support school level improvement.
However, a recent public education expenditure review highlighted the limited impact of this
additional funding on school performance (World Bank 2014). In response to these findings, the
government adjusted their operational grant allocation formula in 2014 to include a component
that linked school grants to performance.

This paper evaluates the impact of the introduction of this performance component of the grant on
learning outcomes. It identifies the impact by exploiting geographic differences in program
coverage as well as by comparing schools that received the additional performance award with
schools that did not.

1
 Per student spending in primary and lower secondary schools also increased over this period and has continued to
grow UIS (UNESCO Institute for Statistics) (2017). “Education (database).”. Montreal: http://data.uis.unesco.org/.


                                                                                                                     2
The paper finds that student learning outcomes improved as a result of the announcement of the
new component in all government junior secondary schools. Despite efforts to ensure a level
playing field, high performing junior secondary schools were much more likely to receive the
performance award than low performing schools. Moreover, the performance improvements
required to secure additional funding were much lower for schools that were already high-
performing (compared to low-performing schools). These program design features appear to have
created stronger incentives for improvement among high performing junior secondary schools and
the program appears to have inadvertently increased inequality in school performance at the junior
secondary school level. In contrast, the program had a small negative effect on government
primary schools in Jakarta. However, primary schools that performed poorly prior to the
introduction of the program registered a small but significant increase in examination scores.
While the paper finds impacts of the announcement of the performance-based component of the
grant on some primary and all junior secondary government schools, it finds no additional impact
of the additional funds associated with the performance-based component of the grant on the 25
percent of government schools that actually received it.

The next section provides a short review of the literature that has explored the impact of school
grants on education outcomes – particularly in developing countries. Section 3 provides a
description of the Jakarta school grants and Section 4 outlines the main research questions,
describes the empirical strategy and data employed. The main results are reported in Section 5 and
the final section provides some suggestions on how the program could be strengthened further.

2. Literature Review

School grants and similar mechanisms that provide discretionary funds to schools exist in many
education systems but their objectives and characteristics vary widely.2 Grants are sometimes used
to compensate schools for lost revenue when policies to abolish fees have been introduced to raise
the demand for schooling. They have also been used as part of broader school based management
reforms and have provided schools with a reliable source of funding to implement their own
improvement plans. The size and coverage of school grants also vary. In some cases, grants can
be used to cover all school operating expenses (e.g. teacher salaries, utilities, infrastructure) while
in other cases the use of grants is heavily circumscribed.

While these differences make it difficult to generalize about the impact of school grants, the
available evidence does suggest that they have been successful at improving participation (Table
1). For example, the introduction of grants in Niger and Uganda improved the chances of children
enrolling in primary school (Grogan 2009, Beasley and Huillery 2013). Grants have also improved
indicators of student progress and retention. Evaluations of two Mexican programs that provided
parent association-managed grants found that they reduced student drop-out and repetition rates
(Skoufias and Shapiro 2006, Gertler, Patrinos et al. 2012).



2
 For the purposes of this paper, school grants are funds provided directly to schools that authorities at the school level
have some discretion over. Grants are usually from public sources and exclude school income from fees and
contributions by parents.

                                                                                                                        3
Evidence on the impact of school grants on learning outcomes is more mixed. The studies
summarized in Table 1 where grants are introduced on their own show little impact on learning.
For example, in India and Zambia, parents lowered their own contributions to schools in
anticipation of schools receiving the grant. This reduced the impact of the grant on school revenues
and limited the additional activities that schools could finance to improve learning (Das, Dercon
et al. 2013). However, the impact of grants on learning has been more promising when they have
been combined with other interventions. For example, in Indonesia grants on their own had no
impact but improved learning outcomes when combined with interventions that strengthened
school oversight (Pradhan, Suryadarma et al. 2014). Similarly, in Tanzania, when school grants
were combined with teacher incentives related to student performance, learning outcomes
improved (Mbiti, Muralidharan et al. 2015).

A review of the literature did not uncover any evaluations where grant payments were linked
directly to school performance. A study in Senegal where grants were allocated to schools
competitively showed that linking decisions about grant allocation to school outcomes had the
potential to raise student learning outcomes (Carneiro, Koussihouèdé et al. 2016). However, there
have been no assessments of grants that are fully or partly allocated on past school performance.
This paper aims to fill this gap by evaluating the early impacts of the Jakarta program which
directly links school grant amounts to school performance on the national examination.




                                                                                                  4
Table 1: Summary of recent evaluations of school grants
Country       Education level     Outcomes evaluated        Was the grant bundled       Effect                                                              Studies
                                                            with other interventions?
Mexico        Non-indigenous      Drop-out, repetition,     Yes. Includes other         Negative and statistically significant effect on drop-out and       Gertler, Patrinos
              public primary      failure to pass grade     support to parent           repetition with larger effects in Grades 1-3. No significant        et al. (2012)
              schools                                       associations.               effect on failure rates.
Mexico        Public primary      Drop-out, repetition,     Yes. Includes               Negative and statistically significant effect on drop-out,          Skoufias and
              schools             failure to pass grade     decentralized               repetition and failure rates.                                       Shapiro (2006)
                                                            management.
Niger         Public primary      Enrolment and drop-       Yes. Support and            Statistically significant positive effect on male and female        Beasley and
              schools             out                       training of school          enrolment in Grade 2. Negative effect on female drop-out for        Huillery (2013)
                                                            committees.                 Grade 2.
Uganda        Primary schools     Probability a child       No but school grants tied   Statistically positive effect on probability of enrolment.          Grogan (2009)
                                  enrolls before age 9      to abolition of school
                                                            fees.
Gambia        Lower basic         Student and teacher       No but also looked at       Statistically significant improvements in teacher and student       Blimpo and Evans
              public and          attendance, numeracy      school grants combined      attendance after 3 years. No effect on learning measures.           (2011)
              government-         and literacy test         with other interventions.
              aided schools       scores
Philippines   Public elementary   English, Mathematics      Yes. Training and school    Statistically significant and positive effect on all test scores.   Khattri, Ling et al.
              schools             and Science test          based management                                                                                (2010); Yamauchi
                                  scores                    interventions.                                                                                  (2014)
Indonesia     Rural public        Drop-out, repetition      No. Also looked at          No statistically significant effect on drop-out and repetition      Pradhan,
              primary schools     and mathematics and       school grants combined      rates or on learning outcomes for grants on their own.              Suryadarma et al.
                                  language test scores      with other interventions.   Statistically significant effect on language test scores for        (2014)
                                                                                        grants combined with (a) links to village councils and (b) links
                                                                                        to councils and elections. Grants and links to village councils
                                                                                        also significant for girls’ mathematics scores.
India and     Public primary      Mathematics and           No.                         Statistically significant improvements in student learning          Das, Dercon et al.
Zambia        schools (rural in   language test scores                                  from unanticipated school grants. No effect when grants are         (2013)
              India)                                                                    anticipated by parents.
Senegal       Primary schools     Mathematics, French       No. School grants           Statistically significant improvements in Grade 3 French and        Carneiro,
                                  and Oral test scores in   allocated competitively.    Oral test scores.                                                   Koussihouèdé et
                                  Grades 3 and 5                                                                                                            al. (2016)
Tanzania      Primary schools     Mathematics, English      No. Also looked at          No effect on test scores of provision of grant alone.               Mbiti,
                                  and Kiswahili test        school grants combined      Statistically significant improvements in test scores for           Muralidharan et
                                  scores in Grades 1-3      with teacher incentives.    mathematics and Swahili in second year when combined with           al. (2015)
                                                                                        teacher incentives.
Note: Studies included in Table 1 were mainly identified from past reviews of impact evaluations (McEwan 2013, Snilstveit, Stevenson et al. 2015).


                                                                                                                                                                              5
3. Education sector funding and the Jakarta school grants program

In Indonesia, decentralization in the early 2000s devolved responsibility for primary and secondary
schools to provincial and district governments. Local governments account for over 60 percent of
public education sector spending. The central government supplements local government funding
through a range of national programs including a large school grant scheme introduced in 2005 –
the Bantuan Operasional Sekolah (BOS) program. The BOS program provides funding to all
primary and junior secondary schools on the basis of a fixed amount per student. Schools have
strict limits on the amounts they are allowed to collect from parents which makes schools heavily
reliant on BOS funds. In 2010, BOS funds accounted for 83 percent of all discretionary funding
that primary schools received (World Bank 2012). School funding from the BOS program has
increased significantly since its introduction and in 2014 the average primary school received
approximately US$ 10,000 a year (World Bank 2015).3

In 2005, the Jakarta government introduced a school grants scheme modeled on the national BOS
program. Initially, the program only covered government and non-government primary schools.
However, the per-student amount of IDR 240,000 (US$ 25) received by primary schools was about
50 percent more than junior secondary schools received from the national program. As the program
evolved, per-student funding levels increased and in 2007, the program expanded to cover all
government junior and senior secondary schools. In 2014, per-student funding for junior secondary
schools was IDR 1.3 million (US$ 111) compared to only IDR 710,000 (US$ 59.8) from the
national BOS program. However, by this time the Jakarta government had withdrawn grant support
for non-government schools.4

Figure 1: National Examination Scores for Junior Secondary Schools (SMP) by Province
(%), 2010-13
    100
    80
    60
    40
    20
     0
                            NUSA TENGGARA…




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         NUSA TENGGARA…
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               RIAU




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             BALI
                                                                                                                                                        SUMATERA BARAT




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     SULAWESI BARAT
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      PAPUA BARAT




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     JAMBI
                                                                KALIMANTAN BARAT




                                                                                                                                                                                         PAPUA
                                                                                                                                                                                                 BENGKULU


                                                                                                                                                                                                                        JAWA BARAT




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      MALUKU



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    KALIMANTAN SELATAN


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          SULAWESI UTARA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           SULAWESI SELATAN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              ACEH



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          SUMATERA SELATAN
                                             KALIMANTAN TIMUR



                                                                                                    JAWA TENGAH


                                                                                                                                      SULAWESI TENGAH


                                                                                                                                                                         DI YOGYAKARTA



                                                                                                                                                                                                            GORONTALO




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    MALUKU UTARA




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            LAMPUNG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   SULAWESI TENGGARA
          BANGKA BELITUNG




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             JAWA TIMUR
                                                                                   KEPULAUAN RIAU


                                                                                                                  KALIMANTAN TENGAH




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       INDONESIA
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   BANTEN




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      DKI JAKARTA




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    SUMATERA UTARA




Source: World Bank (2014).

3
 Roughly equivalent to the salary of two certified civil service teachers.
4
 Between 2005 and 2013 school grants were provided to all schools except in 2011 where only government schools
were beneficiaries. Since 2014, non-government schools are only included in government-financed scholarship
programs for poor students.

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     6
Concerns over the quality of education and effectiveness of government education spending
resulted in significant changes to the school grants program. Despite public and private spending
levels considerably higher than most other provinces, schools in Jakarta only ranked in the middle
of the national examination distribution (Figure 1). In 2014, Jawa Timur achieved comparable
examination results as Jakarta but spent only half as much per student (World Bank 2014). These
large differences in spending efficiency led the Jakarta government to introduce a performance
component to their school grant program to tie funding more closely to performance.5

The performance component of the grant was announced in 2014 and gave the best performing
schools an additional per student allocation equivalent to 20 percent of the basic grant allocation
(Table 2).6 Performance was judged along two dimensions: average examination performance over
the last two years (2013 and 2014) and the percentage point improvement in performance over the
same period. The ranking of schools along these two dimensions was averaged and schools in the
top quartile (25%) were awarded the performance component grant in the following year (2015).7
For primary and junior secondary schools, the ranking exercise was conducted separately in each
of Jakarta’s six districts to incentivize more schools and make the scheme more equitable. In
particular, the district ranking exercise ensured that schools in catchment areas serving students
from similar backgrounds were competing against each other rather than schools in more affluent
parts of the city.

Table 2: Grant funding formula and the number of government schools in Jakarta by
district, 2015
                                               Primary      Junior                    % of schools
                                               (SD)         Secondary                 that receive
                                                            (SMP)                     allocation
               Monthly per-student value of grant component IDR 000s (USD)
                    Basic allocation        60 (4.5)        110 (8.2)                 100
                    Performance             12 (0.9)        22 (1.6)                  25
                    allocation
                    Equity allocation*      12 (0.9)        22 (1.6)                  1

                Total number of schools
                      Jakarta Barat           361                50                  -
                      Jakarta Pusat           203                36                 -
                      Jakarta Selatan         375                65                 -
                      Jakarta Timur           479                95                 -
                      Jakarta Utara           197                38
                      Kepulauan Seribu        14                 7                   -
                Average school enrolment 367                     742                -
Notes: Exchange rate for 2015 of IDR 13,389 to the US$ used to convert grant amounts from World Development
Indicators database. Average enrolment data is for 2015 except in a small number of schools where information for


5
  At the same time, an equity component was introduced to provide greater funding to schools in Kepulauan Seribu
(Thousand Islands) that faced significantly higher operational costs given their remote location.
6
  Senior secondary schools and madrassahs were also eligible for performance grants. However, due to data limitations
the impact of the program in these institutions is not analyzed in the paper.
7
  Which schools received the performance component was determined in August/September once the school year had
ended and the examination results were published. Schools that were successful were given the additional funds in the
following budget year which ran from January to December.

                                                                                                                   7
2014 or 2016 has been used. * Given to Kepulauan Seribu only. Source: Monthly per student value of grant and
number of schools reported from Jakarta government education management information system.

The introduction of the performance component was designed to create stronger incentives at the
school level to use resources more effectively to improve learning. Historically, schools have used
a significant proportion of their discretionary funds to hire contract teachers (World Bank 2015).
Unlike in some other countries, however, the hiring of additional teachers has not been associated
with improvements in learning partly because student teacher ratios and class sizes were already
relatively low (World Bank 2013). The performance component was designed to align the schools’
use of resources more centrally with learning.

At the time of its design, it was assumed that the performance component would improve learning
outcomes through two main channels. First, the announcement of the grant alone was expected to
increase effort among teachers and other actors to improve levels of learning. For example, the
announcement of the grant was expected to raise teacher effort through increases in teacher
attendance, greater time on task during lessons and greater lesson preparation. Second, it was
predicted that the introduction of the grant would encourage schools to align their funding more
closely to the objective of improved learning. It was also expected that learning outcomes would
be further enhanced for schools that received the grant because additional activities to raise
learning could be supported.

Table 3: Government schools receiving 2015 performance component and average
improvement in performance
                                         School performance quartiles based on average of national
                                                    examination score in 2013 and 2014
                                           Bottom                                         Top             All
                                        performance       Quartile 2    Quartile 3   performance        schools
                                           quartile                                     quartile
 Average examination score 2013/14: all government schools
   Primary                                   63              71             76             83             74
   Junior Secondary                          70              73             76             83             76
 Percentage of government schools in each quartile receiving performance grant in 2015
   Primary                                    3              12             26             62             26
   Junior Secondary                           0               6             19             75             25
 Average examination score 2013/14: only schools receiving performance grant in 2015
   Primary                                   66              72             77             84             80
   Junior Secondary                           -              73             77             83             82
Note: Average scores and percent of grant recipients in 2015 were calculated using UN scores data from Puspendik
and performance grant data from Jakarta government. Excludes schools in Kepulauan Seribu district.

Despite efforts during design to give all schools an equal opportunity to compete, the data show
that schools with higher overall performance at the outset were more likely to get the performance
grant. The decision to include the percentage point change in examination scores was taken to
encourage low performing schools to compete for the grant. Without this, only high performing
schools would receive the grant. Due to annual changes in content and design, national
examination scores in Indonesia are not comparable over time. However, it is instructive to look
at the average improvements in scores needed to secure the performance component for high and
low performing schools (Table 3). Schools that received the performance grant were
disproportionately drawn from the top performance quartile which is constructed by averaging


                                                                                                              8
school scores in 2013 and 2014. Of the schools which received the performance award in 2015
around 62 percent (75 percent) of primary (junior secondary) schools were already ranked in the
top 25 percent prior to the program (Table 3). This suggests that the strength of the incentive that
the performance component provided differed across schools depending on their level of past
performance.

4. Data, research questions and empirical strategy

Data
Using administrative data provided by the Jakarta government from 2012 to 2016, the paper
examines whether the introduction of a performance component in the Jakarta school grant during
the 2014/15 school year affected the level and distribution of learning outcomes in 2015 and 2016.

Student results on the annual Indonesian National Examination (UN - Ujian Nasional) are used as
the main indicator to assess the impact of the performance grant. The UN is a mandatory
standardized test in Indonesian (Bahasa Indonesia), English, mathematics and science for
government and non-government school students in the last year of primary, junior secondary and
senior secondary school. Students across Indonesia take the same examination except in primary
schools where provinces have set their own assessments since 2014. While the test development
follows international standards, UN results are not comparable over time and primary examination
results are only comparable among schools in the same province. Cheating in the national
examinations remains a problem despite significant efforts by the authorities to introduce measures
(e.g. different test papers, computerizing test taking) to reduce opportunities for cheating. Media
reports of cheating are common but they do not show any clear pattern in the frequency of cheating
between different types of schools. For example, the answer key for the junior secondary
examination in 2015 was reported as being available to buy for between IDR 14 and IDR 21
million (US$ 1,000 – 1,500) in East Java (Tarigan 2015). A comparison of UN scores and scores
from an independently administered test where cheating was less likely show a positive and
statistically significant correlation (De Ree 2012). However, the integrity of the overall
examination process warrants a cautious interpretation of the results of the current paper.

Data on school-level characteristics were also collected from national and provincial education
management information systems. These data contained information on the number of teachers,
their levels of education and experience, the employment status of teachers, classroom availability
and condition. These variables are used to control for the impact of other factors that might have
influenced changes in UN scores but were not associated with the school grant program.

Research questions
The analysis seeks to answer three research questions:

1. What impact did the introduction of the performance grant have on student learning in
   all eligible schools? The paper first assesses the impact that the performance component had
   on the UN scores of eligible schools. It is expected that all government schools eligible for the
   program would have tried to improve their UN scores in an effort to receive the award.
2. Was the impact of the program different for high and low performing schools? Table 3
   shows that the effort that schools needed to exert to get the performance grant differed


                                                                                                  9
   depending on their existing level of performance. The paper assesses whether program impact
   was different among high performing schools that may have had to exert less effort to obtain
   the performance component of the school grant.
3. What impact did the additional funds have on student learning in schools that received
   the performance component? The paper also compares the impact on learning outcomes
   between government schools that received the performance grant and schools that did not.

Empirical Strategy
In order to explore the first two questions, the paper starts out using a difference-in-differences
(DD) approach to compare changes in educational outcomes of Jakarta government schools before
and after the announcement of the school grant in 2014 with analogous changes in comparison
schools that are not eligible for the grant. To estimate the impact of the introduction of the grant
on all eligible schools, changes in UN scores between government schools and non-government
schools in Jakarta are compared.8

The approach is illustrated in Table 4 using the raw average scores for the main comparison groups
used in the paper. For example, in 2014, before the introduction of the program, the difference in
examination scores between government and non-government junior secondary schools was 4.2
percentage points. After the introduction of the program this raw difference increased to 6.8
percentage points in 2015 and 8.6 percentage points in 2016. The difference in difference from
these raw scores suggests that the program may have increased scores in 2015 by approximately
2.6 percentage points and by around 4.4 percentage points in 2016.

Table 4: Difference in government-non-government gap in examination scores in Jakarta
                                                                 Estimating impact in             Estimating impact in
                                                                        2015                             2016
                                                   Pre            Post        [Post -              Post        [Post -
                                                 (2014)          (2015)        Pre]               (2016)        Pre]
                                           1. Effect on all government schools
     a.   Primary
                      Jakarta government          70.9             70.2          -0.7              68.1         -2.8
                  Jakarta non-government          72.9             72.7          -0.2              71.6         -1.3
           [government - non-government]           -2              -2.5          -0.5              -3.5         -1.5

     b. Junior secondary
                       Jakarta government       75.0             77.2            2.2              65.0          -10.0
                  Jakarta non-government        70.8             70.4           -0.4              56.4          -14.4
          [government - non-government]         4.2               6.8            2.6               8.6           4.4
Note: UN scores are expressed as percentages. Figures in bold are the difference in differences of interest.

While Table 4 illustrates a simple comparison of mean scores, a more robust difference-in-
differences model outlined in equation (1) is estimated. This is estimated on a sample comprised
only of Jakarta schools.


8
 The DD analyses exclude schools in Jakarta’s Kepulauan Seribu district since this district does not have any non-
government schools for comparison. Moreover, all schools in Kepulauan Seribu were given an equity-based grant in
addition to the performance-based incentive starting in 2015, which may make it difficult to separately identify the
impact of the performance component.

                                                                                                                   10
     =	∝ 	 +	           ∗         +           ∗         +∑             +         +     +                            (1)


In equation (1),          denotes the UN score of school s in district d in year t.9         denote year
dummies.            is a dummy variable that takes the value of 1 if the school is a government school
and therefore eligible to compete for the performance grant, and takes the value of 0 if the school
is a non-government school.		        is a vector of observable time-varying characteristics for school
s in district d in year t. These are (i) the share of teachers with a bachelors’ degree or higher, (ii)
the number of students in the graduating class and (iii) the number of students per classroom.
are school fixed effects, and       is the error term. Adding school fixed effects absorbs any time-
invariant school-level characteristics that may be correlated with UN scores and allows estimates
of within school score changes before and after the introduction of the performance grant. The
school fixed effects also control for any sub-district level factors that may drive differences in UN
scores. In addition, the dummy variable for government schools (               ) is also subsumed in the
school fixed effects. The coefficients of interest are and	 ;           is the estimate of the impact of
the performance-based grant in 2015 while		 is the estimated impact in 2016. In other words,
( ) denotes the gap between the change in scores among Jakarta government schools from 2014
to 2015 (2016) and the analogous change among non-government schools in Jakarta. We test the
difference between and	 	to assess whether the impact of the program changes over time.

Validity of Difference-in-Differences
A key underlying assumption of the DD approach is that the size of the examination score gap
between government and non-government schools was similar and remained relatively stable in
the years prior to the introduction of the performance-based grant. This parallel trend assumption
is tested in two ways. First, a test is performed to check whether the gap between examination
scores in government and non-government schools before the program differed over time on
average (denoted by in equation i).10 This test does not reject the parallel trends assumption at
the 5% significance level. Second, a test is performed to examine whether the score gap stayed the
same across each year before the announcement. To test this assumption, examination scores are
regressed on year dummies and interactions of year dummies with school type.11 While the results

9
  Every year, some primary schools are merged. To compare test scores over time, this paper uses the UN score of the
“mother” school (that exists in the database after the merge) for the periods before the merge as “mother” schools tend
to be larger on average than the other schools that are annexed in the consolidation.
10
   A similar approach is adopted in Muralidharan, K. and N. Prakash (2013). Cycling to school: increasing secondary
school enrollment for girls in India, National Bureau of Economic Research.
           A DD model using UN scores data for 2012 to 2014 using the following equation, where Year is a categorical
variable from 1 to 3. The full results of this test are shown in Annex Table A1.2 – Panel A. The coefficient of interest
in that table is Jakarta Government*Year.

                =   +         ∗        +	          +     +      .          (i)

11
   A DD model using UN scores data for 2012 to 2014 of the following form is estimated where	 ( ) denotes the
difference in the government vs non-government score gap in 2013 (2012) relative to the analogous gap in 2014:
                                                        	
     = +        2013 ∗     +	     2012 ∗    +∑             +     +             (ii)



                                                                                                                     11
show that the parallel trends assumption holds for primary schools, it is rejected for junior
secondary schools at the 5% significance level. This result is driven by the much smaller gap in
2013 compared to 2014, the final year before the program began.12 However, the score gap in 2012
is similar to the gap in 2014.

In order to check whether the rejection of the common trend assumption in 2013 affects our results,
the DD model is estimated using different measures of the baseline score gap. Specifically, a DD
specification comparing the post-announcement score gaps between government and non-
government schools with the average analogous gap in the period from 2012 to 2014 is estimated.
In another specification, the post-announcement score gap is compared with the average gap in
2013 and 2014. Regardless of which baseline years are used, the core results of the paper remain
unchanged.13

Robustness Checks
In order to test the sensitivity of the impacts estimated from the model outlined in equation (1), the
paper compares changes in the differences in examination scores between government and non-
government schools in Jakarta with the same gap in other metropolitan areas.14 Specifically,
schools in the most densely populated metropolitan areas around Jakarta are included as
comparisons.15 Table 5 illustrates the approach using the raw differences in average examination
scores between Jakarta and these other metropolitan areas. Government schools perform better
than non-government schools in both Jakarta and other metropolitan areas. In Jakarta, this gap has
widened since the introduction of the new grant program. In contrast, the gap between government
and non-government schools has tended to remain relatively similar in other metropolitan areas.
Putting these two contrasting trends together suggests a positive impact of the new grant program
on junior secondary government schools in Jakarta.




The full results are reported in Annex Table A1.2 – Panel B.
12
   Specifically, the test reveals that coefficient for Jakarta Government*Year2013 denotes that the government-
nongovernment gap in 2013 was significantly smaller than that in 2014.
13
   Annex Table A1.6 show the DD results using alternative baseline measures of the gap between government and
non-government junior secondary schools before the grant program was announced. While the size of the estimates is
different from the estimates of equation 1, the sign and statistical strength of the coefficients are the same as the results
in our main regressions (see Table 6, column 3). In both Table 6 and Annex Table A1.6, the estimated impact in 2015
is positive and significant while the estimated impact for 2016 is larger and significant.
14
   It is not possible to undertake this robustness check for primary schools since examination scores at the primary
level have been set at the provincial level since 2014, which makes it impossible to compare scores in Jakarta and
other metropolitan areas after 2014.
15
   These other metropolitan areas are Bekasi, Bogor, and Tangerang. Government schools in Kota Yogyakarta and
Kota Surabaya were also used as a comparison group but since the results are similar they are not reported in the paper
to ease exposition.

                                                                                                                          12
Table 5: Difference in government-non-government gap in junior secondary school
examination scores between Jakarta and other metropolitan areas
                                                                      Estimating impact in        Estimating impact in
                                                                             2015                        2016
                                                       Pre             Post        [Post -         Post        [Post -
                                                     (2014)           (2015)        Pre]          (2016)        Pre]

                            Jakarta government        75.0             77.2          2.2           65.0          -10.0
                        Jakarta non-government        70.8             70.4         -0.4           56.4          -14.4
                 [government - non-government]        4.2               6.8          2.6            8.6           4.4

              Other metropolitan government           66.9             66.5         -0.4           67.4           0.5
          Other metropolitan non-government           61.9             62.1          0.2           62.3           0.4
             [government - non-government]             5.0              4.4         -0.6           5.1            0.1

      Difference in gap between Jakarta
            and other metropolitan areas                                          3.2                              4.3
Note: UN scores are expressed as percentages. Figures in bold are the triple difference-in-difference of interest. Other
metropolitan areas refer to Bekasi, Bogor, and Tangerang.

To test whether the simple differences in examination scores remain when differences in key
school characteristics are controlled for, a more robust difference-in-difference-in-differences
model is also estimated. This is estimated on a sample of schools from Jakarta and other
metropolitan areas.

         = +         2015   ∗       ∗          +	      ∗
                                                    2016          ∗       +	∑                ∗    +
																	∑              ∗       	+	∑          +	      +       +                                            (2)

In equation (2),       equals 1 if school s in district d is located in Jakarta and equals 0 if located
in either Kota Bogor, Kota Bekasi or Kota Tangerang. All other notations are the same as in
equation (1). and       denote the estimate of the impact of the introduction of the performance-
based grant in 2015 and 2016 respectively. In equation (2),         ( ) denotes the difference in the
change in the gap in scores among government and non-government schools from 2014 to 2015
(2016) in Jakarta compared to an analogous change among government and non-government
schools in other metropolitan areas.

The paper explores the second research question by grouping schools into different performance
quartiles based on UN scores in 2013 and 2014, and estimating equations (1) and (2) separately
for DKI government schools in each quartile. For example, to test the impact of the introduction
of the grant among the lowest performing eligible schools,        in equation (1) equals 1 if school
s in district d is a government school in DKI that falls in the bottom quartile and equals zero if
school is a non-government school in Jakarta.

The final research question is analyzed by estimating a linear model using a sharp regression
discontinuity design:

   	=	         +      	+	       (   − )+                                                                            (3)



                                                                                                                     13
where is the average UN exam performance of school i, is receipt of the performance grant
(treatment), is the performance index score (the variable used for assignment) and the threshold
for assignment to treatment. 	 	defined as schools scoring in the top quartile of the performance
index, which is based on the average examination performance over the last two years and the
scale of improvements in performance over the same period. The treatment effect is given by .
For a detailed description of the regression discontinuity method used in this paper, see Annex 2.

The regression discontinuity approach assumes that in the absence of the treatment, the sample of
schools in a close band around the cutoff c will be similar to each other. Annex Table A2.1 reports
the results of a test for random assignment around the discontinuity point (Imbens and Lemieux
2008, Lee 2008). It tests whether there is statistical equivalence in the average characteristics for
government schools in Jakarta with scores just below and above the cutoff by school level. As
expected, the observable school characteristics are statistically different for schools on either side
of the cutoff on average. However, the difference disappears when schools within a small band
around the cutoff are compared (with the exception of share of teachers with a bachelor’s degree
or higher in junior secondary schools). To increase the precision of the estimated program impacts
and to eliminate small sample biases, control variables are also included in equation (3). These
control variables are the same as the difference-in-difference models above, which are (i) the share
of teachers with education level of S1 or higher, (ii) the number of students in the graduating class
and (iii) the number of students per classroom.

5. Results

What impact did the introduction of the performance grant have on student learning in all
eligible schools?

Comparing government and non-government primary schools in Jakarta reveals that the
introduction of the performance component had a small but negative impact on examination scores
(Table 6). When controls for classroom size, teacher education and the number of graduating
students are added, the negative impact is only statistically significant in 2016 and quite small -
equivalent to 11 percent of a standard deviation of the comparison group (column 2, Table 6). Put
another way, the program resulted in the average UN score of government primary schools falling
from 71 percent in 2014 to 70 percent in 2016.

While the performance grant program was implemented independently in each district in Jakarta
this does not appear to affect the average results reported in Table 6. The performance grant
program for primary schools was implemented independently for each of Jakarta’s six districts and
the top 25 percent of primary schools in each district received the performance grant. Given
differences in average district performance it might be expected that the magnitude of the
program’s impact might also differ across districts.16 However, looking at the impact of the
program in each district separately reveals little difference in program impact in 2015. In 2016, the
overall program impact is negative in most districts and these results are statistically significant in
four of the districts (see Annex Table A1.8). It is interesting to note that the largest negative

16
  In 2015, average examination scores in Jakarta’s mainland districts - Jakarta Timur – 74 percent, Jakarta Selatan –
71 percent, Jakarta Pusat – 68 percent, Jakarta Utara – 69 percent, Jakarta Barat – 66 percent.


                                                                                                                  14
impacts appear to occur in districts that tend to have higher overall performance before the new
school grants program is introduced.17

Table 6. Impact of performance-based grant on eligible primary and junior secondary
schools in Jakarta
                                                                    Government v. non-government schools in
                                                                                    Jakarta


                                                                                               Junior secondary
                                                                   Primary schools
                                                                                                   schools

                                                                    No          Full           No          Full
                                                                  control     controls       control     controls
                                                                    (1)         (2)            (3)         (4)

                                                                  -0.51**      -0.26         2.57***     2.61***
     Jakarta Government*Year2015
                                                                   (0.24)     (0.25)          (0.17)      (0.18)
                                                                 -1.43***    -1.25***        4.47***     4.55***
     Jakarta Government*Year2016
                                                                   (0.29)     (0.30)          (0.36)      (0.38)

     Observations                                                  6,849       6,849          2,679       2,679
     R-squared                                                     0.091       0.101          0.811       0.812

  No. of Jakarta government schools                                    1578          1578           280        280
                                a
  No. of comparison schools                                             705           705           613        613
  S.D. of 2014 UN score in comparison schools                            11           11             7.2        7.2
  P-value of difference in impact between 2016 and 2015               0.0003        0.001           0.00       0.00
  Years included                                                     2014-16       2014-16        2014-16    2014-16
  Controls for students per classroom, teacher education and
                                                                        No           Yes             No        Yes
  graduating students
  Time dummies and school fixed effects                                 Yes          Yes            Yes        Yes
Notes: The dependent variable is national examination scores expressed as a percentage. Robust standard errors in
parenthesis. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Comparison schools are non-government schools in Jakarta in columns
1-4. Full results, including the coefficient estimates for the control variables, are reported in Annex Table A1.4.

While further research is required to understand more clearly why the program had a negative
impact in primary schools, it may reflect ineffective decision making at the school level. It is
possible that the announcement of the program resulted in school principals making changes that
had a negative impact, at least in the short term, on student examination results. The limited data
available suggest that school principals shifted resources away from hiring temporary teachers and
towards improving the condition of classrooms.18 It is possible that these shifts reduced school

17
   Annex Table A1.8 also reports results by district for junior secondary schools. They show a similar impact of the
program in 2015 across all districts. However, in 2016 the program’s impact in Jakarta Pusat is insignificant and its
impact in Jakarta Timur appears much larger than in other districts.
18
   Data show that government schools reduced the share of temporary teachers in the teaching force from 38 to 34
percent between 2014 and 2016. The share of classrooms in good condition increased from 38 to 47 percent over the
same period (see Annex Table A1.3).

                                                                                                                    15
quality, by for example disrupting schooling as classes were repaired. While these may provide a
plausible account of program impact it should be stressed that the lack of information at the school
level on change makes it impossible to come to any definitive conclusions.

In contrast to the primary school results, the introduction of the performance grants in government
junior secondary schools had a positive and relatively large impact on examination results (Table
6). In 2015, for example, it is estimated that the program resulted in 2.6 percentage point increase
in examination scores in government junior secondary schools.19 Taking the average of all
government junior secondary schools this is equivalent to an increase in scores from 72.5 percent
in 2014 to 75 percent in 2015.

The impact of the program on junior secondary school examination results increased in the second
year of implementation. The estimates suggest that in 2016 the program improved examination
scores in government schools by 4.6 percentage points over examination scores in 2014 –
equivalent to 64 percent of a standard deviation of the comparison group (column 4, Table 6). The
impact in 2016 is larger than the impact in 2015 and possibly highlights that information on the
program and its implications spread across more schools over time.

The results for junior secondary schools are partly corroborated by results from comparing the
change in the government-non-government gap in examination scores between Jakarta and other
metropolitan areas.20 Using the approach outlined in equation (2) it is possible to estimate the
program’s impact on examination results by comparing government junior secondary schools in
Jakarta with similar schools in city districts that border or are close to Jakarta. While schools in
these areas served similar populations, they were not eligible to receive the new performance
component. Using this alternative approach, a positive and statistically significant impact of the
program is registered for 2015 and 2016. Estimated impact of the program in 2016 is similar in
magnitude to the estimate from the difference-in-difference regression comparing Jakarta
government schools with non-government schools (Table 7).




19
  Equivalent to 35 percent of a standard deviation of the comparison group.
20
  Since primary school examinations were changed from a national to a province level examination in 2014, it is not
possible to do a similar analysis of program impact for primary schools.

                                                                                                                16
Table 7. Impact of performance-based grant on eligible junior secondary schools in Jakarta
                                                                                          Jakarta vs other
                                                                                      metropolitan area junior
                                                                                         secondary schools

                                                                                      No control      Full controls
                                                                                         (1)               (2)

     Jakarta* Government*Year2015                                                      3.16***           5.28***
                                                                                        (0.73)            (0.89)
     Jakarta* Government*Year2016                                                      4.31***           5.01***
                                                                                        (1.07)            (1.07)

     Observations                                                                       4,014             4,014
     R-squared                                                                          0.618             0.622
     No. of Jakarta government schools                                                   280               280
     No. of Jakarta non-government schools                                               613               613
     No. of government schools in other cities                                            78                78
     No. of non-government schools in other cities                                       367               367
     S.D. of 2014 UN score in Jakarta non-government schools                             7.2                7.2
     P-value of difference in impact between 2016 and 2015                               0.27              0.88
     Years included                                                                    2014-16           2014-16
                                                                                                        Jakarta,
                                                                                      Jakarta,
                                                                                                        Bekasi,
     Cities included                                                               Bekasi, Bogor,
                                                                                                       Bogor, and
                                                                                   and Tangerang
                                                                                                       Tangerang
     Controls for students per classroom, teacher education and graduating
                                                                                         No                Yes
     students
     Time dummies and school fixed effects                                               Yes               Yes
Notes: The dependent variable is national examination scores expressed as a percentage. Robust standard errors in
parenthesis. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Full results, including the coefficient estimates for the control variables,
are reported in Annex Table A1.5.

There are a number of reasons why it is possible that the program had a different impact on primary
and junior secondary schools. First, junior secondary schools tend to have more qualified and
experienced staff and may have had greater capacity to improve examination scores compared to
their primary school counterparts. Second, while the size of the incentive, in proportional terms
was the same, in absolute terms it was much larger for junior secondary schools. Qualified junior
secondary schools stood to receive IDR 110,000 from the performance component compared to
only IDR 60,000 for primary schools.21

Was the impact of the program different for high and low performing schools?


21
   Indeed, comparing the impact of the grant by enrollment size in 2014 shows that the estimated impact in 2016 is
bigger in size for larger junior secondary schools – those in the largest quartile registered a significantly different
increase in scores (5.6 percentage points) than those in the smallest sized schools (3.4 percentage points). While
estimated impacts for primary schools across enrollment sizes are negative, the effects for the largest two quartiles are
significantly smaller in magnitude (less negative) than primary schools in the smallest quartile (see Annex Table
A1.7.).

                                                                                                                      17
The grant program was designed in a way that tried to ensure that it gave all schools, regardless of
their existing level of performance, an incentive to improve student learning outcomes. However,
the paper has shown that the magnitude of the improvements required to secure the performance
grant were much greater for low performing compared to high performing schools. Did the
difference in effort required to get the performance grant affect program impact for high and low
performing schools? This section aims to answer this question by estimating program impact on
different quartiles of school performance.

The program appears to have had the greatest impact on the best performing quartile of junior
secondary schools (Table 8). Schools were assigned to performance quartiles based on their
average examinations scores in 2013 and 2014 before the change in the school grants program.
The impact of the program on examination scores for the top performing quartile of junior
secondary schools was 6.9 percentage points in 2016 compared to only 2.2 percentage points for
government schools in the bottom quartile.22 This is perhaps an indication that better performing
schools in junior secondary felt that they were more likely to receive the additional performance
award and exerted greater effort to improve.

The impact of the performance grant on government primary schools varies markedly between
different performance quartiles. In contrast with the overall results, the program appears to have
had a positive impact on the worst performing primary schools (Table 8). These findings suggest
that the effect of the program at the primary level has been to narrow gaps in examination scores
between high and low performing schools. However, a large part of the reduction in inequalities
in examination results has been driven by the negative impact of the program on better performing
schools.




22
  The difference in results between the bottom and top performing quartiles is significant for estimated impacts in
2016 but not in 2015.

                                                                                                                18
  Table 8. Impact of the performance-based grant on examination scores in primary and
  junior secondary schools in Jakarta
                                        Primary Schools                              Junior Secondary Schools
                               Jakarta government v. Jakarta non-              Jakarta government v. Jakarta non-
                                       government schools                              government schools
                           Bottom       2nd        3rd         Top          Bottom       2nd       3rd         Top
                           quartile   quartile   quartile     quartile      quartile quartile quartile       quartile
                             (1)         (2)        (3)         (4)           (5)        (6)       (7)         (8)

JakartaGov*Year2015        1.88***      0.06      -1.20***   -2.15***       1.85***     3.01***   3.35***    2.22***
                            (0.34)     (0.33)      (0.32)     (0.31)         (0.33)      (0.30)    (0.26)     (0.24)
JakartaGov*Year2016        1.61***    -1.26***    -2.76***   -2.93***       2.16***     3.81***   5.20***    6.93***
                            (0.40)     (0.40)      (0.39)     (0.38)         (0.48)      (0.41)    (0.53)     (0.48)

Observations                3,303      3,294       3,300       3,297         2,049       2,055     2,043        2,049
R-squared                   0.034      0.064       0.116       0.130         0.801       0.800     0.795        0.792
No. of Jakarta gov.
schools                      396        393         395         394            70         72         68          70
No. of comparison
schools                      705        705         705         705           613         613       613         613
S.D. of 2014 UN score
                             11          11          11          11            7.2        7.2        7.2         7.2
in comparison schools
P-value of difference in
impact between 2016          0.45      0.0002        0          0.02          0.45        0.05     0.0002        0
and 2015

Years included               2014-16 2014-16         2014-16      2014-16        2014-16 2014-16 2014-16 2014-16
Controls for students per
classroom, teacher
                               Yes         Yes         Yes           Yes           Yes       Yes   Yes           Yes
education and
graduating students
Time dummies and
                               Yes         Yes         Yes           Yes           Yes       Yes   Yes           Yes
school fixed effects
  Notes: Dependent variable is national examination scores expressed as a percentage. Robust standard errors in
  parenthesis. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Comparison schools are non-government schools in Jakarta. Full results,
  including the coefficient estimates for the control variables, are reported in Annex Table A1.9.

  What impact did the additional funds have on student learning in schools that received the
  performance component?

  In order to look at whether the additional resources that schools were awarded from the
  performance component helped to improve learning outcomes, the paper compares schools that
  did not receive the performance component but were very close to doing so with schools that just
  managed to improve their performance enough to get the performance award. Table 9 shows the
  impact estimates from the regression discontinuity design in 2015 and 2016 for schools on either
  side of the cut-off for awarding of the performance grant. One way of thinking of the RD estimate
  is as a local average treatment effect – the effect on those induced to comply as their scores cross
  the threshold of eligibility. Given the narrow focus on schools around the threshold of eligibility,
  any differences in test scores have to be sufficiently large to be statistically distinguishable from
  zero.



                                                                                                                  19
 Table 9. Regression discontinuity estimates of the impacts on examination scores of receiving
 the performance grant
                                                                                  Jakarta government junior secondary
                                 Jakarta government primary schools
                                                                                                schools
                                       2015                     2016                     2015                  2016
                               No          Full         No          Full         No          Full       No         Full
                             control     controls     control     controls     control     controls   control    controls
                               (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)          (5)         (6)        (7)        (8)

                              -0.90       -0.84         0.34        0.93         0.78        0.51      -3.27       -3.51
Received grant
                              (1.17)      (1.13)       (1.75)      (1.71)       (1.09)      (1.04)    (3.11)      (3.03)

Observations                275        275            323        323           124         124          145    145
Controls for students
per classroom, teacher
                            No         Yes            No         Yes            No        Yes            No    Yes
education and
graduating students
 Note: Each column is the result of a separate regression. All regressions use a triangular kernel and optimal
 bandwidth that reduces the mean squared error as proposed by Imbens and Kalyanaraman (2011). Controls are share
 of teachers with education degree S1 or above, the number of students in the graduating class and the student
 classroom ratio. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Column 1-2 and 5-6 show the estimated impact of receiving the
 performance-based grant in 2015 while columns 3-4 and 7-8 show the impact in 2016.

 The results show that the additional resources provided by the performance component of the grant
 do not appear to have a statistically significant impact on examination scores. While the results
 show a small negative impact of receiving the performance grant in 2015 on primary school
 examination scores they are not statistically significant - the impact of the performance grant on
 the 2015 national examination scores ranges from -0.9 to -0.8 percentage points at the margin of
 the cutoff. In contrast, receipt of the performance grant improved national examination scores in
 2016 for primary schools (0.3 to 0.9 percentage points) but again, these coefficients are not
 distinguishable from zero.23 The results for junior secondary schools suggest that the additional
 funds improved examination scores in 2015 but had a negative impact on scores in 2016. However,
 none of the results are statistically significantly different from zero (see columns 5-8 of Table 9).

 One possible explanation for these null results on test scores using the RDD approach is that receipt
 of the performance grant is not sufficient to boost schools at or near the threshold to increase
 performance on the national examination. The performance grants may have helped schools
 allocate resources to improve school quality but these changes may not reflect quickly enough into
 improvements in test scores.

 In order to test this hypothesis, the regression discontinuity model is re-estimated for two different
 outcomes - the share of temporary, auxiliary, or honorary teachers, which is a proxy measure for
 the quality of teachers. Second is the share of classrooms in good condition, which is a proxy
 measure for the quality of school infrastructure. The additional funds that schools receive appear
 to have had no significant effect on the share of temporary, auxiliary, or honorary teachers in either
 primary or junior secondary schools. At the secondary school level, the additional funds schools
 receive from the performance component has a significantly negative impact in 2015 on the share
 23
      All of these results are robust to different bandwidth specifications (see Annex Table A2.2).

                                                                                                                      20
of classrooms in good condition. However, this negative effect of the performance grant on the
share of classrooms in good condition at the secondary school level does not persist into 2016,
which suggests that the estimates are not stable. Taken together, the RDD results suggest that the
additional funds that schools received under the performance component had no impact on
examination scores or on intermediate outcomes (see Annex Table A1.10).

6. Discussion and Conclusion

Data from the first two years of program implementation suggest that thus far the introduction of
a performance component into the school grants program appears to have had very different
impacts on government primary and junior secondary schools in Jakarta. In primary schools, the
performance component of the program reduced examination scores albeit by a relatively small
amount. However, these average results mask differences in program impact across schools with
differing levels of initial performance; program impact was positive for schools in the bottom
quartile of performance and negative for better performing schools. As a result, the program has
tended to narrow inequalities in school performance. In contrast to the primary school impacts, the
introduction of the performance component improved examination scores in government junior
secondary schools. However, the impact seemed to be greatest among better performing schools
and has contributed to a widening gap in performance.

The findings show that the efforts that some government primary schools made to improve
examination scores in the first two years of implementation of the performance component were
unsuccessful. It is possible that the lack of flexibility in the types of spending allowed under the
school grant program made it difficult to respond to the additional incentives appropriately. Further
research that takes a closer look at the strategies adopted by schools to improve performance would
be useful in unpacking the effects of the program. For example, a focus group discussion with
principals of primary and junior secondary schools that received the performance grant may help
clarify how funds were used in practice. Comparing these changes between primary and junior
secondary schools could also highlight the factors underlying the differential results between
primary and junior secondary schools in Jakarta.

The paper shows that after the announcement of the performance component, principals in primary
schools changed the way they allocated their resources – both by hiring fewer contract teachers
and by spending more on physical infrastructure at the classroom level. Available data only allow
a few such channels to be empirically tested in this paper. However, the growing evidence base
suggests that there are many other avenues to improve school performance possibly with greater
impact (Snilstveit, Stevenson et al. 2015). Increased teaching time, improved pedagogy, support
to at-risk learners and teacher professional development are all areas that have the potential to
improve school performance. Encouraging experimentation with these and other approaches to
improve school performance could help schools act on the incentives created by the program. This
is likely to require raising awareness among primary school principals and supporting them in
school management and the effective use of resources to improve performance. A close look at the
effectiveness of district education offices and other institutions in providing this kind of support
has the potential to improve the impact of performance-based school grant programs at the primary
level.



                                                                                                  21
It has not been possible to assess the effectiveness of using examination scores to award the
performance component of the school grant. However, evidence in other contexts suggests that
using tests of student level achievement to judge school performance may not be optimal (Neal
2013). For example, in Kenya the introduction of teacher incentives based on student test results
led to a greater focus and effort on preparing only for the tests directly linked to these incentives.
While student results on these tests improved, they did not register any gains in other examinations
that covered similar subjects using different testing formats (Glewwe, Ilias et al. 2010). Given
these findings from other countries, it may be worthwhile in the Jakarta context to experiment with
alternative measures of school performance in the program. For example, Indonesia has a well-
established quality assurance system that measures performance along a set of 8 dimensions
(Ministry of National Development Planning 2015). Using these assessments may strengthen the
incentive effect of the program and provide schools with greater guidance on areas of
improvement.

The results for junior secondary suggest that the program has resulted in a widening of the gap
between high and low performing government schools. Despite attempts during design to provide
incentives for all schools, the paper has shown that better performing schools were more likely to
receive the performance component and registered larger examination score improvements when
compared to poorer performing schools. Using existing information and results from this paper it
is possible to develop alternative designs for the performance-based component that could narrow
inequalities. Experimenting with different weightings for the change and level components of the
performance award could help to fine tune the program and support the equity objectives of the
Jakarta government. An alternative design could be more targeted at the outset and foster
competition among the bottom quartiles in the first year and work upward through the performance
distribution in subsequent years.

The evidence presented in the paper also suggests that the additional resources that successful
schools receive as part of the program have not improved performance. Rather, the biggest effects
of the program appear to have arisen through the incentive that it provided to all schools regardless
of whether they went on to receive the additional funding associated with the program. It is
possible that a non-monetary program that recognized improved school performance could provide
an alternative and less costly incentive to improve performance. An examination of the
effectiveness of alternative models of recognition could be a first step in designing the next
generation of performance-based school grants. While further experimentation is needed to
understand how to best design programs of this kind, the results in this paper from the first year of
a school grants program that directly linked school grant amounts to school performance suggest
that this is an avenue worth pursuing.




                                                                                                   22
References

Beasley, E. and E. Huillery (2013). "Empowering Parents in School: What They Can (not) Do."

Blimpo, M. P. and D. Evans (2011). School-based management and educational outcomes: lessons from a
randomized filed experiment. Unpublished manuscript.

Carneiro, P. M., et al. (2016). "School grants and education quality: experimental evidence from
Senegal." World Bank Policy Research Working Paper(7624).

Das, J., et al. (2013). "School inputs, household substitution, and test scores." American Economic
Journal: Applied Economics 5(2): 29-57.

De Ree, J. (2012). UN scores (in SD schools). Unpbulished analysis note. Jakarta, The World Bank.

Education Commission (2016). The Learning Generation: Investing in Education for a Changing World.

Gertler, P. J., et al. (2012). "Empowering parents to improve education: Evidence from rural Mexico."
Journal of Development Economics 99(1): 68-79.

Glewwe, P., et al. (2010). "Teacher incentives." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 2(3):
205-227.

Glewwe, P. W., et al. (2011). School resources and educational outcomes in developing countries: A
review of the literature from 1990 to 2010, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Grogan, L. (2009). "Universal primary education and school entry in Uganda." Journal of African
Economies 18(2): 183-211.

Imbens, G. and K. Kalyanaraman (2011). "Optimal bandwidth choice for the regression discontinuity
estimator." The Review of Economic Studies: rdr043.

Imbens, G. W. and T. Lemieux (2008). "Regression discontinuity designs: A guide to practice." Journal
of Econometrics 142(2): 615-635.

Khattri, N., et al. (2010). The Effects of School-based Management in the Philippines: An Initial
Assessment Using Administrative Data. Policy research working paper series. No. 5248, The World
Bank.

Lee, D. S. (2008). "Randomized experiments from non-random selection in US House elections." Journal
of Econometrics 142(2): 675-697.

Lee, J.-W. and H. Lee (2016). "Human capital in the long run." Journal of Development Economics.

Mbiti, I., et al. (2015). Inputs, Incentives, and Complementarities in Primary Education: Experimental
Evidence from Tanzania, process.

McEwan, P. (2013). Improving Learning in Primary Schools of Developing Countries:
A Meta-Analysis of Randomized Experiments.



                                                                                                         23
Ministry of National Development Planning (2015). Background Study for the Preparation of the RPJMN
for Education 2015-2019. Jakarta, Ministry of National Development Planning (Bappenas).

Muralidharan, K. and N. Prakash (2013). Cycling to school: increasing secondary school enrollment for
girls in India, National Bureau of Economic Research.

Neal, D. (2013). "The consequences of using one assessment system to pursue two objectives." The
Journal of Economic Education 44(4): 339-352.

OECD (2013). "What makes a school successful: Resources, policies and practices." 4.

OECD (2016). PISA 2015 Results (Volume I), OECD Publishing.

Pradhan, M., et al. (2014). "Improving educational quality through enhancing community participation:
Results from a randomized field experiment in Indonesia." American Economic Journal. Applied
Economics 6(2): 105.

Skoufias, E. and J. Shapiro (2006). "Evaluating the Impact of Mexico's Quality Schools Program: The
Pitfalls of Using Nonexperimental Data." World Bank Policy Research Working Paper Series, Vol.

Skoufias, E. and J. Shapiro (2006). The pitfalls of evaluating a schools grants program using non-
experimental data. Policy Research Working Paper Series 4036, World Bank.

Snilstveit, B., et al. (2015). Interventions for improving learning outcomes and access to education in
low- and middleincome countries.

Tarigan, M. (2015). Ini Kecurangan Ujian Nasional 2015 Versi FSGI (Cheating in the 2015 National
Exam 2015 reported by FSGI). Tempo. Jakarta, Tempo.

UIS (UNESCO Institute for Statistics) (2017). “Education (database).”. Montreal:
http://data.uis.unesco.org/.

World Bank (2012). School based management in Indonesia. Jakarta.

World Bank (2013). A Decade of Progress: Educational Attainment in Indonesia, 2000-2012.

World Bank (2013). Spending more or spending better: Improving education financing in Indonesia.
Education Public Expenditure Review. Jakarta, The World Bank.

World Bank (2014). Improving education outcomes through better spending: Public Expenditure Review
of the Education Sector in DKI Jakarta, The World Bank.

World Bank (2015). Assessing the Role of the School Operational Grant Program (BOS) in Improving
Education Outcomes in Indonesia.

Yamauchi, F. (2014). "An alternative estimate of school-based management impacts on students’
achievements: evidence from the Philippines." Journal of Development Effectiveness.




                                                                                                          24
ANNEX 1
     Table A1.1: Summary of data availability
     Type of school                                  UN Scores   Covariates (Graduating
                                                                 class size, students per
                                                                 classroom, teacher
                                                                 characteristics,
                                                                 classroom conditions)
     Jakarta SD                                      2012-2016   2014-2015

     Jakarta SMP                                     2012-2016   2014-2015

     Other metropolitan SMP

                                 Kota Yogyakarta     2012-2016   2014-2015

              Other surrounding metropolitan areas

                                      Kota Bekasi    2012-2016   2014-2015

                                      Kota Bogor     2012-2016   2014-2015

                                  Kota Tangerang     2012-2016   2014-2015




                                                                                            25
Table A1.2: Testing parallel trends assumption between government and non-government schools
in Jakarta
                 Panel A: Average change in score gap per year before grant announcement
                                                                     Primary         Junior Secondary
                                                                       (1)                  (2)
    Jakarta Government*Year                                          0.251*                0.179
                                                                     (0.131)              (0.146)
    Year (coded from 1 to 3)                                       -1.242***            -1.417***
                                                                     (0.108)             (0.0958)
    Constant                                                        76.10***             76.42***
                                                                     (0.122)              (0.148)

    Observations                                                                6,849                     2,679
    R-squared                                                                   0.055                     0.204
    No. of Jakarta government schools                                           1578                       280
    No. of comparison schools                                                    705                       613
    Standard deviation comparison schools in 2014                                 11                       7.2
    Years included                                                             2012-14                   2012-14
    Controls for students per classroom, teacher education and
    graduating students                                                          No                         No
    School fixed effects                                                         Yes                        Yes

           Panel B: Change in score gap in each year before grant announcement relative to 2014
                                                                     Primary         Junior Secondary
                                                                       (1)                    (2)
    Jakarta Government*Year2013                                       0.221              -1.165***
                                                                     (0.237)               (0.140)
    Jakarta Government*Year2012                                      -0.502*                -0.357
                                                                     (0.262)               (0.291)
    Year 2013                                                       4.929***              2.572***
                                                                     (0.199)              (0.0979)
    Year 2012                                                       2.484***              2.835***
                                                                     (0.217)               (0.192)
    Constant                                                        71.56***              72.05***
                                                                    (0.0687)              (0.0631)

    Observations                                                                6,849                     2,679
    R-squared                                                                   0.314                     0.238
    No. of Jakarta government schools                                           1578                       280
    No. of comparison schools                                                    705                       613
    Standard deviation comparison schools in 2014                                 11                       7.2
    Years included                                                             2012-14                   2012-14
    Controls for students per classroom, teacher education and
    graduating students                                                          No                         No
    School fixed effects                                                         Yes                        Yes
Notes: This table is based on data on UN scores for government and non-government primary and junior secondary schools
in Jakarta from 2012 to 2014. In Panel A, the year variable is categorical and coded from 1 to 3 where 1 denotes year 2012,
2 denotes 2013 and 3 denotes 2014. The co-efficient on Jakarta Government*Year denotes the average change in score gap
between government and non-government schools per year. In Panel B, Jakarta Government*Year2013 denotes the change in
score gap between government and non-government schools in 2013 compared to the analogous gap in 2014. *** p<0.01, **
p<0.05, * p<0.1.

                                                                                                                          26
Table A1.3a: Average UN scores and school characteristics, primary schools
                                                              Jakarta government schools
                                                                    Eligible and    Eligible but   Jakarta non-
 Variable                                   Year   All eligible      received a        didn’t      government
                                                                       grant       receive grant     schools
 UN score                                   2014      70.9              79.7           67.9            72.9
                                                      (8.4)             (5.1)          (7.1)          (11.1)
                                            2015      70.2              76.1           68.1            72.7
                                                      (7.7)             (6.7)          (6.9)          (10.1)
                                            2016      68.1              73.7           66.2            71.6
                                                      (8.1)             (7.8)          (7.3)          (10.5)

 No of students in graduating class         2014
                                                      53.6              52.6           53.9            42.4
                                                     (23.5)            (22.3)         (23.9)          (35.4)
                                            2015      61.6              60.8           61.9            41.1
                                                     (29.4)            (28.5)         (29.6)          (34.4)
                                            2016      60.9              62.7           60.3            42.3
                                                     (31.5)            (31.7)         (31.5)          (34.2)
 Share of temporary, auxiliary or
                                            2014
 honorary teachers                                    0.38              0.37           0.38            0.13
                                                     (0.14)            (0.13)         (0.14)          (0.18)
                                            2015      0.33              0.31           0.34            0.13
                                                     (0.13)            (0.13)         (0.13)          (0.18)
                                            2016      0.34              0.32           0.35            0.11
                                                     (0.14)            (0.14)         (0.14)          (0.16)
 Share of teachers with S1 degree or
                                            2014
 higher                                               0.88              0.89           0.88            0.77
                                                     (0.12)            (0.11)         (0.12)          (0.21)
                                            2015       0.9              0.91            0.9             0.8
                                                      (0.1)            (0.09)          (0.1)           (0.2)
                                            2016      0.93              0.94           0.93            0.85
                                                     (0.08)            (0.07)         (0.08)          (0.18)
 No. of students per classroom              2014      32.1              31.8           32.2            23.8
                                                      (4.8)             (4.4)           (5)            (7.5)
                                            2015      31.5              31.3           31.5            23.6
                                                      (3.7)             (3.4)          (3.8)           (7.3)
                                            2016      30.7              30.6           30.7            23.7
                                                      (3.3)             (3.1)          (3.4)           (7.2)
 Share of classrooms in good
                                            2014
 condition                                            0.38              0.39           0.37            0.57
                                                     (0.43)            (0.42)         (0.43)          (0.51)
                                            2015      0.47              0.48           0.47            0.61
                                                     (0.47)            (0.46)         (0.47)          (0.52)
                                            2016      0.47              0.48           0.46            0.61
                                                     (0.46)            (0.45)         (0.46)          (0.52)
 Number of schools                                   1,564              401            1163            700
Note: Standard deviations in parenthesis.




                                                                                                          27
             Table A1.3b: Average UN scores and school characteristics, junior secondary schools
                                                   Jakarta government schools
                                                                                                                      Government                 Non-
                                                             Eligible      Eligible but
                                                                                                Jakarta non-           schools in             government
                                                  All          and            didn’t
Variable                             Year                                                       government               other              schools in other
                                               eligible     received a       receive
                                                                                                  schools             metropolitan           metropolitan
                                                              grant           grant
                                                                                                                         areas                   areas
UN score                             2014         75           81.6            72.8                  70.8                 66.9                    61.9
                                                 (5.2)         (4.2)           (3.4)                 (7.2)                (9.8)                  (11.6)
                                     2015        77.2          82.9            75.3                  70.4                 66.5                    62.2
                                                 (5.5)         (4.3)           (4.6)                 (8.1)                (8.6)                   (9.4)
                                     2016         65           73.9            62.2                  56.4                 67.4                    62.3
                                                 (7.6)         (6.4)           (5.5)                 (14)                 (8.6)                  (10.7)
No of students in graduating
                                     2014
class
                                                227.5         233.3            225.6                 69.1                  286.3                  50.4
                                                (54.1)        (52.9)           (54.5)               (52.1)                (102.6)                (56.6)
                                     2015       237.6         244.8            235.3                 78.6                  466.7                  82.2
                                                (54.8)        (59.3)           (53.2)               (57.7)                (150.1)                (70.6)
                                     2016       245.9         261.8            240.7                  72                   375.6                  89.5
                                                (55.2)        (62.3)           (51.8)                (54)                  (63.3)                (71.2)
Share of temporary, auxiliary or
                                     2014
honorary teachers                                0.15          0.14             0.15                 0.18                  0.14                   0.18
                                                (0.08)        (0.07)           (0.08)               (0.21)                (0.11)                  (0.2)
                                     2015        0.13          0.13             0.13                 0.23                  0.14                   0.25
                                                (0.07)        (0.08)           (0.07)               (0.22)                (0.11)                 (0.22)
                                     2016        0.13          0.13             0.13                 0.17                  0.13                   0.19
                                                (0.07)        (0.08)           (0.07)                (0.2)                 (0.1)                  (0.2)
Share of teachers with S1
                                     2014
degree or higher                                 0.91          0.92             0.91                 0.82                   0.9                   0.82
                                                (0.08)        (0.06)           (0.08)               (0.22)                (0.09)                  (0.2)
                                     2015        0.93          0.93             0.92                 0.82                  0.91                   0.82
                                                (0.07)        (0.07)           (0.07)                (0.2)                (0.09)                  (0.2)
                                     2016        0.95          0.96             0.95                 0.93                  0.95                   0.92
                                                (0.05)        (0.04)           (0.05)               (0.11)                (0.05)                 (0.12)
No. of students per classroom        2014        34.4          34.8             34.2                 26.8                  39.5                   29.5
                                                 (2.4)          (1)             (2.7)                (6.6)                 (3.9)                  (7.2)
                                     2015        34.7          35.2             34.5                 26.3                  38.1                   29.1
                                                  (1)           (.8)             (1)                 (6.5)                 (3.6)                  (7.3)
                                     2016        34.8          35.1             34.7                 25.8                  28.3                   28.4
                                                 (1.1)         (1.1)             (1)                 (6.8)                (17.1)                  (7.5)
Share of classrooms in good
                                     2014
condition                                        0.47          0.52             0.46                 0.54                  0.25                   0.32
                                                (0.48)        (0.52)           (0.47)               (0.59)                (0.37)                 (0.46)
                                     2015        0.49          0.46             0.51                 0.65                  0.36                   0.35
                                                (0.48)         (0.5)           (0.47)               (0.66)                (0.49)                 (0.49)
                                     2016        0.52          0.52             0.52                 0.67                  0.39                   0.38
                                                (0.47)         (0.5)           (0.46)               (0.74)                (0.48)                 (0.51)
                                                 277            68              209                  609                    78                    363
             Note: Standard deviations in parenthesis. Government schools in other metropolitan areas includes those in Kota Bekasi, Kota
             Bogor, and Kota Tangerang.


                                                                                                                                            28
Table A1.4: Impact of performance-based grant on eligible primary and junior secondary schools
in Jakarta
                                                                                               Junior Secondary
                                                                   Primary Schools
                                                                                                    Schools

                                                                  Jakarta government          Jakarta government v.
                                                                    v. Jakarta non-          Jakarta non-government
                                                                  government schools                  schools

                                                                    No          Full                         Full
                                                                                             No control
                                                                  control     controls                     controls
                                                                    (1)         (2)              (3)         (4)

 Jakarta Government*Year2015                                      -0.51**      -0.26         2.57***      2.61***
                                                                   (0.24)     (0.25)         (0.17)       (0.18)
 Jakarta Government*Year2016                                     -1.43***    -1.25***        4.47***      4.55***
                                                                   (0.29)     (0.30)            (0.36)       (0.38)
 Year 2016                                                       -1.35***    -1.32***        -14.40***    -14.61***
                                                                   (0.25)     (0.26)            (0.30)      (0.32)
 Year 2015                                                         -0.26       -0.29          -0.35***     -0.44***
                                                                   (0.21)     (0.21)            (0.11)       (0.12)
 No. of students per classroom                                                 -0.01                          -0.07
                                                                               (0.03)                        (0.04)
 No. of students in graduating class                                         -0.03***                        0.01*
                                                                               (0.00)                        (0.00)
 Teacher education: Share of teachers with S1 or higher                        -0.44                          1.07
                                                                               (0.80)                        (0.90)
 Constant                                                        71.56***    73.54***        72.05***      72.48***
                                                                 (0.07)       (1.11)         (0.09)          (1.54)

 Observations                                                       6,849      6,849           2,679        2,679
 R-squared                                                          0.091      0.101           0.811        0.812
 No. of DKI public schools                                       1578          1578          280             280
 No. of comparison schools                                           705        705             613          613
 S.D. of 2014 UN score in comparison schools                         11         11               7.2         7.2
 P-value of difference in impact between 2016 and 2015             0.0003      0.001            0.00         0.00
 Years included                                                   2014-16     2014-16         2014-16      2014-16
 Controls for students per classroom, teacher education and
 graduating students                                                No          Yes             No           Yes
 School fixed effects                                               Yes         Yes             Yes          Yes




Notes: The dependent variable is national examination scores expressed as a percentage. Robust standard errors in
parenthesis. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Comparison schools are non-government schools in DKI.




                                                                                                                29
Table A1.5: Impact of performance-based grant on eligible junior secondary schools in Jakarta
                                                                  Jakarta vs other metropolitan area schools
                                                                      No control             Full controls
                                                                         (1)                      (2)

 Jakarta Government*Year2015                                           3.16***                  5.28***
                                                                        (0.73)                    (0.89)
 Jakarta Government*Year2016                                           4.31***                  5.01***
                                                                        (1.07)                    (1.07)
 Jakarta*Year2016                                                     -14.81***                -14.27***
                                                                        (0.70)                    (0.73)
 Jakarta*Year2015                                                        -0.56                     -0.22
                                                                        (0.41)                    (0.41)
 Government*Year2016                                                     0.16                      -0.19
                                                                        (1.01)                    (0.99)
 Government*Year2015                                                     -0.59                  -2.75***
                                                                        (0.71)                    (0.87)
 Year 2016                                                               0.40                      -0.15
                                                                        (0.64)                    (0.65)
 Year 2015                                                               0.21                      -0.25
                                                                        (0.39)                    (0.41)
 No. of students per classroom                                                                  0.04***
                                                                                                  (0.01)
 No. of students in graduating class                                                             0.01***
                                                                                                  (0.00)
 Teacher education: Share of teachers with S1 or higher                                            0.20
                                                                                                  (0.91)
 Constant                                                              68.95***                 66.07***
                                                                        (0.10)                    (0.90)

 Observations                                                           4,014                   4,014
 R-squared                                                              0.618                   0.622
 No. of DKI government schools                                           280                     280
 No. of DKI non-government schools                                       613                     613
 No. of government schools in other cities                                78                      78
 No. of non-government schools in other cities                           367                     367
 Standard deviation DKI non-government schools in 2014                    7.2                     7.2
 P-value of difference in impact between 2016 and 2015                   0.27                    0.88
 Years included                                                        2014-16                 2014-16
 Controls for students per classroom, teacher education and
 graduating students                                                      No                      Yes
 School fixed effects                                                     Yes                     Yes




    Notes: The dependent variable is national examination scores expressed as a percentage. Robust standard
    errors in parenthesis. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                                                              30
Table A1.6: Impact of performance-based grant on examination scores in junior secondary schools,
compared with alternative baseline scores
                                                                                         Junior Secondary Schools
                                                                                        Jakarta government v. Jakarta
                                                                                          non-government schools
                                                                                                         Comparing
                                                                                      Comparing with with average
                                                                                       average gap in   gap in 2013-
                                                                                          2012-14             14
                                                                                             (1)              (2)

 Jakarta Government*Year2015                                                              3.076***          3.151***
                                                                                           (0.168)            (0.168)
 Jakarta Government*Year2016                                                              4.982***          5.057***
                                                                                           (0.394)            (0.382)
 Year 2016                                                                               -14.56***          -14.59***
                                                                                           (0.310)            (0.306)
 Year 2015                                                                               -0.509***          -0.533***
                                                                                           (0.113)            (0.110)
 Year 2013                                                                                2.207***          2.207***
                                                                                          (0.0763)           (0.0763)
 Year 2012                                                                                2.723***
                                                                                           (0.149)
 Constant                                                                                 72.05***          72.05***
                                                                                          (0.0606)          (0.0647)

 Observations                                                                              4,465              3,572
 R-squared                                                                                 0.756              0.798
 No. of DKI public schools                                                                  280                280
 No. of comparison schools                                                                  613                613
 Standard deviation comparison schools in 2014                                              7.2                7.2
 Years included                                                                           2012-16            2013-16
 Controls for students per classroom, teacher education and graduating students             No                 No
 School fixed effects                                                                       Yes                Yes


Notes: Column (1) is based on UN scores data for junior secondary schools (SMP) in Jakarta from 2012 to 2016. Jakarta
Government*Year2016 in Column (1) denotes the change in score gap between government and non-government SMP schools in
2016 compared with the average score gap in the period from 2012 to 2014 before the grant program was announced. In column
(2), Jakarta Government*Year2016 denotes the change in score gap in 2016 compared to the average score gap in the period
from 2013 to 2014. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                                                                                        31
  Table A1.7: Impact of the performance-based grant on examination scores in primary and junior secondary schools by school size
                                                                          Primary Schools                                    Junior Secondary Schools
                                                            Jakarta government v. Jakarta non-government           Jakarta government v. Jakarta non-government
                                                                                schools                                                schools
                                                             Smallest       2nd         3rd      Largest           Smallest       2nd          3rd       Largest
                                                              20%         quartile    quartile     20%              20%         quartile     quartile     20%
                                                               (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)              (5)          (6)          (7)         (8)

                                                              -0.17        -0.51       -0.13       -0.45           2.28***      2.98***      2.74***     2.40***
Jakarta Government*Year2015
                                                             (0.364)      (0.348)     (0.315)     (0.301)           (0.339)      (0.296)      (0.280)     (0.248)
                                                            -2.12***     -1.32***     -0.83**     -0.94**           3.43***     4.12***      4.84***     5.64***
Jakarta Government*Year2016
                                                             (0.441)      (0.422)     (0.374)     (0.364)           (0.520)      (0.505)      (0.495)     (0.511)
Year 2016                                                   -1.28***     -1.26***    -1.33***    -1.26***         -14.60***    -14.60***    -14.62***   -14.60***
                                                             (0.266)      (0.265)     (0.267)     (0.266)           (0.319)      (0.319)      (0.319)     (0.319)
Year 2015                                                     -0.27        -0.25       -0.29       -0.26           -0.45***     -0.45***     -0.47***    -0.47***
                                                             (0.213)      (0.212)     (0.213)     (0.213)           (0.121)      (0.121)      (0.120)     (0.120)
No. of students per classroom                                 -0.03        0.01         0.01       -0.03             -0.07        -0.07        -0.07       -0.07
                                                             (0.042)      (0.050)     (0.047)     (0.050)           (0.045)      (0.049)      (0.049)     (0.048)
No. of students in graduating class                         -0.02***     -0.02***    -0.03***    -0.02***             0.01        0.01        0.01**      0.01**
                                                             (0.008)      (0.008)     (0.005)     (0.005)           (0.006)      (0.005)      (0.005)     (0.005)
Teacher education: Share of teachers with S1 or higher        -1.01        -1.17       -0.28       -1.30              1.04        1.09          1.13        1.02
                                                             (0.985)      (0.956)     (1.019)     (0.985)           (0.920)      (0.917)      (0.918)     (0.920)
Constant                                                    73.88***     73.80***    74.14***    75.70***          71.30***     71.56***     71.32***   71.51***
                                                             (1.316)      (1.567)     (1.529)     (1.616)           (1.527)      (1.617)      (1.601)     (1.607)

Observations                                                  3,306        3,291       3,303      3,294              2,049         2,052       2,046         2,049
R-squared                                                     0.082        0.059       0.062      0.062              0.797         0.797       0.796         0.794
No. of DKI public schools                                      397          392         396        393                 70            71          69            70
No. of comparison schools                                      705          705         705        705                613           613         613           613
S.D. of 2014 UN score in comparison schools                     11           11          11         11                 7.2           7.2        7.2           7.2
P-value of difference in impact between 2016 and 2015           0           0.02        0.03       0.11               0.02          0.02         0             0
Years included                                               2014-16      2014-16     2014-16    2014-16            2014-16       2014-16     2014-16      2014-16
School fixed effects                                           Yes          Yes         Yes        Yes                Yes           Yes         Yes           Yes
  Notes: Dependent variable is national examination scores expressed as a percentage. Robust standard errors in parenthesis. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
  Quartiles are based on enrollment size in 2014 among Jakarta government schools. Comparison schools are non-government schools in Jakarta.



                                                                                                                                                             32
    Table A1.8: Impact of the performance-based grant on examination scores in primary and junior secondary schools by district
                                                           Primary schools                                                  Junior secondary schools
                                        Jakarta government v. Jakarta non-government schools                  Jakarta government v. Jakarta non-government schools
                                       Jakarta      Jakarta     Jakarta     Jakarta    Jakarta             Jakarta      Jakarta      Jakarta      Jakarta     Jakarta
                                        Pusat        Utara       Barat      Selatan    Timur                Pusat        Utara        Barat       Selatan     Timur
                                         (1)          (2)         (3)         (4)        (5)                 (6)          (7)          (8)          (9)        (10)

                                        1.26*          0.48       -0.05     -1.17**         -0.58          2.18***      2.38***      2.18***      2.89***      2.11***
Jakarta Government*Year2015
                                        (0.71)       (0.63)      (0.44)      (0.56)        (0.49)           (0.52)       (0.42)        (0.36)      (0.39)       (0.33)
                                       -2.03**        -1.10       0.02      -1.42**       -1.68***           0.60       3.99***       4.03***     3.80***      6.80***
Jakarta Government*Year2016
                                        (0.91)       (0.80)      (0.53)      (0.63)        (0.59)           (1.18)       (0.95)        (0.75)      (0.85)       (0.63)
Year 2016                             -2.07***        -0.22    -2.13***    -1.72***         -0.62         -12.83***    -14.75***    -15.06***    -13.36***    -15.70***
                                        (0.75)       (0.71)      (0.41)      (0.56)        (0.53)           (1.06)       (0.81)        (0.61)      (0.69)       (0.57)
Year 2015                             -1.84***         0.03       -0.10       -0.10         -0.10            -0.48      -1.01***     -1.37***      0.54**        0.38
                                        (0.57)       (0.54)      (0.35)      (0.48)        (0.43)           (0.36)       (0.26)        (0.20)      (0.27)       (0.27)
No. of students per classroom            0.07         -0.04        0.04       -0.02         -0.03             0.04        -0.06         -0.01       -0.10       -0.14*
                                        (0.08)       (0.09)      (0.06)      (0.06)        (0.06)           (0.08)       (0.13)        (0.09)      (0.11)       (0.07)
No. of students in graduating class   -0.05***     -0.04***    -0.02***    -0.03***       -0.02***          0.02*         -0.01         0.01      0.02***        0.00
                                        (0.02)       (0.01)     (0.01)       (0.01)        (0.01)           (0.01)       (0.01)        (0.01)      (0.01)       (0.01)
Share of teachers with less than 5
years of experience                     -2.29       -2.60        -0.14       2.05           0.38            -1.34        1.50         1.28         5.03**        -0.00
                                       (2.19)      (2.14)       (1.33)      (1.69)         (1.62)          (2.76)       (1.87)       (1.73)        (2.01)       (1.64)
Constant                              72.50***    74.17***     68.87***    73.44***       76.52***        70.97***     72.35***     70.54***      68.31***     75.93***
                                       (2.36)      (3.18)       (2.11)      (2.34)         (2.40)          (3.69)       (4.23)       (3.16)        (3.70)       (2.71)

Observations                             870        1,014       1,650        1,485         1,830             324          441          678          543           693
R-squared                               0.174       0.072       0.105        0.128         0.094            0.779        0.806        0.807        0.821         0.861
No. of Jakarta government schools        202         186         359          364           467              36            36          50           64             94
No. of comparison schools                 88         152         191          131           143              72           111          176          117           137
S.D. of 2014 UN score in
comparison schools                      10.8         12.3         11          8.9           10.8             8.2          7.6           7.5          6.6          6.1
P-value of difference in impact
between 2016 and 2015                      0         0.01        0.88         0.69          0.04            0.18          0.03         0.005         0.27           0
Years included                        2014-16      2014-16     2014-16      2014-16       2014-16         2014-16       2014-16       2014-16      2014-16       2014-16
School fixed effects                     Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes           Yes              Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes           Yes
    Notes: Dependent variable is national examination scores expressed as a percentage.   Robust standard errors in parenthesis. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
    Comparison schools are non-government schools in the respective district.




                                                                                                                                                                  33
             Table A1.9: Impact of the performance-based grant on examination scores in primary and junior
             secondary schools in Jakarta by baseline performance
                                                    Primary Schools                                   Junior Secondary Schools
                                      Jakarta government v. Jakarta non-government          Jakarta government v. Jakarta non-government
                                                          schools                                              schools
                                      Bottom         2nd          3rd        Top            Bottom        2nd          3rd         Top
                                      quartile     quartile     quartile   quartile         quartile    quartile     quartile    quartile
                                        (1)          (2)          (3)         (4)             (5)          (6)         (7)         (8)

                                      1.88***       0.06       -1.20***    -2.15***        1.85***      3.01***     3.35***     2.22***
Jakarta Government*Year2015
                                       (0.34)      (0.33)       (0.32)      (0.31)          (0.33)       (0.30)      (0.26)      (0.24)
                                      1.61***     -1.26***     -2.76***    -2.93***        2.16***      3.81***     5.20***     6.93***
Jakarta Government*Year2016
                                       (0.40)      (0.40)       (0.39)      (0.38)          (0.48)       (0.41)      (0.53)      (0.48)
                                                                                               -                        -
Year 2016                             -1.35***    -1.26***     -1.22***    -1.28***        14.60***    -14.60***    14.61***    -14.61***
                                        (0.27)      (0.27)      (0.27)      (0.27)          (0.32)       (0.32)      (0.32)       (0.32)
Year 2015                               -0.27        -0.25       -0.25       -0.27         -0.45***     -0.45***    -0.46***     -0.47***
                                        (0.21)      (0.21)      (0.21)      (0.21)          (0.12)       (0.12)      (0.12)       (0.12)
No. of students per classroom            -0.01       -0.05       -0.03        0.02           -0.07        -0.07       -0.07        -0.07
                                        (0.05)      (0.05)      (0.05)      (0.05)          (0.05)       (0.04)      (0.05)       (0.05)
No. of students in graduating class     -0.01     -0.02***     -0.02***    -0.03***          0.01         0.01        0.01         0.01*
                                        (0.01)      (0.01)      (0.01)      (0.01)          (0.01)       (0.00)      (0.01)       (0.00)
Teacher education: Share of
teachers with S1 or higher              -0.12       -1.33       -1.71*       -0.88           1.06         1.07        1.14        1.06
                                       (0.97)      (0.96)       (0.98)      (1.00)          (0.92)       (0.92)      (0.92)      (0.92)
Constant                              69.19***    74.56***     76.40***    77.43***        70.94***     71.23***    71.46***    72.17***
                                       (1.39)      (1.45)       (1.49)      (1.54)          (1.60)       (1.51)      (1.63)      (1.61)

Observations                            3,303         3,294       3,300        3,297           2,049       2,055        2,043     2,049
R-squared                               0.034         0.064       0.116        0.130           0.801       0.800        0.795     0.792
No. of Jakarta gov. schools              396           393         395          394              70          72           68       70
No. of comparison schools                705           705         705          705             613         613          613       613
S.D. of 2014 UN score in
                                         11.1         11.1        11.1         11.1              7.2         7.2          7.2      7.2
comparison schools
P-value of difference in impact
                                         0.45        0.0002         0          0.02             0.45        0.05       0.0002       0
between 2016 and 2015
Years included                         2014-16      2014-16     2014-16      2014-16          2014-16     2014-16     2014-16   2014-16
School fixed effects                     Yes           Yes         Yes          Yes             Yes         Yes          Yes      Yes
             Notes: Dependent variable is national examination scores expressed as a percentage. Robust standard errors in
             parenthesis. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Quartiles are based on the average of UN scores in 2013 and 2014
             among Jakarta government schools. Comparison schools are non-government schools in Jakarta.




                                                                                                                           34
Table A1.10: Full results of regression discontinuity estimates of performance grant
                                                     Treatment                                     Observations
                    Year     School type                                    Bandwidth   Controls    (non-zero
                                                       Coeff.        S.E.                           weighted)
                                              1        -0.905       1.175       6          No          275
                              Primary
                                              2        -0.841       1.130       6          Yes         275
                    2015
                               Junior         3         0.785       1.087      6.4         No          124
     National                secondary        4         0.511       1.043      6.4         Yes         124
    exam score
       (%)                                    5         0.337       1.747       7          No          323
                              Primary
                                              6         0.926       1.708       7          Yes         323
                    2016
                               Junior         7        -3.272       3.106       8          No          145
                             secondary        8        -3.511       3.030       8          Yes         145
                                                 9        0.086        0.070      2.6         No           120
                              Primary
                                                10        0.090        0.070      2.6         Yes          120
                     2015
       Share of                  Junior         11       -0.005        0.077       3          No            52
      temporary,               secondary        12        0.027        0.063       3          Yes           52
       auxiliary,
       honorary                                 13        0.051        0.058      2.6         No           119
                                Primary
        teachers                                14        0.019        0.054      2.6         Yes          119
                     2016
                                 Junior         15        0.006        0.087      2.8         No            50
                               secondary        16        0.034        0.057      2.8         Yes           50
                                                17       -0.146        0.154       3          No           141
                                Primary
                                                18       -0.156        0.153       3          Yes          141
                     2015
                                 Junior         19       -0.868    *** 0.253       3          No            52
       Share of
      classrooms               secondary        20       -0.839 *** 0.256          3          Yes           52
        in good                                 21       -0.178        0.151       4          No           183
       condition                Primary
                                                22       -0.181        0.155       4          Yes          183
                     2016
                                 Junior         23       -0.046        0.215       4          No            72
                               secondary        24       -0.041        0.225       4          Yes           72
 Note: Each row is the result of a separate regression. All regressions use a triangular kernel and optimal bandwidth
that reduces the mean squared error as proposed by Imbens and Kalyanaraman (2011). Controls are share of teachers
with less than five years of work experience, the number of students in the graduating class and the student
classroom ratio. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                                                                                  35
Annex 2. Detailed outline of regression discontinuity approach

We estimate a linear model using a sharp regression discontinuity design:

  	=	    +      	+	   (   − )+

where is the average UN exam performance of school i, is receipt of the performance grant (treatment),
   is the performance index score (the variable used for assignment) and the threshold for assignment to
treatment. 	 	defined as schools scoring in the top quartile of the performance index, which is based on
the average examination performance over the last two years and the scale of improvements in performance
over the same period. The treatment effect is given by .

We follow Imbens and Lemieux’s (2008) suggestion of estimating a non-parametric local linear
regression using only the observations close to the discontinuity point to estimate the program impact.
The bandwidth h controls the width of the neighborhood around the cutoff that is used to fit the local
linear regression. The method for bandwidth selection involves a bias-variance trade-off. In general,
selecting a small h will reduce the error or bias of the linear approximation but will increase the variance
of the estimated coefficients because the model relies on fewer observations. Conversely, a large h will
generally increase bias if the unknown function differs considerably from the linear approximation, but
will result in lower variance because of the larger number of observations. We use the optimal bandwidth
proposed by Imbens and Kalyanaraman (2012), which minimizes the mean square error (henceforth IK
optimal bandwidth). In addition to this optimal bandwidth, we test the sensitivity of our impact estimates
to different bandwidths of the cutoff by estimating our model using half and twice the IK optimal
bandwidth.

Within this optimal bandwidth, observations closer to c receive more weight than observations further
away, where the weights are determined by a kernel function. We use the triangular kernel function
because when using an optimal bandwidth, it leads to a point estimator with optimal variance and bias
properties (Cheng et al. 1997, Imbens and Lemieux 2008). The triangular kernel function assigns zero
weights to all observations with scores outside the interval	[ − ℎ, 	 + 	ℎ] and positive weights to all
observations within this interval. The weight is maximized at = 	 and declines symmetrically as the
value of the score moves further away from the cutoff.

As shown in Figure A2.1 below, assignment to treatment was enforced based on the performance index
score. Treatment status and the assignment variable are related through a deterministic and discontinuous
function 	 = 	1( ≥ )	where schools scoring above in the performance index receive the performance
grant and schools scoring below do not. For the purpose of estimation, c is normalized such that c=0 when
Z is the 75th percentile score on the performance index score. Thus,      ≥ 0 for schools that receive the
performance grant and < 0 for schools that do not.




                                                                                                          36
Figure A2.1: Sharp regression discontinuity design at the 75% performance index cut-off




Figure A2.2 below illustrates the relationship between our rating variable (local performance index)
around the cutoff and our main outcome variable (average UN exam performance measured in percent) as
well as two intermediate outcome variables (share of teachers with temporary, auxiliary, or honorary
status and share of classrooms in good condition). These two intermediate outcomes are estimated
because while the performance grants may help schools allocate resources to improve school quality,
these changes may not reflect quickly enough into improvements in test scores.

Figure A2.2: Outcome variables versus rating variable in 2015




                                                                                                  37
One concern in making causal inference from regression discontinuity designs is that other, non-outcome
variables might also vary discontinuously around the cutoff. Figure A2.3 below plots the relationship
between the rating variable and three non-outcome variables: number of students in a graduating class,
number of students per classroom, and share of teachers with education of S1 or higher. Graphically, we
show that a discontinuity does not exist for these other non-outcome variables around the cutoff for
primary schools and that the estimated discontinuity is small for the non-outcome variables around the
cutoff for junior secondary schools.

Figure A2.3: Non-outcome variable versus rating variable in 2015




                                                                                                     38
      Finally, in Table A2.1 below, a test for random assignment around the discontinuity point (Imbens and
      Lemieux 2008; Lee 2008) is provided by showing the statistical equivalence in the average characteristics
      for public schools in Jakarta with scores below and above the cutoff by school level.

      Table A2.1: Test of equivalence of baseline variables in 2014 by receipt of performance grant in
      2015
                                                      Band above and below cutoff                   Band around cutoff
                                                              (all range)                            (neighborhood)
                                                                  All
                                                  All below     above     Difference        Below        Above     Difference
Primary schools (N=2293)
 UN score (%)                                       67.91        82.41       14.50***       77.18        78.98     1.801***
 Share of temporary, auxiliary or honorary
teachers                                            0.321        0.233      -0.0877***      0.266        0.275      0.00953
 Share of classrooms in good condition              0.396        0.504       0.108***       0.474        0.456      -0.0185
 No. of students in graduating class                48.09        56.06       7.971***       51.65        52.38       0.727
 Share of teachers with S1 degree or higher         0.844        0.848       0.00411        0.855        0.845      -0.0104
 No. of students per classroom                      29.94        28.28      -1.665***       29.72        29.22       -0.493
Junior secondary schools (N=896)
 UN score (%)                                       68.70        81.72       13.02***       75.83        78.08     2.364***
 Share of temporary, auxiliary or honorary
teachers                                            0.180        0.150      -0.0296**       0.170        0.154      -0.0340
 Share of classrooms in good condition              0.402        0.689       0.288***       0.514        0.660       0.0397
 No. of students in graduating class                110.8        142.5       31.67***       137.2        135.8       -2.646
 Share of teachers with S1 degree or higher         0.842        0.871       0.0287*        0.832        0.905     0.0582**
 No. of students per classroom                      28.97        29.58         0.611        28.26      29.63         -0.245
      Note: Neighborhood around cutoff is determined by optimal bandwidth that reduces the mean squared error as
      proposed by Imbens and Kalyanaraman (2012). *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.




                                                                                                                    39
Table A2.2. Bandwidth sensitivity: Regression discontinuity estimates of performance grant on outcomes using
50% & 200% bandwidths
                                                                                                 Observations
                              School
                                              Treatment                  Bandwidth Controls        (non-zero
                     Year      type
                                                                                                   weighted)
                                                Coeff.            S.E.
                                                 50% Bandwidth
                                         1      -1.335           1.655        3        No             141
                             Primary
                                          2     -1.210           1.616        3        Yes            141
                     2015
                              Junior      3      0.186           1.596       3.2       No              61
   National exam            secondary     4      0.116           1.468       3.2       Yes             61
      score (%)                           5      0.549           2.807       3.5       No             159
                             Primary
                                          6      0.829           2.630       3.5       Yes            159
                     2016
                              Junior      7     -2.599           4.415        4        No              72
                            secondary 8         -2.992           4.565        4        Yes             72
                                          9      0.137           0.103       1.3       No              58
                             Primary
                                         10      0.122           0.107       1.3       Yes             58
                     2015
       Share of               Junior     11      0.065           0.138       1.5       No              25
     temporary,             secondary 12         0.092           0.127       1.5       Yes             25
 auxiliary, honorary                     13      0.122    *      0.073       1.3       No              59
       teachers              Primary
                                         14      0.084           0.066       1.3       Yes             59
                     2016
                              Junior     15      0.010           0.085       1.4       No              26
                            secondary 16        0.078            0.096       1.4       Yes             26
                                         17     -0.272           0.220       1.5       No              65
                             Primary
                                         18     -0.206           0.213       1.5       Yes             65
                     2015
                              Junior     19     -0.855           0.541       1.5       No              25
       Share of             secondary 20        -0.929           0.579       1.5       Yes             25
 classrooms in good
                                         21     -0.111           0.217        2        No              93
      condition              Primary
                                         22     -0.108           0.244        2        Yes             93
                     2016
                              Junior     23     -0.177           0.251        2        No              35
                            secondary 24        -0.235           0.260        2        Yes             35
                                                200% bandwidth
                                         25     -0.292           0.835       12        No             554
                             Primary
                                         26     -0.218           0.807       12        Yes            554
                     2015
                              Junior     27      0.836           0.773      12.8       No             228
   National exam            secondary 28         0.603           0.721      12.8       Yes            228
      score (%)                          29      0.869           1.150       14        No             640
                             Primary
                                         30      1.147           1.121       14        Yes            640
                     2016
                              Junior     31     -3.851           2.067       16        No             288
                            secondary 32        -4.022           1.999       16        Yes            288
                                         33      0.035           0.050       5.2       No             114
                             Primary
                                         34      0.046           0.051       5.2       Yes            114
                     2015
       Share of               Junior     35      0.000           0.066        6        No             107
     temporary,             secondary 36         0.028           0.060        6        Yes            107
 auxiliary, honorary                     37      0.051           0.045       5.2       No             239
       teachers              Primary
                                         38      0.033           0.041       5.2       Yes            239
                     2016
                              Junior     39     -0.003           0.064       5.6       No              99
                            secondary 40        0.031            0.052       5.6       Yes             99
                                         41     -0.103           0.112        6        No             273
                     2015    Primary
                                         42     -0.115           0.112        6        Yes            273

                                                                                                         40
                                    Junior       43      -0.551      ***    0.179          6            No                107
                                  secondary      44      -0.514      ***    0.180          6            Yes               107
       Share of                                  45      -0.184      *      0.108          8            No                368
 classrooms in good                 Primary
                                                 46      -0.175             0.110          8            Yes               368
      condition           2016
                                    Junior       47       0.014             0.163          8            No                145
                                  secondary      48       0.009             0.164          8            Yes               145
Notes: *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. Each row is the result of a separate regression. All regressions use a triangular kernel and
optimal bandwidth that reduces the mean squared error as proposed by Imbens and Kalyanaraman (2012). Controls are share of
teachers with S1 degree or higher, the number of students in the graduating class and the student classroom ratio.




                                                                                                                                41
