                                                        WPS8231


Policy Research Working Paper                          8231




   How Much Oil is the Islamic State Group
               Producing?
                  Evidence from Remote Sensing

                                   Quy-Toan Do
                                 Jacob N. Shapiro
                              Christopher D. Elvidge
                               Mohamed Abdel-Jelil
                                   Daniel P. Ahn
                                 Kimberly Baugh
                               Jamie Hansen-Lewis
                                 Mikhail Zhizhin




Development Research Group
Poverty and Inequality Team
October 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 8231


  Abstract
 Accurately measuring oil production in low-governance                              and other regions without reliable administrative data
 contexts is an important task. Many terrorist organizations                        can support a broad range of public policy decisions and
 and insurgencies—including the Islamic State group, also                           academic research. This paper uses satellite multi-spec-
 known as ISIL/ISIS or Daesh—tap oil as a revenue source.                           tral imaging and ground-truth pre-war output data to
 Understanding spatial and temporal variation in production                         effectively construct a real-time day-to-day census of oil
 in their territory can help address such threats by providing                      production in areas controlled by the terrorist group. The
 near real-time monitoring of their revenue streams, help-                          estimates of production levels were approximately 56,000
 ing to assess long-term economic potential, and informing                          barrels per day (bpd) from July–December 2014, drop
 reconstruction strategies. More broadly, remotely measur-                          to an average of 35,000 bpd throughout 2015, before
 ing extractive industry activity in conflict-affected areas                        dropping further to approximately 16,000 bpd in 2016.




  This paper is a product of the Poverty and Inequality Team, Development Research Group. It is part of a larger effort by
  the World Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions around
  the world. Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The authors may be
  contacted at abonfield@worldbank.org.




         The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
         issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
         names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
         of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
         its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                       Produced by the Research Support Team
 How Much Oil is the Islamic State Group Producing?
         Evidence from Remote Sensing *
 Quy-Toan Do1 , Jacob N. Shapiro2 , Christopher D. Elvidge3 , Mohamed Abdel-Jelil4 , Daniel P. Ahn5 ,
                  Kimberly Baugh6 , Jamie Hansen-Lewis7 , and Mikhail Zhizhin6
                                   1
                                    Research Department, The World Bank
                 2
                   Politics Department and Woodrow Wilson School, Princeton University
            3
              Earth Observation Group, NOAA National Centers for Environmental Information
                 4
                   Middle East and North Africa Chief Economist’s Ofﬁce, The World Bank
      5
        Johns Hopkins University SAIS and Ofﬁce of the Chief Economist, U.S. Department of State
        6
          Cooperative Institute for Research in the Environmental Sciences, University of Colorado
                                 7
                                   Economics Department, Brown University




    JEL Classiﬁcation: D74, Q35

    Keywords: oil, remote sensing, ﬂaring, Islamic State group
   * This paper is a joint product between the Empirical Studies of Conﬂict Project (ESOC) and the Development
Research Group of the World Bank. The authors are grateful to Jishnu Das, Shanta Devarajan, Fabrice Mosneron
Dupin, Tarek Ghani, Guy Grossman, Martyn Howells, and Roy van der Weide for helpful comments. The views
and opinions expressed are those of the author(s) and do not necessarily represent the views or ofﬁcial positions or
policy of the U.S. Department of State, U.S. National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, the U.S. Depart-
ment of Commerce, the U.S. Government, or the World Bank, its Board of Executive Directors, or the governments
they represent. The institutions above does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The bound-
aries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment
on the part of the institutions above concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance
of such boundaries. Correspondence: Quy-Toan Do (qdo@worldbank.org), Jacob Shapiro (jns@princeton.edu),
Chris Elvidge (chris.elvidge@noaa.gov), and Daniel Ahn (pahn4@jhu.edu).
Introduction

The non-state insurgent organization known as the Islamic State group (also sometimes called
the Islamic State [IS], the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant [ISIL], the Islamic State of Iraq

and al-Sham [ISIS], or Daesh, its Arabic acronym) took control of large swathes of territory
in Syria and Iraq beginning in mid-2013 (see map in Figure 1).1 Its rapid territorial expansion
began when ﬁghters from the Islamic State of Iraq (ISI) started operating in Syria in April 2013

and accelerated from early 2014 onwards when the group moved aggressively back into Iraq
[28].
       For a time, the group was considered the richest jihadist group in the world and was thought

to raise money from a variety of sources [15]. In 2014 and 2015 revenue from oil production in
areas the group controlled was often cited as its largest potential source of revenue ﬂow, with
estimates of weekly oil revenue ranging from “several million” to US$28 million [8, 5]. Any

reasonable assessment of the organization’s long-run survival prospects had to account for these
revenues and identify how sustainable they were [21]. Beginning in late of 2015, Daesh steadily
lost territory in both Iraq and Syria, but still maintained substantial territory in both countries at

of early 2017.
       Remotely measuring oil production using satellite imagery provides a way to make a con-
sistent assessment of activity that would have been useful in 2014-15 and to track developments

since then with some precision. In our case, combining multi-spectral satellite imagery with
available production data enables transparent and reproducible estimation of oil production in
Daesh-controlled areas. We ﬁnd that production levels were approximately 56,000 barrels per

day (bpd) from July-December 2014, later dropped to an average of 35,000 bpd throughout
2015, before further sinking to approximately 16,000 bpd in 2016. These estimates are in line
with production reported for late-2014 in captured internal Daesh documents, as we discuss in
   1
       We henceforth use Daesh and Islamic State group/organization interchangeably.

                                                        2
detail below.
       Careful study of news outlets’ reports, agencies’ press releases and Institute for the Study

of War (ISW) maps allow us to assign individual oil wells to the Islamic State group’s control
at the daily level. We use data from the Visible Infrared Imaging Radiometer Suite (VIIRS)
sensors deployed on the NOAA/NASA Suomi NPP satellite, to assess the status of each of the

sites and then impute the appropriate levels of production.
       Our approach relies on the property that the natural gas dissolved in oil underground ex-
pands when it reaches the surface. In our study context, the gas is subsequently ﬂared, hence

generating heat that is captured by VIIRS sensors. Using pre-war data on oil production ob-
tained from several public and private sources, we estimate the relationship between production
and VIIRS detection and infer contemporaneous production of Daesh-controlled oil ﬁelds. Al-

ternatively, oil extraction can take place without gas ﬂaring –a process called venting– in which
case we assign historic output values as there will not be sensor detection.
       Our paper contributes to two streams of literature. The ﬁrst is the emerging literature that

uses remote sensing to assess behavior in extractive industries in low-governance regions.2 Re-
liable external measures of resource forestry, mining, and oil production can enable better ap-
proaches to a broad range of challenges. In Colombia and Nigeria, for example, insurgent

organizations have long controlled territory where oil is produced, and in many regions around
the world reliable ﬁeld-level production numbers are hard to come by. Estimating produc-
tion remotely can enable governments and international organizations to identify illegal or un-

taxed production as well as to better understand the role production could play in post-conﬂict
economies and the impact of sanctions, trade restrictions, and other policy interventions. Vari-
ants on the approach adopted here could be applied in a much broader set of places.

       The second literature is the substantive one that investigates the role of natural resources in
   2
    See, for example, [30] and [35] which use remote sensing to measure illegal mining activity in Myanmar and
Colombia, respectively.

                                                      3
shaping conﬂicts. For instance [36] ﬁnds that positive prices shocks to a bulky commodity leads
armed groups to create a monopoly of violence to impose taxation and regulate production in

Eastern Congo. Along the same lines, [32] use mineral international price changes and data on
historical concessions to show that armed groups tend to reduce violence in areas near the mines.
This “protection effect” is consistent with violence reducing economic proﬁtability through

higher labor costs. Others ﬁnd that ﬁghting around diamond mines did not affect civilians in
Sierra Leone, but was rather limited to violence among soldiers [3, 22]. This result is echoed by
[49], which ﬁnds that violence against civilians was lower in diamond areas in Angola. Finally,

[10] ﬁnd that price shocks have heterogeneous effects: in labor-intensive sectors, commodity
price drops result in higher incentives to join armed groups, while in the capital-intensive sector
the rise in the price elicits predatory behavior from armed groups.

    The rest of the paper is structured as follows. Section 1 provides some context and describes
our methodology, while section 2 presents and discusses the results of the analysis. Section 3
concludes. Details about the methods are available in Annex A; supplementary materials can

be found in Annex B.


1     Background and methodology
1.1    Context

During our period of study, 42 production sites in both Syria and Iraq (34 in Syria and 8 in Iraq;

see map on Figure 1) had been or are under Daesh control, out of a total of 75 identiﬁed oil sites
in Syria and 114 in Iraq (see Annex A section A.3 for details on the identiﬁcation of oil assets
and the delineation of Daesh territorial control).

    Early accounts of the group’s oil production and the revenues generated indicated that oil
was a signiﬁcant source of ﬁnancing for the organization. The 2014 Oil Market Report of the
International Energy Agency estimates an output of 70,000 barrels per day (bpd) [25]. Other

                                                4
        Figure 1: Iraq and Syria Oil Production, Fields, and Daesh Control, March 2016

                          IBRD 42122 | MARCH 2016
                          This map was produced by the Map Design Unit of The World Bank.
                                                                                                                   40°E                                                                                   45°E
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      DAESH STUDY
                          The boundaries, colors, denominations and any other information
                          shown on this map do not imply, on the part of The World Bank
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         DAESH CONTROLLED FLARES
        GSDPM
        Map Design Unit
                          Group, any judgment on the legal status of any territory, or any
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         NON-DAESH CONTROLLED FLARES
                          endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.
                                                                                                T U R K E Y                                                                                                                              MAXIMUM EXPANSION OF DAESH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         DURING PERIOD OF CONCERN
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         DAESH TERRITORY BY EARLY
                                                                                                                                                              Ibrahim Khalil                                                             SEPTEMBER 2015
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         MAIN CITIES
                                                                                                                                                                   Duhok
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         NATIONAL CAPITALS
                                                                                                                                               Al Yarubie
                                                                       Azaz                                                                                                                                                              SECONDARY ROADS
                                                                                                                    Al-Hasakah                 Sinjar                    Mosul                                                           PRIMARY ROADS
                                                           Aleppo                                                                                           Tall`Afar                                                                    INTERNATIONAL BOUNDARIES
                                                                                                                                                                                           Arbil
                                                            Idlib                            Ar Raqqah                  Shadadi

                                                                                                                                                                                                                    As-Sulaymaniyah
                                 Latakia
                          Sea




                                                                                                                                                                                                   Kirkuk
                                                                                                         Dayr az Zawr
                                                    Hamah
                      an




      35°N                                                                                                       Al Mayadin                                             Bayji                                                                                       35°N
                  ane




                                    Tartus
                                                 Aboudiye Homs
               err




                                                                                                                                          uphrates
                                    Tripoli
                                                                               SYRIAN                                   Abu Kamal        Kamal
                                                                                                                                      AbuE
             dit




                                                                                                                                           Sa`dah                         Samarra
         Me




                              LEBANON                                       ARAB REPUBLIC                                                                    Tharthar                                                                   ISLAMIC
                                                                                                                                                                Lake
                          BEIRUT
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Ba qubah
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        REP. OF
                                    Masnaa
                                                       DAMASCUS
                                                                                                    Attanf                                                   Ar-Ramadi            Al Fallujah                                             IRAN
                                                                                                                                                              Habbānīyah                           BAGHDAD
                                                                                                                                                                    Lake

                                                                                                                                                                                                         Tig
                                                    Dar'a As Suwayda
                                                                                             Al Karama
                                                                                                                                               I R A Q             Razzaza
                                                                                                                                                                      Lake
                                                                                                                                                                                Karbala'
                                                                                                                                                                                                            ris
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Al-Kut
                                         Irbid                                                                                                                                                      Al-Hillah
       West Bank
                                                     Zarqa                                                                                                                          An Najaf                  Ad Diwaniyah
                                                 AMMAN           Azraq                                                                                                                                                            Al 'Amarah




                                                                                                                                                                                             Euph
        Gaza                                                          Al Omari




                                                                                                                                                                                                 rat
                                                                                                                                                                                                    es
                                                                                                                                                                                                As-Samawah
                    ISRAEL                        JORDAN                                                                                                                                                                         An-Nasiriyah


                                                                                                                   SAUDI                                                                                                                         Basra
                                                                                                                  ARABIA                                                                                                                                 Um Qasr
      30°N

        ARAB                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    KUWAIT
       REP. OF                Aqaba                                                                          0                       150                    300                                                                                  KUWAIT
       EGYPT                                                                                                                      KILOMETERS
                          35°E                                                                                     40°E                                                                                   45°E




news outlets give numbers around 50-60,000 bpd yielding an income of US$2.5m per day [33]
to more than US$3m per day [1]. Early estimates by the US Departments of State and Treasury

put the organization’s oil revenues at around US$1m per day [42]. These estimates were then
revised down to “a couple million dollars a week” after the U.S. started air-strikes against the
organization’s assets [4]. Views as to whether Daesh was ﬁnancing itself through oil, external

support, extortion, or taxes then evolved, with higher emphasis put on taxes and extortion as pri-
mary sources of revenues over time. Die Zeit for instance reported December 2014 oil revenues
to be a mere US$370,000 per day or even lower at US$260,000 [9]. An October 2015 article

however gives an estimated output of 34-40,000 bpd, earning the organization an average of

                                                                                                                                           5
US$1.5m per day [16]. In sum, there was no consensus on the production numbers or revenue
they created.

       On 15 May 2015, U.S. Army special forces killed a senior Daesh leader known as Abu
Sayyaf, who, according to the U.S. Department of Defense “helped direct the terrorist orga-
nization’s illicit oil, gas and ﬁnancial operations.” This raid also yielded signiﬁcant amounts

of intelligence into the Daesh economy, including administrative data providing a retrospective
look at Daesh oil production in certain regions. Below, we shall compare our estimates from
remote sensing with the administrative data captured during the raid.

1.2       Remote sensing estimation of oil production with gas ﬂaring

Our approach relies on the property that the extraction of oil is associated with the liberation of
natural gas, primarily methane, which is initially dissolved in crude oil in constant proportions.
The gas is typically collected and ﬂared unless infrastructure exists to either re-inject the gas

into the ﬁeld, utilize the gas on-site, or package and send the gas off to markets [29]. Flaring
is the generic method of natural gas disposal in Syria and most of Iraq, as it is in most of
the world [47].3 Remote sensing from the Visible Infrared Imaging Radiometer Suite (VIIRS)

sensor deployed on the NOAA/NASA Suomi NPP satellite [12] allows the use of multi-spectral
methods [14, 12] to estimate a ﬂare’s radiant heat (RH), a measure of the heat released with the
combustion of the natural gas. RH is thus an indicator of the volume of gas ﬂared, which in turn

is a predictor of the volume of oil extracted.
       Figure 2 plots the relationship between yearly oil production and measured RH in 2012-2015
for the 22 signiﬁcant oil ﬁelds that are deemed comparable to the ﬁelds Daesh now controls.

Each point represents the logarithm of yearly oil production (vertical axis) and the logarithm of
yearly RH (horizontal axis) for any given oil ﬁeld in our estimation sample, with black symbols
   3
     Large ﬁelds in southern Iraq where Daesh is not present have undertaken ﬂaring reduction projects to collect
the natural gas for economic uses.


                                                       6
for Syrian ﬁelds and grey symbols for Iraqi ones. The black circles with labeled years report
the same quantities as for Syria in total. The line shows the slope of the oil-RH relationship

estimated by ordinary least squares, while the shaded area is the 95 percent conﬁdence interval.

                                               Figure 2: Radiant heat and oil output

                                                                                                                    2012
                 5




                                                                                                             2013
                                                                                                       2015
                                                                                                          2014
          Log(oil output)
          -5     -10  0




                                  -6              -4             -2            0                 2                     4
                                                               Log(radiant heat)

                                                95% conﬁdence interval                       Point estimate
                                                Syria Fields                                 Iraq Fields
                                                Syria total
                            Beta=1.0165 Linearity test (p-value) = 0.8937 R-squared=0.7311




Note: Plot of linear regression of the logarithm of ﬁeld RH against the logarithm of ﬁeld oil output on the vertical
axis. Each point represents an oil ﬁeld annual average unless otherwise labeled. Linear regression and 95%
conﬁdence intervals also depicted. The fail to reject the null hypothesis that the slope equals one (see Annex A
section A.4 for details on estimation sample). Data sources: [45, 46, 24] and NOAA.


    Under the assumption that the oil-RH relationship estimated using data prior to the seizure

of oil ﬁelds by Daesh still holds thereafter, we can make consistent statistical inference about
contemporaneous volume of crude oil extracted from contemporaneous measures of RH.




                                                                      7
1.3     Remote sensing assessment of oil production with gas venting

At any given moment, a site is in one of three production states:

      • S 1: The site is producing with natural gas ﬂaring Iraq is among the countries with
        the highest volume of gas ﬂared per unit of oil produced and like Syria, did not have any

        regulatory limits on ﬂaring before the war [47]. Oil production with ﬂaring is thus the
        generic production state when a site is producing oil.

      • S 2: The site is producing without gas ﬂaring (i.e. venting) A site that extracts crude oil
        could simply vent the accumulated natural gas. Although venting is wasteful and harmful

        to the environment, methane is lighter than air so that controlled venting (e.g. through a
        stack) would not constitute a ﬁre or explosion hazard. Venting would happen on a site
        if (i) the operator voluntarily shuts down the pilot ﬂame in the ﬂare stack, or (ii) long

        periods of inactivity extinguish the pilot, which is not re-ignited as production resumes.

      • S 3: The site is inactive A site might become inactive if ﬁghting has damaged productive
        infrastructure or no qualiﬁed personnel are available to operate the site.

   Distinguishing between these production states is important since the lack of RH does not
necessarily imply an absence of oil production; venting remains a possibility. Because the

narrow spectral bands used in the estimation of RH – the near-infrared (NIR) bands M7 and M8,
the short-wave-infrared (SWIR) band M10, and the mid-wave-infrared (MWI) bands M12 and
M13 – are not sensitive enough to detect low light from low-intensity ﬂaring, we also make use

of data from VIIRS’ Day/Night band (DNB). DNB is a wide, visible, and NIR imaging spectral
band, designed to detect moonlit clouds. The DNB’s low detection limits make it possible
to detect electric lighting present at the Earth’s surface [27, 7, 48, 31, 39], which cannot be

sensed in the infrared spectral channels; it is even sensitive to moonlight reﬂection on the Earth.


                                                  8
DNB detection, once the effect of the lunar cycle has been accounted for [11], therefore allows
discriminating between states S 2 and S 3 when no infrared signals are detected (see Annex A

section A.1 for more details).


2     Results
2.1    Interpreting remote sensing data: case studies

To provide a precise understanding of how trends over time show up in our data, Figure 3

plots the time-series of M10 detection (top row), temperature (middle row), and DNB radiance
(bottom row) for three ﬁelds in Iraq and Syria. This ﬁgure highlights the ﬁne temporal resolution
of our approach at the ﬁeld-level .

    Ajil (top panel) is situated northeast of Tikrit near the Hamrin Mountains in Iraq. Daesh took
control of the ﬁeld in June 2014 and continued production without interruption until January
2015. The ﬁeld was set on ﬁre by the group to counter an attack by Iraqi forces attacks in late-

March 2015. An engineer at the site told Reuters in July 2014 that Daesh ﬁghters were pumping
low volumes of oil from the ﬁeld [20]. As shown in the M10 detection panel, the site saw normal
ﬂaring activity through mid-June 2014. At the time Daesh takes over, ﬂaring intensity drops

substantially but sporadic temperature detections continue through January 2015 and during
that low-intensity period, the DNB measures are mostly greater than would be possible with
electrical lighting. This activity is consistent with Daesh pumping small volumes of oil using

the in-place infrastructure. From January to March 2015 there is no activity at the site; only the
lunar cycle lighting is detected (bottom row). The spike in M10 detections and DNB intensity in
late-March 2015 correspond to the reported burning of the ﬁeld by Daesh forces. Fighting in the

area continued into mid-April 2015, consistent with ongoing DNB detections which sometimes
cross the threshold for ﬂaring but could be battle-related (e.g. burning vehicles). After Tikrit is
fully retaken in late-2015 and the surrounding area secured, there is continued low-level DNB

                                                9
radiance at the site and regular radiant heat detections resume.
   The radiance reading from the site of Jaffra (middle panel) on the other hand tells a different

story. The Jaffra oil ﬁeld is in the western part of Deir Ezzour Governorate in Syria. This major
ﬁeld reportedly had a capacity of 25,000 bpd but it has not ﬂared since June 2013 and there
are no signs of activity since November 2013. The DNB band shows nothing but the lunar

cycle. Conversely, the M10 and DNB detections for Taq Taq (bottom panel) provide a sense
of what normal activity looks like for a ﬂare in the an area controlled by the Kurdish Regional
Government (KRG). Taq Taq oil ﬁeld is southeast of Erbil. It shows a consistent and continuous

production in our period of observation. In 2014, it produced at a rate of 103,000 bpd.




                                               10
                                                                                                                                          Spike Mean Index                  Temperature ('00 K)            Radiance (W/m2/sr/um)                               Spike Mean Index                  Temperature ('00 K)            Radiance (W/m2/sr/um)                              Spike Mean Index                  Temperature ('00 K)            Radiance (W/m2/sr/um)




                                                                                                                                          0
                                                                                                                                              2
                                                                                                                                                  4
                                                                                                                                                      6
                                                                                                                                                          8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   8
                                                                                                                                                              M                                                                                                                    M                                                                                                                   M




                                                                                                                                                                              0
                                                                                                                                                                              5
                                                                                                                                                                             10
                                                                                                                                                                             15
                                                                                                                                                                             20
                                                                                                                                                                             25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                        10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      25
                                                                                                                            M                                                                     M                                              M                                                                     M                                             M
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             50
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  100
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        150




                                                                                                                                                               ar                                                                                                                      ar                                                                                                                  ar
                                                                                                                             ar                                  12                                ar
                                                                                                                                                                                                     12                                              ar                                  12                                ar
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             12                                          ar                                  12                            M
                                                                                                                               12                                                                                                                      12                                                                                                                  12                                                                  ar
                                                                                                                                                              M                                                                                                                    M                                                                                                                   M                                         12
                                                                                                                            M                                  ay                                 M                                              M                                     ay                              M                                             M                                     ay
                                                                                                                             ay                                     12                             ay                                                ay                                     12                             ay                                            ay                                     12                         M
                                                                                                                                  12                                                                    12                                                12                                                                    12                                            12                                                               ay
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    12
                                                                                                                                                              Au                                  Au                                                                               Au                                  Au                                                                              Au
                                                                                                                            Au                                     g1                                                                            Au                                     g1                                                                           Au                                     g1                             Au
                                                                                                                                 g1                                     2                              g1
                                                                                                                                                                                                            2                                         g1                                     2                              g1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2                                        g1                                     2                              g1
                                                                                                                                      2                                                                                                                    2                                                                                                                   2                                                                     2
                                                                                                                                                              N                                   N                                                                                N                                   N                                                                               N
                                                                                                                            N                                  ov                                  ov                                            N                                  ov                                  ov                                           N                                  ov                                 N
                                                                                                                                ov                                12                                  12                                             ov                                12                                  12                                            ov                                12                                  ov
                                                                                                                                  12                                                                                                                      12                                                                                                                  12                                                                    12
                                                                                                                                                              Fe                                  Fe                                                                               Fe                                  Fe                                                                              Fe
                                                                                                                            Fe                                  b1                                                                               Fe                                  b1                                                                              Fe                                  b1                                Fe
                                                                                                                              b1                                   3                                b1                                             b1                                   3                                b1                                            b1                                   3
                                                                                                                                3                                                                      3                                             3                                                                      3                                            3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             b1
                                                                                                                                                              M                                                                                                                    M                                                                                                                   M                                       3
                                                                                                                            M                                                                     M                                              M                                                                     M                                             M
                                                                                                                             ay
                                                                                                                                                               ay
                                                                                                                                                                    13                             ay                                                ay
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       ay
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            13                             ay                                            ay
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           ay
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                13                         M
                                                                                                                                  13                                                                    13                                                13                                                                    13                                            13                                                               ay
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    13
                                                                                                                                                              Au                                  Au                                                                               Au                                  Au                                                                              Au
                                                                                                                            Au                                     g1                                                                            Au                                     g1                                                                           Au                                     g1                             Au
                                                                                                                                 g1                                     3                              g1                                             g1                                     3                              g1                                            g1                                     3
                                                                                                                                      3                                                                     3                                              3                                                                     3                                             3
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                g1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     3
                                                                                                                                                              N                                   N                                                                                N                                   N                                                                               N
                                                                                                                            N                                  ov                                     ov                                         N                                  ov                                     ov                                        N                                  ov                                 N
                                                                                                                                ov                                13                                                                                 ov                                13                                       13                                       ov                                13                                  ov
                                                                                                                                  13                                                                    13                                                13                                                                                                                  13                                                                    13
                                                                                                                            Fe                                Fe                                  Fe                                             Fe                                Fe                                  Fe                                            Fe                                Fe
                                                                                                                                                                b1                                  b1                                                                               b1                                  b1                                                                              b1                                Fe
                                                                                                                              b1
                                                                                                                                4                                  4                                  4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   b1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     4                                  4                                  4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       b1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         4                                  4                                b1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               4
                                                                                                                            M                                 M                                   M                                              M                                 M                                   M                                             M                                 M
                                                                                                                             ay                                ay                                  ay                                                ay                                ay                                  ay                                            ay                                ay                              M
                                                                                                                                                                    14                                  14                                                                                  14                                  14                                                                              14                             ay
                                                                                                                                  14                                                                                                                      14                                                                                                                  14                                                                    14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Ajil




11
                                                                                                                            Au                                Au                                  Au                                             Au                                Au                                  Au                                            Au                                Au
                                                                                                                                                                   g1                                                                                                                   g1                                                                                                                  g1                             Au
                                                                                                                                 g1
                                                                                                                                      4                                 4
                                                                                                                                                                                                       g1
                                                                                                                                                                                                            4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      g1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           4                                 4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            g1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 4                          Jaffra        g1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               4                                 4                              g1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Taq Taq
                                                                                                                            N                                 N                                   N                                              N                                 N                                   N                                             N                                 N                                   N
                                                                                                                                ov                                ov                                  ov                                             ov                                ov                                  ov                                            ov                                ov                                  ov
                                                                                                                                  14                                14                                  14                                                14                                14                                  14                                            14                                14                                  14
                                                                                                                            Fe                                Fe                                  Fe                                             Fe                                Fe                                  Fe                                            Fe                                Fe                                  Fe
                                                                                                                              b1                                b1                                  b1                                             b1                                b1                                  b1                                            b1                                b1
                                                                                                                                5                                 5                                   5                                              5                                 5                                   5                                             5                                 5                                 b1
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               5
                                                                                                                            M                                 M                                   M                                              M                                 M                                   M                                             M                                 M                                   M
                                                                                                                             ay                                ay                                  ay                                                ay                                ay                                  ay                                            ay                                ay                                  ay
                                                                                                                                  15                                15                                  15                                                15                                15                                  15                                            15                                15                                  15
                                                                                                                            Au                                Au                                  Au                                             Au                                Au                                  Au                                            Au                                Au                                  Au
                                                                                                                                 g1                                g1                                  g1                                             g1                                g1                                  g1                                            g1                                g1                                  g1
                                                                                                                                      5                                 5                                   5                                              5                                 5                                   5                                             5                                 5                                   5
                                                                                                                            N                                 N                                   N                                              N                                 N                                   N                                             N                                 N                                   N
                                                                                                                                ov                                ov                                  ov                                             ov                                ov                                  ov                                            ov                                ov                                  ov
                                                                                                                                  15                                15                                  15                                                15                                15                                  15                                            15                                15                                  15
                                                                                                                            Fe                                Fe                                  Fe                                             Fe                                Fe                                  Fe                                            Fe                                Fe                                  Fe
                                                                                                                              b1                                b1                                  b1                                             b1                                b1                                  b1                                            b1                                b1                                  b1
                                                                                                                                6                                 6                                   6                                              6                                 6                                   6                                             6                                 6                                   6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Figure 3: M10 and DNB over time




                                                                                                                            M                                 M                                   M                                              M                                 M                                   M                                             M                                 M                                   M
                                                                                                                             ay                                ay                                  ay                                                ay                                ay                                  ay                                            ay                                ay                                  ay
                                                                                                                                  16                                16                                  16                                                16                                16                                  16                                            16                                16                                  16
                                                                                                                            Au                                Au                                  Au                                             Au                                Au                                  Au                                            Au                                Au                                  Au
                                                                                                                                 g1                                g1                                  g1                                             g1                                g1                                  g1                                            g1                                g1                                  g1
                                                                                                                                      6                                 6                                   6                                              6                                 6                                   6                                             6                                 6                                   6
                                                                                                                            N                                 N                                   N                                              N                                 N                                   N                                             N                                 N                                   N
                                                                                                                                ov                                ov                                  ov                                             ov                                ov                                  ov                                            ov                                ov                                  ov
                                                                                                                                  16                                16                                  16                                                16                                16                                  16                                            16                                16                                  16




     Taq Taq in Iraq, and Jaffra in Syria Temperatures are in kilo Kelvin. Black lines demarcate period of Daesh control.
     Note: Time series of M10 and DNB detections from March 2012 through November 2016 for Flares in Ajil and
2.2       Production Estimates

Analysis of the 42 sites that have ever been under Daesh control reveals that the group’s produc-
tion peaked in July 2014, declined from much of 2015 before peaking again in late-2015 after

which it declined precipitously to 16,000 bpd in 2016. Figure 4 shows production estimates
with 95 percent conﬁdence intervals (panel A) from January 2014 through November 2016 us-
ing the approach and assumptions discussed above. Column (1) shows the results assuming

no production when we do not observe a radiant heat signal. That represents our low-end esti-
mate. Column (2) shows the results when we assume that ﬁelds without a radiant heat signal
are producing via venting on days with DNB detections above the lunar illumination threshold

(S 2).4
       Several precautions indicate these estimates represent an upper bound on Daesh oil pro-
duction. First, as gas-to-oil ratio (GOR) gradually increase as oil is extracted, our inferences

based on the assumption that the GOR remained constant at its pre-war level will overestimate
output when converting RH to oil production. Second, our assumptions are, by design, biased
towards over-estimating rather than under-estimating production. For example, the cutoff value

we choose to separate electric lights from low-intensity ﬂaring is set at a level that rules out
electric lights with probability one, while infrared detection still happens at much lower levels
of radiance. Last, we assign cloudy days the average of production at the site over the month.

This method is generous since production is highly sporadic at some sites and even one day of
production will be smoothed over the entire month. We performed a validation of this procedure
where we randomly assigned clouds to 10% of the observations and obtained higher estimates.

       In Annex A section A.4.5, we gauge the robustness of our inferences to alternative as-
sumptions on the way we determine production states and compute RH. Resulting production
   4
    As noted on venting days we assume production at the median production level since Daesh’s takeover of the
ﬁeld.



                                                     12
estimates vary little and stay within a 30 percent range of our baseline speciﬁcation.
                   Based on these estimates Daesh oil production peaked at roughly 86,000 bpd in late July

2014 and declined steadily thereafter, averaging approximately 56,000 bpd in the second half
of 2014. Production dropped through most of 2015 until rising brieﬂy in late 2015 to 72,000
bpd. Since there is signiﬁcant uncertainty as to the prices Daesh earned for oil over time, we do

not turn the production ﬁgures into revenue estimates.

                                                   Figure 4: Production Over Time
                                     200
  Daesh Production (thousands bpd)
                                     150
                                     100
                                     50
                                     0

                                   4




                                               4




                                                       5




                                                                         5




                                                                                     6




                                                                                                        6




                                                                                                                7
                                 n1




                                             l1




                                                     n1




                                                                       l1




                                                                                   n1




                                                                                                      l1




                                                                                                              n1
                                           Ju




                                                                     Ju




                                                                                                    Ju
                               Ja




                                                   Ja




                                                                                 Ja




                                                                                                            Ja




                                                       95% Confidence Interval           Point estimate




 Note: 28-day moving average of production estimates in barrels per day with 95 percent conﬁdence intervals.




                                                                      13
                                                            Figure 5: Comparison of estimates
                           150
  Daesh production ('000 bpd)
                           100
                           50
                           0




                                           4




                                                             14




                                                                                       4




                                                                                                         4




                                                                                                                                15
                                        01




                                                                                   01




                                                                                                      01
                                                            20




                                                                                                                            20
                                      r2




                                                                                  r2




                                                                                                    r2
                                                        er




                                                                                                                            n
                                   be




                                                                              be




                                                                                                 be




                                                                                                                         Ja
                                                       ob
                                 em




                                                                            em




                                                                                               em




                                                                                                                       to
                                                     ct
                                                    O
                                 pt




                                                                         ov




                                                                                               ec




                                                                                                                    14
                                Se




                                                                        N




                                                                                           D




                                                                                                                  20
                                                                                                               ec
                                                                                                              D
                                                                     Daesh Reported Month

                                               Production estimate with venting                              95% Confidence Interval
                                               Production estimate from Abu Sayyaf documents




Note: Daesh production reported in Abu Sayyaf documents and our estimates with 95 percent conﬁdence intervals
for the corresponding periods. Units are in thousands of barrels per day.



              Our ﬁndings, while lower than some accounts provided in the media, are consistent with

some estimates for the early period of Daesh control that relied on extrapolation from pre-war
ﬁeld data [8] or captured documents [37]. In particular, administrative data captured from the
Abu Sayyaf raid posits daily production ranging from 52,120 bpd to 55,560 bpd in the time

frame from roughly June to October 2014. These numbers are well within the bounds of our
95-percent conﬁdence intervals and actually very close to our point estimates (Figure 5).



                                                                                  14
        Other ﬁgures available in the documents seized during the Abu Sayyaf raid, however, sug-
gest potential problems with the Islamic State group’s own administrative data. For example,

the captured documents indicate signiﬁcant output from the At Tayyanah ﬁeld in the Al Khayr
Governorate, but for which our remote data detects no visual activity and was understood to be
non-active prior to Daesh takeover. Other simple arithmetic inconsistencies also reduce conﬁ-

dence in the accuracy of this administrative data. It is possible that internal political motivations
that may bias administrative data upwards.5
        In such circumstances, estimates from remote sensing serve as a complementary estimate of

Daesh oil production and further allows real-time monitoring of said production.


3        Conclusion

Based on our method employing satellite data, we estimate oil production in territory under the
Islamic State group’s control peaked brieﬂy above 80,000 bpd in July 2014, declined steeply be-
fore a short rise in late-2015, after which it dropped steadily until another peak from November

2015 through February 2016, after which it dropped steeply to an average of less than 16,000
bpd in the rest of 2016. These results lend support to the view that Daesh is ﬁnancing itself
out of other sources such as taxation and extortion rather than oil. Moreover, the results show

that Daesh was ineffective in comparison to historical trends at exploiting the ﬁelds under its
control. For comparison, AFPC and DZPC ﬁelds (the majority of which remained under its

control during the period of study) produced around 110,000 bpd before the war [6], while Taq
Taq ﬁeld in the Kurdistan Region of Iraq (KRI) alone produced 103,000 bpd in 2014. With
respect to revenues, there is no reliable price data on which to base estimates. Early reports

recount that Daesh was selling at a discounted price, ranging from $20 to $35 dollars in 2014
    5
    The most consequential example of biased administrative data is probably China’s Great Leap Forward in
which falsiﬁcation by lower- and mid-level ofﬁcials contributed to a famine that killed millions [44]. Recently
Chinese air pollution ﬁgures have also been falsiﬁed in a similar dynamic [43].


                                                      15
[38], while a subsequent report indicated that prices depend on the ﬁeld of origin, and that some
ﬁelds charged $40 to $45 dollars per barrel [17]. At such levels, the annual revenue from oil

would be far below many published estimates.
    One reason why our estimates differ substantially from many publicly-available ones is
likely sampling bias. To our knowledge, prior estimates all relied on what is effectively a

survey of Daesh’s oil assets. Information was obtained from a few selected sites and at speciﬁc
dates on the basis of key documents or interviewee self-reports, which were then extrapolated.
In spite of being supplemented with expert opinions, generalizations to the universe of Daesh-

controlled oil facilities are intrinsically imprecise in that the underlying data have observations
that are few and might not be representative, therefore leading to imprecise and potentially
biased inferences. Updating these estimates over time faces similar methodological challenges.

    The approach proposed here instead conducts a real-time census of Daesh oil production
facilities with daily temporal resolution. The estimates coming from our analysis are not in-
ferences made from observations on a few selected sites and at a few selected dates but from

all sites and in real time. Thus, they have the substantial advantage of enabling less bias than
previous estimates of the impact of various kinds of events (e.g. attacks, leadership conﬂicts,
territorial losses, etc.) on oil production.

    Our study aims to help bridge the knowledge gap on economic activity in Daesh-controlled
territories. The results here can be built on to inform planning for short-term humanitarian
assistance and long-term reconstruction. We also provide a methodological contribution in

that reliable external measures of oil output can enable better approaches to a broad range of
policy challenges. Across the world’s poorly-governed states, few report reliable oil production
numbers. Yet assessing production is critical for making sound economic policy and can enable

governments and international organizations to identify illegal or untaxed production, as well
as for assessing the impact of policy changes. We show that combining reliable records for


                                                16
a subset of ﬁelds with remote sensing alongside area-speciﬁc knowledge can enable reliable
production estimates at ﬁne temporal scales in such settings.

   In Syria and Iraq, understanding the structure of the economy in Daesh-controlled areas is
important as it allows having a better image of the welfare of the local population and antici-
pating potential humanitarian needs in the region. Furthermore, taking stock of the status of the

oil infrastructure will help design reconstruction plans, and inform post-conﬂict redistributive
policy interventions.




                                               17
References

 [1] Associated Press. Islamic state group’s war chest is growing daily, 15 September 2014.

 [2] Aymenn Jawad Al-Tamimi. Archive of islamic state administrative documents, 27 January

     2015.

 [3] John Bellows and Edward Miguel. War and local collective action in sierra leone. Journal
     of Public Economics, 93(11):1144–1157, 2009.

 [4] Bloomberg View. Cutting islamic state’s purse strings, 6 January 2015.

 [5] Jean-Charles Brisard and Damien Martinez. Islamic state: The economy-based terrorist
     funding. Technical report, Thomson Reuters Accelus, October 2014.

 [6] David Butter. Syria’s economy: Picking up the pieces. Chatham House, 23:3241–3246,
     2015.

 [7] Xi Chen and William Nordhaus. A test of the new viirs lights data set: Population and

     economic output in africa. Remote Sensing, 7(4):4937, 2015.

 [8] David S. Cohen. Prepared testimony of under secretary cohen before the house ﬁnancial
     services committee on “the islamic state and terrorist ﬁnancing”, 2014.

 [9] Die Zeit. The business of the caliph, 4 December 2014.

[10] Oeindrila Dube and Juan F Vargas. Commodity price shocks and civil conﬂict: Evidence
     from colombia. The Review of Economic Studies, 80(4):1384–1421, 2013.

[11] Christopher D Elvidge, Mikhail Zhizhin, Kimberly Baugh, and Feng-Chi Hsu. Automatic
     boat identiﬁcation system for viirs low light imaging data. Remote Sensing, 7(3):3020–
     3036, 2015.

                                             18
[12] Christopher D. Elvidge, Mikhail Zhizhin, Kimberly Baugh, Feng-Chi Hsu, and Tilottama
     Ghosh. Global survey of 2012 natural gas ﬂaring from viirs data. Energies, 8, 2015.

[13] Christopher D Elvidge, Mikhail Zhizhin, Kimberly Baugh, Feng-Chi Hsu, and Tilottama

     Ghosh. Methods for global survey of natural gas ﬂaring from visible infrared imaging
     radiometer suite data. Energies, 9(1):14, 2015.

[14] Christopher D Elvidge, Mikhail Zhizhin, Feng-Chi Hsu, and Kimberly E Baugh. Viirs
     nightﬁre: Satellite pyrometry at night. Remote Sensing, 5(9):4423–4449, 2013.

[15] FATF. Financing of the terrorist organisation islamic state in iraq and the levant (isil),

     2015.

[16] Financial Times. Isis inc: how oil fuels the jihadi terrorists, 14 October 2015.

[17] Financial Times. Inside isis inc: The journey of a barrel of oil, 29 February 2016.

[18] Franz Gerner, Bent Svensson, and Sascha Djumena. Gas ﬂaring and venting: A regulatory
     framework and incentives for gas utilization. Note 279, World Bank Group, 2004.

[19] B. Guo and A. Ghalambor. Natural Gas Engineering Handbook. Gulf Publishing Com-
     pany, Houston, Texas, 2nd edition, 2014.

[20] Saif Hameed and Dominic Evans. Islamic state torches oil ﬁeld near tikrit as militia

     advance, 5 March 2015.

[21] Jamie Hansen-Lewis and Jacob N. Shapiro. Understanding the daesh economy. Perspec-
     tives on Terrorism, 9(4), 2015.

[22] Macartan Humphreys and Jeremy M Weinstein. Handling and manhandling civilians in
     civil war. American Political Science Review, 100(3):429, 2006.

                                               19
[23] Carla E. Humud, Robert Pirog, and Liana Rosen. Islamic state ﬁnancing and u.s. policy
     approaches. Technical report, Congressional Research Service, 2015.

[24] IHS Energy Intelligence, Global Exploration & Production Service. Field Reports for Iraq

     and Syria . Field reports, IHS Energy Intelligence, 2015.

[25] International Energy Agency. Oil market report. Technical report, October 2014.

[26] ISW. Isis sanctuary map, 25 May 2016.

[27] Xin Jing, Xi Shao, Changyong Cao, Xiaodong Fu, and Lei Yan. Comparison between the
     suomi-npp day-night band and dmsp-ols for correlating socio-economic variables at the
     provincial level in china. Remote Sensing, 8(1):17, 2015.

[28] Patrick B. Johnston, Jacob N. Shapiro, Benjamin Bahney, Danielle Jung, Howard J. Shatz,

     Patrick K. Ryan, Jonathan Wallace, and Barbara Sude. Foundations of the Islamic State:
     Management, Money, and Terror in Iraq, 2005-2010. RAND Corporation, Forthcoming.

[29] John Kearns, Kit Armstrong, Les Shirvill, Emmanuel Garland, Carlos Simon, and Jennifer
     Monopolis. Flaring & venting in the oil & gas exploration & production industry. Tech-

     nical Report 2.79/288, International Association of Oil & Gas Producers (OGP), 2000.

[30] Katherine J. LaJeunesse Connette, Grant Connette, Asja Bernd, Paing Phyo, Kyaw Htet
     Aung, Ye Lin Tun, Zaw Min Thein, Ned Horning, Peter Leimgruber, and Melissa Songer.
     Assessment of mining extent and expansion in myanmar based on freely-available satellite

     imagery. Remote Sensing, 8(11), 2016.

[31] Xi Li, Huimin Xu, Xiaoling Chen, and Chang Li. Potential of npp-viirs nighttime light
     imagery for modeling the regional economy of china. Remote Sensing, 5(6):3057, 2013.



                                             20
              ¸ ois Maystadt, Giacomo De Luca, Petros G Sekeris, and John Ulimwengu. Min-
[32] Jean-Franc
     eral resources and conﬂicts in drc: a case of ecological fallacy? Oxford Economic Papers,

     page gpt037, 2014.

[33] Newsweek. How does isis fund its reign of terror?, 6 November 2014. Janine Di Giovanni
     and Leah Mcgrath Goodman and Damien Sharkov.

[34] Now. Where does daesh oil go ? [translated from arabic], 22 December 2015.

[35] Santiago Saavedra and Mauricio Romero. Local incentives and national tax evasion: The
     response of illegal mining to a tax reform in colombia. Technical report, Stanford Univer-

     sity, 2017.

       ul S´
[36] Ra´   anchez de la Sierra. On the origins of the state: Stationary bandits and taxation in
     eastern congo. Working paper, University of California Berkeley, 2017.

[37] Abu Sayyaf. Islamic State, Diwan of Natural Resources, Oil and Gas Division - Oil and
     Gas Report 003 #82. Seized May 15, 2015 from Abu Sayyaf, Declassiﬁed 2017, 2015.

[38] Louise Shelley. Blood money. Foreign Affairs, 2014.

[39] Kaifang Shi, Chang Huang, Bailang Yu, Bing Yin, Yixiu Huang, and Jianping Wu. Eval-

     uation of npp-viirs night-time light composite data for extracting built-up urban areas.
     Remote Sensing Letters, 5(4):358–366, 2014.

[40] A. Stohl, Z. Klimont, S. Eckhardt, K. Kupiainen, V. P. Shevchenko, V. M. Kopeikin, and
     A. N. Novigatsky. Black carbon in the arctic: the underestimated role of gas ﬂaring

     and residential combustion emissions. Atmospheric Chemistry and Physics, 13(17):8833–
     8855, 2013.



                                              21
[41] The Guardian. Inside islamic state’s oil empire: how captured oilﬁelds fuel isis insurgency,
     19 November 2014.

[42] Treasury. Remarks of under secretary for terrorism and ﬁnancial intelligence david s.

     cohen at the carnegie endowment for international peace, “attacking isil’s ﬁnancial foun-
     dation”, 2014.

[43] Jeremy Wallace. Juking the stats: Authoritarian information problems in china. British
     Journal of Political Science, 46.

[44] Jeremy Wallace. Cities and Stability: Urbanization, Redistribution, and Regime Survival

     in China. New York: Oxford University Press, 2014.

[45] Wood Mackenzie. Syria upstream summary. Country report, Wood Mackenzie, December
     2014.

[46] Wood Mackenzie. Iraq upstream summary. Country report, Wood Mackenzie, December
     2015.

[47] World Bank. Regulation of associated gas ﬂaring and venting: A global overview and

     lessons. Working Paper 29554, World Bank Group, July 2010.

[48] Yuke Zhou, Ting Ma, Chenghu Zhou, and Tao Xu. Nighttime light derived assessment of
     regional inequality of socioeconomic development in china. Remote Sensing, 7(2):1242,
     2015.

[49] Jennifer J Ziemke. From battles to massacres. ProQuest, 2008.




                                               22
A     Materials and Methods
A.1     Classiﬁcation of production states

Infrared detection rules out venting and site inactivity, as the observed radiance indicates night

ﬁres that are almost surely natural gas ﬂares given the location of the observed signal. The ﬂar-
ing site is thus in state of production with ﬂaring when infrared signals are detected. However,
depending on the temperature and the surface area of the gas ﬂare, detection on one or more

sensors will occur. Figure A.6 shows the distribution of radiance for M10 detections in our
study sample. No infrared signal was detected with a radiance below 0.01 W.sr-1 .m-2 .nm-1 .
    While lower-intensity ﬂares fail to trigger an M10 detection, they always do so on the wide-

band DNB. Thus, when no infrared signal is detected, we rely on DNB to assess which state a
given ﬂaring site is in, since low-intensity ﬂaring could well go undetected by infrared sensors.
However, given the sensitivity of DNB to lunar illuminance, we ﬁrst proceed by suppressing the

radiance effects stemming from moonlight reﬂection on the Earth or on clouds at night. Such
procedure yields the Spike Median Index (SMI), which allows detecting the presence of surface
lighting and ranking the brightness of sources over extended periods of time [11].

    Figure A.7 shows the distribution of SMI measurement over four sites which are relatively
isolated: three small towns in Syria and a regional airport in Lebanon. The only source of
nighttime lighting in these four sites is electric.

    As indicated on the histogram, no signal above an SMI value of .6 was detected over the
period March 2012 to October 2015, at the exception of a few outliers. We thus consider that
SMI levels observed on ﬂaring sites above .6 are associated with low-intensity ﬂaring, so that

the site is in state of production with ﬂaring (S 1). Conversely, when SMI indicates that no
signiﬁcant night-time light is detected above the lunar cycle for a period of 7 consecutive days,
we rule out venting and determine that the site is inactive. Alternative cutoffs for SMI and


                                                  23
                  Figure A.6: Distribution of infrared detections by M10 sensor


                                  Radiance of M10 infrared detection
          450


          400


          350


          300


          250
density




          200


          150


          100


           50


            0
             -2       -1.5       -1        -0.5          0          0.5    1      1.5
                                       logarithm (10) of radiance




                                                  24
Figure A.7: Distribution of SMI detection from electric lights




                             25
number of days of inactivity are considered to assess the robustness of our results (see Figure
A.11 and corresponding discussion in Annex section A.4.5).

   Finally, when venting cannot be ruled out because either (i) SMI is low enough so that
electric lighting could be the sole source of light detected, or (ii) SMI is high enough to rule
out site inactivity, we determine that oil is extracted without natural gas ﬂaring (state S 2). The

DNB signals are thus posited to come from infrastructure or automative electric lighting.
   The results of the production state identiﬁcation exercise are summarized in Table A.1. For
each site, column (2) indicates the number of days it has been under Daesh control, while the

three other columns give the percentage of these days that were in states of ﬂaring (S 1), venting
(S 2), and inactive (S 3), respectively. Sites under Daesh control are inactive on average 68
percent of the time, while actual ﬂaring is detected only 10 percent of the time. The remainder

are cases where, because we cannot rule it out, are assumed cases of venting and consist of 22
percent of our daily observations. Out of the 42 sites ever under Daesh control, regular ﬂaring
activity (with more than 10 percent of days with ﬂaring) is identiﬁed for 12 sites, while 30 sites

have been active less than 50 percent of the time.
   We look at the robustness of our results by adopting alternative site production classiﬁca-
tions (see section A.4.5).

A.2    Imputing radiant heat

When signals have been detected in two or more infrared bands, we follow the multispectral
methods outlined in [14] and [12], which we brieﬂy summarize here after. The ﬁrst step consists
of using the radiances in the spectral bands with detection in Planck curve ﬁtting. The ﬁtting

involves adjusting two parameters, temperature and emission scaling factor (esf). The Planck
curve ﬁtting thus requires detection in at least two spectral bands. Once a ﬁt is derived, the esf
is multiplied by the size of the VIIRS pixel footprint, which varies as a function of scan angle,


                                                26
   Table A.1: Summary of Daesh controlled ﬂare states
              (1)              (2)            (3)          (4)
Flare   Days controlled   Production(%)   Venting(%)   Inactive(%)
86          1051               17             31           53
87          1051                4             13           83
89          1051                5              6           89
96          1051                0             12           88
102          842                0              2           97
118          865                0              3           97
128          196                7             93            0
137          878               23              9           69
143          878                0              2           98
144          878               63             15           22
158          879                0              3           97
159          879                1              4           95
164          879                4             83           13
166          879               38             19           43
169          879                1             27           73
171          879               21             79            1
182          878                4             56           40
183          879                0              1           99
184          878                0              1           99
187          878               14              8           78
188          879                0              1           99
193          864               52             47            1
194          878                0              1           99
195          864                0             11           89
196          580                0             12           88
197          864               22             27           51
199          580                0              9           91
200          580                0              3           97
202          580                0              4           96
208          863               29             39           32
209          878                0              2           98
210          864                0             23           77
211          863                0              2           97
212          485                0              1           99
247          858                6             89            5
259          758               36             23           41
271          858                2             40           58
280          858                7             32           60
313          226               33             24           43
319          226                0              1           98
333          229                0              6           93
786          878               26             43           31
Total       33041              9.9           21.6         68.5




                               27
to estimate the source size of the hot object. Radiant heat (measured in MW) is then calculated
with temperature and source size using the Stefan-Boltzmann law.

   In case of single-spectral infrared detection, Planck curve ﬁtting is thus no longer feasible;
we instead set temperature at 1810K, which is the temperature of an object with peak radiant
emissions at the M10 wavelength. Alternative temperature assignment rules are considered (see

Figure A.11 and corresponding discussion in Annex section A.4.5).
   Finally, if we do not have infrared detection and have yet determined that the site is ﬂaring
(state S 1), we measure DNB radiance and, as above, set temperature to 1810K to apply the

Stefan-Boltzmann law and derive the associated RH. Note however that in such instance, the
observed radiance aggregates radiance from gas ﬂaring and any other source of lights not ﬁltered
out by the SMI such as facility or automotive electric lighting; the resulting measure is then an

overestimate of RH from gas ﬂaring.
   When a site is deemed inactive (state S 3), a value of RH = 0 is then assigned for each day
of these 7-day periods.

   Finally, when a state of production with venting is identiﬁed (state S 2), we make the as-
sumption that the site is producing at a level equivalent to the median of its historical production
since being taken over by Daesh. If such level is equal to zero or is not deﬁned because there

was no detected infrared signal, we instead set venting production at the median pre-war level:
we assign the median RH of all measured RH prior to July 2012.

A.3     Identifying oil assets and assigning control
A.3.1   Identifying ﬂaring sites

All nighttime VIIRS data over Syria and Iraq, spanning March 2012 through November 2016,
were processed with the VIIRS nightﬁre algorithms [14]. The detections were ingested into

a spatial database for analysis. Sites were included when (i) one multispectral band detection


                                                28
occurred over the period March 2012 - October 2015 with a temperature above 1300K, or
(ii) two detections occurred regardless of temperature. The resulting set of pixels was then

visually inspected and manually edited to remove low temperature sites (under 1300 K) located
in agricultural settings, deemed to be the outcomes of biomass burning.
       To further ensure that the ﬂaring sites identiﬁed by the algorithm described above did cor-

respond to natural gas ﬂaring associated with oil production, we veriﬁed the presence of oil
production infrastructure around the detected ﬂares. Daytime satellite imagery were obtained
from Google Earth and Esri’s World Imagery Map. Google Earth combines imagery dating to

as early as 2004 from a range of providers at varying resolutions over the area. Esri’s World
Imagery Map also collates satellite and aerial imagery from a range of providers; however, Dig-
ital Globe provided the majority of images in the ISIS region of interest at 0.5 meter resolution

during 2010-2012.6
       A site was classiﬁed as having infrastructure if a ﬂare stack was observed within 750 meters
(the size of the pixels in the VIIRS data) of the detection coordinates in any of the available

images. Included images typically showed production facilities with a pipeline to the ﬂare stack,
though even sites with primitive infrastructure, such as simply a stack with a wall, were also
included. Excluded sites fell into two categories. Either the site had no infrastructure, suggestive

of agricultural burning or bombing, or the site had industrial facilities inconsistent with oil
production, such as oil reﬁneries. Figure A.8 shows an example of a site with infrastructure and
a site without.
   6
   The  Esri  data is  available at http://www.arcgis.com/home/item.html?id=
10df2279f9684e4a9f6a7f08febac2a9. The list of providers by region is documented at http:
//help.arcgis.com/en/communitymaps/pdf/WorldImageryMap_Contributors.pdf




                                                 29
           Figure A.8: Examples of sites with and without oil production infrastructure




                                         (a) Site without infrastructure




                                          (b) Site with infrastructure

This ﬁgure an example of a site in ISIS territory without oil production infrastructure and an example of a site in
Daesh territory with infrastructure. Panel A marks coordinates (40.561188, 35.029762) over image from Digital
Globe on 28 June 2012. Panel B marks coordinates (40.56361, 35.115139) over the same image.

                                                       30
A.3.2   Delineating Daesh territorial control

Daesh territorial control spanned from the east of Fallujah to the north of the city of Aleppo
[26]. Most of the oil assets in Syria under Daesh control are in the eastern part of the country,

i.e. in the governorates of Deir Ezzour and Hassaka, and to a lesser extent Raqqa. In Iraq, Daesh
controls the Ajil ﬁeld and oil wells in the Hamrin Mountains, the Qayara and Najma ﬁelds, and
had access to parts of the Baiji reﬁnery until October 2015. We assign control of ﬁelds by

determining the date at which a site is taken by or away from Daesh using news reports in both
English and Arabic and verifying this assignment with maps published by the U.S. Department
of Defense, the New York Times, and the Institute for the Study of War.


Deir Ezzour: In this governorate, Daesh consolidated its control of the western part of the
governorate within a few days. CNN reports the seizure of Al Omar ﬁeld on July 3rd 2014 [13],

while Al Arabiya indicates that Tanak ﬁeld fell under Daesh control on July 4th [4]. The rest
of the western ﬁelds are not covered individually by news reports. Asharq Al Awsat announced
that major ﬁelds in the governorate had been seized by July 11th [12]. The hegemony of Daesh

over that part of the governorate is conﬁrmed around that time also; we thus assign the ﬁelds of
Jaffra, Izba, Sijan, Abu Hardan, and others using the date of control of either the closest major
ﬁeld or the district capital. Al Arabiya reports that Al Mayadin city fell under Daesh control

by the end of June, while Al Hayat and other sources report that Abu Kamal did so on July
1st [1]. Finally the city of Deir Ezzour was contested for a while, and Al Jazeera announced

on July 14th that the group seized control of a number of neighborhoods in this city, chasing
out the opposition and other Islamist groups [6]. On July 15th, the Syrian Observatory for
Human Rights reported that 90 percent of the governorate had gone under Daesh control [7]

and Al Jazeera announced that the group had seized all the ﬁelds in the governorate [22]. On
the Eastern side, there are only two major ﬁelds: local websites and social media feeds report


                                               31
Al Kharrata ﬁeld falling as soon as June 9th [16], while Al Thayem was reportdly seized in July
2014 and released in January 2015 [5].


Hassaka: The presence of Daesh in this governorate has been mostly restricted to the south
and east of Hassaka city. The northern ﬁelds are still under the control of Kurdish forces. We

date the control of Shadadi, Jebeisse, and Al Hol ﬁelds to July 18th, as reported by local news
outlets such as Aljomhuria [10].


Raqqa: Individual reports on ﬁelds controlled by Daesh in Raqqa governorate are very lim-
ited. We instead look at reports on Daesh territorial control within the governorate to assign
oil asset control. While Deutsche Welle reports that the governorate was not fully under Daesh

control until August 2014 [14], Al Arabiya announced that the group had consolidated its con-
trol over the three district capitals by January 13th [2] and Asharqalarabi reports that all the
ﬁelds in Raqqa were seized in that month [11]. We thus assign control of Raqqa oil ﬁelds to

Daesh starting in January 13 2014.


Iraq: We assign control of the ﬁelds of Qayarra, Najma, Ajeel and Hamrin to Daesh starting
June 24th. Reuters had reported the seizing of two of these ﬁelds [18], while International
Business Times had announced that the four ﬁelds had fallen around the same time in June

[17]. Iraqi forces regained control of Ajeel and Hamrin ﬁelds on March 4 2015, as reported
by Reuters; Daesh forces set ﬁre to the oil wells as they were ﬂeeing the scene [19]. Similar
pattern of territorial loss along and sabotage happened in the Qayarrah area, were wells burned

for several weeks before engineers were able to restore production [8, 21].




                                              32
A.3.3   Removal of warfare events

We removed from the sample in the main analysis a number of isolated high radiance and low
temperature events that are not consistent with oil production. There are two cases that cause

these observations: air strikes and sabotage (by ﬁre) by Daesh ﬁghters. Coalition air strikes have
damaged infrastructure in Iraq and Syria, and caused ﬁres, while Daesh set ﬁre to some wells to
curb the advance of Iraqi forces and deter air strikes. In this section we provide evidence from

news, daytime images, and temperature to establish the case for each observation we removed.


                                 Table A.2: Al Omar ﬁeld area

                            Dates Removed     Temperature (K)
                            October 21, 2015      1239
                            October 31, 2015      1290
                            November 1, 2015       930
                            November 3, 2015       NA
                            November 12, 2015     1166


Al Omar Area: This major ﬁeld was the target of repeated Coalition and Russian air strikes.
Reports conﬁrm strikes on the 21st of October where B-1 bombers and other allied warplanes
hit 26 targets in the ﬁeld [24, 3, 25]. Similarly on the 3rd and 12th of November 2015, the

Syrian Observatory for Human rights and local news outlets documented air strikes generated
ﬁres in the ﬁeld [23, 20]. These reports conﬁrm the existence of large scale ﬁres in the facilities
because of such interventions. We also exclude October 31st and November 1st from the sample

because the temperatures below 1300 K are not consistent with oil production and the reports
of air strikes before that date indicate strikes were successful at destroying the infrastructure
needed to operate the ﬁeld in the short run. No daytime imagery of this site was available in

this period.




                                                33
                                    Table A.3: Qayarrah ﬁeld

                Dates Removed                            Temperature (K)
                June 9, 2016                                    1040
                June 12, 2016                                   1051
                June 13, 2016                                   1055
                June 14, 2016                                   1049
                June 15, 2016                                   1163
                June 16, 2016                                   1156
                July 3, 2016 to August 24, 2016      Average = 1160 Max = 1488


Qayarrah Area: Prolonged confrontation between Daesh ﬁghters and Iraqi forces occurred
at the site near Qayarrah city, southeast of Mosul. While Al Jazeera reported the presence of
Iraqi forces in the area as early as June 2016 [8], the earliest reports of ﬁres at the ﬁeld date to

early July [21]. These ﬁres continued throughout the second half of 2016: Daesh lost control of
the site 24 August 2016 and ﬁres continued until at least December 2016 [15].
   Daytime images are consistent with the news reports that large ﬁres began in July 2016.

Images were available at four dates around the drop in temperature at this site: 1 May 2016, 28
June 2016, 16 July, and 19 July. Analysis of these images shows large smoke plumes on 16 and
19 July but no apparent smoke 1 May and 28 June.

   While several low temperature nights were observed in June 2016 (June 9 – June 16), the
last date with temperature observed above 1500 K was 2 July 2016. A structural break test of
temperature indicated the greatest likelihood of a change in the temperature pattern on 9 June

2016. To remain conservative in our estimates and consistent with the qualitative evidence, we
drop observations from this site June 9 to June 16, 2016 included and all dates after 3 July 2016
included.


Ajil and Hamrin Area:       As Daesh rapidly lost territory in Iraq in March 2015, three adjacent
sites were all lit on ﬁre as Daesh ceded control. Landsat images of the sites were available



                                                34
March 1, 2015, March 17, 2015, and April 2, 2015. There is no evidence of smoke on March
1 image. Smoke plumes from the three oil production sites are visible in the March 17, 2015

image and portions of the sites display smoke on April 2. Large-scale smoke, evidence of
ﬁghting, is visible over the area on 18 April 2015 Landsat.

                                      Table A.4: Ajil ﬁeld

                             Dates Removed       Temperature (K)
                             March 5, 2015           1356
                             March 6, 2015           1297
                             March 7, 2015           1350


   First, Ajil is situated northeast of Tikrit near the Hamrin Mountains in Iraq. Daesh took
control of the ﬁeld in June 2014 and continued production without interruption until January

2015. The ﬁeld was set on ﬁre by the group to counter an attack by Iraqi forces in starting
March 5, 2015 [9] and Daesh ceded control of the site on March 8, 2015. Fires reportedly
continued for a few weeks as Iraqi engineers worked to put the site back to production and data

corroborate this activity at the site: temperature observations after Daesh lost control generally
remain below 1400 degrees K until 19th March 2015.

                                   Table A.5: Hamrin area 1

                             Dates Removed       Temperature (K)
                             March 5, 2015           1270
                             March 6, 2015           1282


   Second, we reached similar conclusions for nearby Hamrin sites. Like Ajil, Daesh ﬁghters
set ﬁres in wells in the Hamrin Mountains during March 2015 to curb the same advance of the
Iraqi forces before they lost control of the area on March 7th, 2015. The same Landsat images

depict Hamrin on March 1, 2015, March 17, 2015, and April 2, 2015. Smoke plumes from the
oil ﬁeld are visible in the March 17, 2015 image and there is no deﬁnitive evidence of smoke
on March 1 and April 2.

                                               35
                                     Table A.6: Hamrin area 2

                               Dates Removed       Temperature (K)
                               March 7, 2015           1273
                               March 8, 2015           1810
                               March 9, 2015            972

   Last, in an another site in the Hamrin vicinity, Daesh again set ﬁres before it ceded control
March 10th 2015. Landsat Images are available March 1, 2015, March 17, 2015, and April 2,
2015. Smoke plumes from portions of the oil ﬁeld are visible in the March 17, 2015 image and

smoke plumes are visible in other portions April 2, 2015. There is no deﬁnitive evidence of
smoke on March 1.


                                   Table A.7: Al Hussein North

                  Dates Removed                                    Temperature (K)
                  October 26, 2015 to November 23, 2015             Average = 1725


Al Hussein North Area: A ﬁnal site located near the border of Ar-Raqqah and Homs Syr-
ian governorates was removed due to irregular activity in November 2015. The site displayed
infrequent low-intensity production and during and before the period of Daesh control. We ob-

served a sudden spike in uncharacteristically high production in November 2015 (Figure A.9).
We interpreted the irregular spike immediately prior to indeﬁnite inactivity as evidence of an
air strike or warfare that destroyed infrastructure at the site.

   In support of this interpretation, we observed that the radiant heat signals during this period
were generally lower than expected for oil production. Most temperatures observed in this
period were below 1600K; however, for several days there were no detections in the M10 band

and we assumed the temperature was 1810K. Thus the high average temperature generally
reﬂects our generous assumption of activity when the signal was poor. Qualitative evidence of
the activity at this location was not available. Landsat images were available November 8, 2015

                                                 36
and November 24, 2015; however, we were unable to observe activity at the site at 30 meter
pixel resolution. Thus, we present our results including Al Hussein North for comparison in

Table A.9.

                                                                 Figure A.9: Al Hussein North Observations

                                                                                                         Al Hussein North
                Radiance (W/m2/sr/um)




                                        5
                                        4
                                        3
                                        2
                                        1
                                        0
                                            12

                                                      12


                                                                 2

                                                                         12


                                                                                   3

                                                                                           13


                                                                                                     3

                                                                                                              13


                                                                                                                       4

                                                                                                                               14


                                                                                                                                         4

                                                                                                                                                 14


                                                                                                                                                          5

                                                                                                                                                                   15


                                                                                                                                                                             5

                                                                                                                                                                                     15


                                                                                                                                                                                              6

                                                                                                                                                                                                      16


                                                                                                                                                                                                                6

                                                                                                                                                                                                                        16
                                                                g1




                                                                                 b1




                                                                                                 g1




                                                                                                                     b1




                                                                                                                                     g1




                                                                                                                                                        b1




                                                                                                                                                                         g1




                                                                                                                                                                                            b1




                                                                                                                                                                                                            g1
                                        ar

                                                  ay




                                                                      ov




                                                                                       ay




                                                                                                          ov




                                                                                                                           ay




                                                                                                                                              ov




                                                                                                                                                               ay




                                                                                                                                                                                 ov




                                                                                                                                                                                                  ay




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ov
                                                            Au




                                                                               Fe




                                                                                                Au




                                                                                                                   Fe




                                                                                                                                    Au




                                                                                                                                                      Fe




                                                                                                                                                                        Au




                                                                                                                                                                                          Fe




                                                                                                                                                                                                           Au
                                        M

                                                 M




                                                                     N




                                                                                       M




                                                                                                         N




                                                                                                                           M




                                                                                                                                             N




                                                                                                                                                               M




                                                                                                                                                                                 N




                                                                                                                                                                                                  M




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    N
                                        25
                Temperature (K)




                                        20
                                        15
                                        10
                                         5
                                         0
                                             12

                                                       12


                                                                 2

                                                                          12


                                                                                   3

                                                                                           13


                                                                                                     3

                                                                                                                 13


                                                                                                                  4

                                                                                                                               14


                                                                                                                                         4

                                                                                                                                                 14


                                                                                                                                                           5

                                                                                                                                                                   15


                                                                                                                                                                             5

                                                                                                                                                                                     15


                                                                                                                                                                                              6

                                                                                                                                                                                                      16


                                                                                                                                                                                                                6

                                                                                                                                                                                                                        16
                                                                g1




                                                                                 b1




                                                                                                 g1




                                                                                                                b1




                                                                                                                                     g1




                                                                                                                                                         b1




                                                                                                                                                                         g1




                                                                                                                                                                                            b1




                                                                                                                                                                                                            g1
                                            ar

                                                      ay




                                                                         ov




                                                                                       ay




                                                                                                          ov




                                                                                                                           ay




                                                                                                                                              ov




                                                                                                                                                               ay




                                                                                                                                                                                 ov




                                                                                                                                                                                                  ay




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ov
                                                            Au




                                                                               Fe




                                                                                                Au




                                                                                                              Fe




                                                                                                                                    Au




                                                                                                                                                       Fe




                                                                                                                                                                        Au




                                                                                                                                                                                          Fe




                                                                                                                                                                                                           Au
                                        M

                                                  M




                                                                     N




                                                                                       M




                                                                                                          N




                                                                                                                           M




                                                                                                                                             N




                                                                                                                                                               M




                                                                                                                                                                                 N




                                                                                                                                                                                                  M




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    N
                Spike Mean Index




                                        8
                                        6
                                        4
                                        2
                                        0
                                                 12

                                                           12


                                                                     2

                                                                                 12


                                                                                  3

                                                                                            13


                                                                                                      3

                                                                                                                  13


                                                                                                                   4

                                                                                                                                14


                                                                                                                                          4

                                                                                                                                                  14


                                                                                                                                                           5

                                                                                                                                                                   15


                                                                                                                                                                             5

                                                                                                                                                                                     15


                                                                                                                                                                                              6

                                                                                                                                                                                                      16


                                                                                                                                                                                                                6

                                                                                                                                                                                                                        16
                                                                 g1




                                                                                b1




                                                                                                     g1




                                                                                                                 b1




                                                                                                                                      g1




                                                                                                                                                         b1




                                                                                                                                                                         g1




                                                                                                                                                                                            b1




                                                                                                                                                                                                            g1
                                             ar

                                                       ay




                                                                          ov




                                                                                           ay




                                                                                                              ov




                                                                                                                               ay




                                                                                                                                              ov




                                                                                                                                                               ay




                                                                                                                                                                                 ov




                                                                                                                                                                                                  ay




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    ov
                                                                Au




                                                                              Fe




                                                                                                 Au




                                                                                                               Fe




                                                                                                                                     Au




                                                                                                                                                       Fe




                                                                                                                                                                        Au




                                                                                                                                                                                          Fe




                                                                                                                                                                                                           Au
                                            M

                                                      M




                                                                         N




                                                                                       M




                                                                                                          N




                                                                                                                           M




                                                                                                                                              N




                                                                                                                                                               M




                                                                                                                                                                                 N




                                                                                                                                                                                                  M




                                                                                                                                                                                                                    N




This ﬁgure shows the time series of M10 and DNB detections from March 2012 through November 2016 at Al
Hussein North. Temperatures are in kilo Kelvin. Black lines demarcate period of Daesh control.




A.4    Inferring oil output

To infer oil production we estimate a parametric model predicting pre-war liquid production
estimates at the oil-ﬁeld level with measured radiant heat and other ﬁeld-level characteristics.

As predicted by theory and documented by [14], there is a linear relationship between Rit , the
radiant heat measured in period t at site i, and the volume Git of gas ﬂared: there thus exists a
constant A such that Git = A · Rit . Furthermore, the constant ratio of natural gas dissolved in

crude oil can be written Git = Γit · Oit , where Γi is the gas-to-oil ratio (GOR) that is also ﬁeld-


                                                                                                                               37
                                                                                           A·Rit
and time-speciﬁc. Substituting implies the following theoretical relationship: Oit =        Γit
                                                                                                   that
can be expressed in logarithmic terms as:


                                                oit = a − γit + rit                                (1)

       Our estimating equation is thus


                                         oit = α + β1 rit + β2 γit + εit ,                         (2)

where lower-case notations indicate natural logarithm of corresponding upper-case variables

and εit is the disturbance term that we assume to be independently and identically distributed
across sites and time. We examined the estimated εit to ensure symmetry and normality. The re-
sults of the model validation and estimation are reported in A.4.3. A linear relationship between

crude oil extraction and radiant heat would imply β1 = 1.
       Under the assumption that the relationship estimated in equation 2 is valid after the onset of
                   ˆit of oil production are obtained according to
the war, estimates o


                                            o
                                            ˆit = α          ˆ2 γit ,
                                                    ˆ1 rit + β
                                                  ˆ+β                                              (3)

where α           ˆ2 are estimated by ordinary least squares (OLS). 7 A consistent estimate of
         ˆ1 , and β
      ˆ, β

the level of oil production needs to adjust for the fact that the expectation of the exponential of
a random variable is not equivalent to the exponential of its expectation.

A.4.1       Consolidating oil production and ﬁeld characteristics data

To construct the dataset used to estimate equation 2, we combine data on ﬁeld-level character-

istics (including oil output and GOR) with ﬂare-level radiant heat measures. In this section, we
describe the sources and preparation of calibration data.
   7
       The statistical software package used to that end is STATA version 14.



                                                         38
   Information on oil ﬁeld locations and production were collated from multiple sources. Oil
ﬁeld boundaries for Syria and Iraq were obtained from [27] and [28]. The map lists the ﬁeld

name, operator, operational status, type, and utilization for each ﬁeld. To supplement this data
in Iraq, additional ﬁelds were digitized and added from IHS Global Exploration and Production
Service’s map of Iraq. This map displays the oil and gas ﬁeld boundaries, ﬁeld name, ﬁeld

status, as well as oil and gas well points. Yearly ﬁeld-level production data in barrels per day
from 2012 to 2015 in Iraq and Syria were obtained from [27, 28, 24]. Production data was
matched to the ﬁeld locations using the ﬁeld name.

   A few restrictions were applied to the sample of included ﬁelds. Including Syria and Iraq,
45 ﬁelds with production data could be assigned to boundaries according to their name. First,
to ensure differences in the geology and production technology between oil ﬁelds southern Iraq

and Daesh-controlled ﬁelds did not bias the estimation, 16 oil ﬁelds in south Iraq were removed.
South Iraq oil ﬁelds were deﬁned as any ﬁeld below the southern most ﬂare in Syria, 34.64
degrees latitude. Removing south Iraq reduced the sample to 29 oil ﬁelds. One ﬁeld (Miran

West) were dropped for having no production data. In total, 28 ﬁelds outside of southern Iraq
were matched and included data.
   Second, two ﬁelds were dropped due to inconsistencies in the production data. Ain Zalah

(West Butmah) oil ﬁeld, was removed due to data reliability: oil output was reported invari-
ant during the entire production history, while corresponding RH levels differed signiﬁcantly.
Likewise, output was reported invariant during all years with data at Bijeel, 2014-2015, yet RH

varied substantially. Removing ﬁelds with inconsistent production data results in 26 oil ﬁelds.
Last, four ﬁelds, Gebibe, Hamrin, Hawler, and Tawke, were dropped due to year to year changes
in production that were not in proportion to the change in RH, indicating alterations in the tech-

nology or production process that would affect the stability of the oil to ﬂaring relationship.
   The ﬁnal sample consists of 22 oil ﬁelds. Further, some individual years were missing


                                               39
production data. In Syria, no ﬁelds were observed in 2013 nor 2014. Twelve ﬁelds in Syria
were observed only in 2012 and two ﬁelds were observed in 2012 and 2013. One ﬁeld in Iraq

was missing data in two years and had no RH in another year. The ﬁnal data thus has 48 ﬁeld
year observations.8
       The estimation employs additional data on the geological characteristics of each ﬂare site

to account for heterogeneity in the estimation of the ﬂaring-production relationship. Field-level
GOR were obtained from Energy-Redeﬁned, and matched to the ﬁeld locations according to the
ﬁeld name.9 Each ﬂare was subsequently assigned the GOR of the nearest ﬁeld with a known

GOR. We do not have ﬁeld-level GOR data for recent years, so that our statistical inferences
assume constant GOR. Field GOR however increases over time as the ﬁeld ages and crude oil
is being extracted. This implies that the assumption of constant GOR will lead to inferences on

oil output that are biased upward.

A.4.2       Aggregating RH data

Since the dependent variable, ﬁeld oil production, is measured yearly and at the ﬁeld level, we
aggregate daily observations on ﬂare-level radiant heat into one yearly ﬁeld-level measure. The

linear relationship between RH and the volume of crude oil extracted allows linear aggregation.
       First, each oil ﬁeld in the production data was linked to gas ﬂares located within its bound-
aries. In some instances, oil ﬁelds were linked to gas ﬂares located beyond the boundaries if

clear pipeline infrastructure linking the gas ﬂare to wells within the boundary was observed in
daytime satellite imagery (see section A.3 in Annex A for a discussion of the use of satellite im-
agery). Oil ﬁelds were not linked to sites in the VIIRS output where no oil stack infrastructure

was observed in daytime imagery, even if the site’s coordinates were within the boundary (see
Annex A section A.3 for discussion of infrastructure).
   8
       Four observations for the whole country of Syria were added to the ﬁnal data for robustness check.
   9
       Data were obtained from http://www.energy-redefined.com/


                                                         40
    Finally, the radiant heat of each ﬂare at each observation was averaged to obtain the ﬂare-
level yearly average radiant heat for 2012 to 2015. In calculating the averages, observations

where the site was cloudy were excluded. Last, the yearly averages of all sites linked to a
ﬁeld were summed to obtain the ﬁeld’s yearly radiant heat. If ﬂares from the same ﬁeld have
heterogeneous productivity, the log of the sum does not equal the sum of the logs. To address

this concern, we repeated the calibration estimation with the subsample of sites with only one
ﬂare so that there was no aggregation.

A.4.3    Estimation results

Table A.8 shows the result of the estimation of equation 2. In column (1), we do not include

GOR in the regression, while column (2) shows the full speciﬁcation shown in equation 2.
Column (3) excludes ﬁelds with more than one ﬂare site.

                     Table A.8: Oil output and radiant heat - estimation results

                                             (1)                        (2)                         (3)
 VARIABLES                           Logarithm oil output       Logarithm oil output        Logarithm oil output

 Logarithm of radiant heat                  0.984***                   1.017***                   0.958***
                                             (0.101)                    (0.123)                    (0.170)
 Logarithm of oil to gas ratio                                           0.264                      0.383
                                                                        (0.311)                    (0.473)
 Constant                                   0.776**                      -0.775                     -1.870
                                            (0.308)                     (2.001)                    (2.931)

 Observations                                 52                      48                              28
 R-squared                                  0.733                   0.731                           0.788
 Linearity test (p-value)                   0.874                   0.894                           0.894
                                     Robust standard errors in parentheses
                                      *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

Note: Sample includes 22 unique oil ﬁelds in Syria and Iraq pooled over four years. Column (2) includes an
additional four observation of Syria aggregated. Column (3) limits the sample to only ﬁelds with one ﬂare site.


    The R-squared of the regression is .73 with the full sample and .78 with only single ﬂare

                                                      41
ﬁelds. The model still leaves roughly 25 percent of the variation in oil output data unexplained.
The error term in the model represents two primary possibilities. First, there exists some mea-

surement errors as both oil output and RH data could not be reported or measured precisely.
Second, the might be model speciﬁcation errors whereby the relationship between oil output
and RH are more complex than what is suggested by equation (2) as other factors (ﬂare stack

characteristics, wind conditions, etc.) might affect the RH-oil output relationship.
   In Figure A.10 we plot the residuals of the estimation in Table A.8 Column 2 as an alter-
native validation of model. We provide additional plots for comparison. In the top panel, the

linear model residuals are plotted against a normal distribution. The linear model residuals are
estimated from a regression of oil output on radiant heat and gas to oil ratio in levels. In the bot-
tom panel, the analogous residuals from the model in logs are plotted against a normal density.

We observe that while the linear model residuals deviate substantially from the normal distri-
bution, the nonlinear model residuals are a good approximation of the normal distribution. The
normality of the nonlinear residuals supports the premise that the model of Table A.8 Column

2 is appropriate for calibrating radiant heat to oil production.

A.4.4   Inferring oil production

To compute the level of oil production for each ﬂare observation, we start with the results of the
estimation of equation (2). We impute log production for 200 draws from the estimated joint
                       ˆ2 . After converting to the level of oil production for each observation
                ˆ1 and β
distribution of β
for each draw, we compute the daily sum of all draws for all Daesh ﬂares. Last, we compute
the expectation (average), 5th, and 95th percentiles of total Daesh production each day over

the 200 draws. The implications of this method are notable in the results: conﬁdence intervals
are asymmetric with greater mean than median because the exponential of a uniform random
variable is positively skewed.


                                                 42
                                     Figure A.10: Distribution of Calibration Regression Residuals

                                                                         Linear Model Residuals
  0 .005 .01 .015 .02
       Density




                        -100                                         0                           100          200
                                                                                 Residuals
                         kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 9.7685

                                                                     Log-Log Model Residuals
           .3
   Density
  .1   .2  0




                         -6                      -4                         -2               0          2      4
                                                                                 Residuals
                         kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 0.4883


                                                                           Kernel density estimate
                                                                           Normal density



                                        Table A.9: Annual Mean Production Summary (’000 bpd)

                                                      (1)                                  (2)
                                     Year        Main sample               Main sample and Al Hussein North
                                     2014             56                                   56
                                                  (28, 109)                            (28, 109)
                                     2015             35                                   39
                                                   (18, 67)                             (20, 70)
                                     2016             16                                   16
                                                    (8, 27)                              (8, 27)

Note: Estimates are reported in thousands of barrels per day. 95% conﬁdence interval reported below in parenthe-
sis. Year 2014 includes July 1, 2014 to December 31, 2014. Year 2016 includes January 1, 2016 to November 31,
2016. Estimates assume venting.




                                                                                 43
   Such procedure allows inferring daily oil production at any site, which we can then aggre-
gate to obtain yearly production as reported in Table A.9. Column 1 repeats the estimates with

the main sample, cited in the text, assuming venting when no radiant heat is observed. We also
report our estimates including the November 2015 observations at Al Hussein North in Column
2. The inclusion of Al Hussein North results in an increase of 5,000 bpd on average in 2015.

A.4.5   Alternative site production state classiﬁcations

In this section we show the results are not sensitive to the alternative RH assignment rules for
sites that are deemed to be venting and discusses the resulting inferences. Figure A.11 displays
the estimated July 1 to December 31, 2014 Daesh oil production in thousands of barrels per

day for various assignments of parameters employed in the production estimate. The y-axis
represents the number of consecutive days a site without electric lights is assumed to be venting
before it is declared non-productive. The x-axis represents the absolute deviation from the lunar

cycle that must be achieved to determine electric lights are present. A lower threshold allows
observations with faint light to qualify as lit with electric lights. The panels 1710, 1810, and
1910 represent the temperature in K that is assigned in the computation of radiant heat when

there is a single spectral band detected. Last, the shaded area shows the July 1 to December 31,
2014 Daesh production in thousand of barrels per day with the corresponding values for venting
days, electric lights threshold, and temperature are assigned. The primary estimates in the paper

assume 7 days venting, lights threshold of .6, and temperature of 1810. The ﬁgure shows that
this estimate is invariant to the assumptions. The upper bound of the estimate considering all
parameters increases from 56,000 bpd to around 83,000 bpd.




                                               44
                                 Figure A.11: Venting assumptions contour plot

                                               1710
                                                                                 80.0
               8 10 12 14




                                                                                 75.0
               6




                                               1810                              70.0




                                                                                        Production 2014
               8 10 12 14
Days venting




                                                                                 65.0
               6




                                                                                 60.0
                                               1910
               8 10 12 14




                                                                                 55.0


                                                                                 50.0
               6




                            .4     .5           .6           .7           .8
                                        Lights threshold
               Graphs by temperature




                                                       45
B     Supplementary Materials

The supplementary materials contain a number of additional analyses that are useful context for
the analysis in the main text.

B.1    Daesh vs. non-Daesh RH Measures

Figure B.12 provides three simple ways of viewing trends in oil production in Daesh held ter-

ritory using remote sensing data. We assign all ﬂares for this ﬁgure as Daesh or Non-Daesh
according to the extent of Daesh territorial control in July 2014. Column 1 shows the number of
sites ﬂaring on any given day. Column 2 shows the average intensity of ﬂaring activity over all

sites, which is a rough proxy for total production. Column 3 shows the average RH measured
at active sites, which captures in a rough way the intensity of production among working sites.
The top row shows raw values, while the bottom row normalizes by activity levels measured

before the war escalated (March-June 2012) as a way to highlight changes over time. As il-
lustrated, Daesh’s productive base was small to start with and dropped rapidly long before the
group took over (column 1). Moreover, its total productivity has generally fallen since January

2014 (column 2), and the productivity per well after its takeover, as measured by ﬂaring activity,
is quite poor compared to that in non-Daesh areas of Iraq and Syria.




                                               46
                   Figure B.12: Output productivity: Daesh versus non-Daesh




      This ﬁgure shows the time series of RH estimates for Daesh and non-Daesh areas in Iraq and Syria.



   Interestingly, the share of Daesh sites in each of our three production conditions—S 1, the

site is producing with natural gas ﬂaring; S 2, the site is producing without gas ﬂaring (i.e.
venting); or S 3, the site is not producing—changes little over time. This is likely because ﬂaring

activity had already dropped dramatically at most of those sites before Daesh took over. Fields
Daesh would control at some time after June 2014 had substantially reduced ﬂaring activity by
mid-2013, both in terms of the share of days ﬂaring, average radiant heat per site, and average

radiant heat per active ﬂare. This is not surprising, since the ﬁelds in Syria were in a hotly


                                                     47
contested war zone for two years before Daesh began taking substantial territory in mid-2014.

B.2    Daesh oil revenues: a compilation of media reports

This section provides a brief compilation of media reports on Daesh oil revenues. We reviewed

a wide range of media reports. The table below summarizes representative estimates from June
2014 through December 2015, recording the source in the article and providing full citations
for each piece.




                                             48
                 Period           Daily              Daily
Date of      Referenced (if     Revenue           Production
Article     not article date) ($1,000/day)        (1,000 bpd)               Source               Citation                                         Link
                                                                Interview w/Robin Mills
                                                                (energy analyst) and Theodore Leigh, Karen. "ISIS Makes Up To $3 Million          http://www.syriadeeply.org/articles/2014/
                                                                Karasik (think tank research     a Day Selling Oil, Analysts Say." Syria News.    07/5856/isis-3-million-day-selling-oil-
 Jul-14                              $3,000           n/a       director)                        N.p., 28 July 2014. Web. 07 Jan. 2016.           analysts/
                                                                                                 Malas, Nour, and Maria Abi-Habib. "Islamic
                                                                                                 State Economy Runs on Extortion, Oil Piracy      http://www.wsj.com/articles/islamic-state-
                                                                                                 in Syria, Iraq." WSJ. The Wall Street Journal,   fills-coffers-from-illicit-economy-in-syria-
 Aug-14                                n/a           30-70      Wall Street Journal              28 Aug. 2014. Web. 07 Jan. 2016.                 iraq-1409175458
                                                                US Energy Information
                                                                Administration and Iraq Energy Daragahi, Borzou, and Erika Solomon.           http://www.ft.com/intl/cms/s/2/34e874ac-
                                                                                                                                              3dad-11e4-b782-
                                                                Institute, reported in Financial "Fuelling Isis Inc." Financial Times. N.p., 21
 Sep-14                              $3,200           80        Times                            Sept. 2014. Web. 11 Jan. 2016.               00144feabdc0.html#axzz3FfGlccp6
                                                                                                 "2014 Oil Market Report" 14 October, 2014    https://www.iea.org/media/omrreports/ful
14-Oct-14    Summer 2014               n/a            70        International Energy Agency      International Energy Agency,                 lissues/2014-10-14.pdf
                                                                                                                                              https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/n
                                                                                               DeYoung, Karen. "Before Airstrikes, Islamic ational-security/islamic-state-was-making-
                                                                                               State Was Making $1 Million a Day from Oil 1million-a-day-from-oil-sales-before-
                                                                                               Sales to Middlemen and Even Assad              airstrikes-began/2014/10/23/34e1b0c4-
                                                                WaPo from David Cohen,         Regime." Washington Post. The Washington 5ae8-11e4-bd61-
 Oct-14          Jun-14              $1,000           n/a       Treasury Dep Undersecretary Post, 23 Oct. 2014. Web. 07 Jan. 2016.            346aee66ba29_story.html
                                                                                               Shelley, Louise. "Blood Money." Foreign
                                                                                               Affairs. N.p., 30 Nov. 2014. Web. 7 Jan.
                                                                                               2016.
                                                                                               <https://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/iraq/ https://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/ir
 Nov-14                              $1,000           48        Foreign Affairs/CFR            2014-11-30/blood-money>.                       aq/2014-11-30/blood-money
                                                                                               Hunt, Albert R. "Cutting Islamic State's Purse
                                                                                               Strings." <i>BloombergView.com</i>.            http://www.bloombergview.com/articles/2
                                                                Bloomberg, interview with      BloombergView, 26 Jan. 2015. Web. 07 Jan. 015-01-26/u-s-attacks-islamic-state-oil-
 Jan-15                              ~$300            n/a       Treasury Undersecretary Cohen 2016.                                           revenue
                                                                                               Levitt, Matthew. Feb, 2 2015. “Terrorist
                                                                                               Financing and the Islamic State.” URL:
                                                                                               http://www.washingtoninstitute.org/policy-     https://www.washingtoninstitute.org/uplo
                                                                Matthew Levitt at Washington analysis/view/terrorist-financing-and-the-       ads/Documents/other/LevittStatement201
 Feb-15                            $750-$1300         n/a       Institute for Near East Policy islamic-state                                  50202-v3.pdf
                                                                                               Crowcroft, Orlando. "Isis: Inside the
                                                                                               Struggling Islamic State Economy in Iraq and http://www.ibtimes.co.uk/isis-inside-
                                                                                               Syria." International Business Times RSS.      struggling-islamic-state-economy-iraq-
 Apr-15                            $800 - 1600        n/a       IB Times                       N.p., 10 Apr. 2015. Web. 07 Jan. 2016.         syria-1495726

                                                                                                 Almukhtar, Sarah. "ISIS Finances Are        http://www.nytimes.com/interactive/2015
                                                                                                 Strong." The New York Times. The New York /05/19/world/middleeast/isis-
 May-15                               $300            n/a       NYT                              Times, 18 May 2015. Web. 07 Jan. 2016.      finances.html?smid=tw-nytimes&_r=0
                                                                                                 Daniel Glaser, “Remarks on Aspen Institute
                                                                                                 Panel Regarding Iraq/Syria: Worse Now Than
                                                                                                 Before?” (The Aspen Institute, Aspen,
                                                                                                 Colorado, July 23, 2015),
                                                                Daniel Glaser, Asstant Sec for http://aspensecurityforum.org/wp-             http://aspensecurityforum.org/wp-
                                                                Terrorist Financing at Treasury, content/uploads/2015/07/Iraq-or-SyriaWorse- content/uploads/2015/07/Iraq-or-Syria-
 Jul-15     "earlier this year"      $1,400           n/a       speaking at Aspen                Now-Than-Before.pdf                         Worse-Now-Than-Before.pdf

                                                                Statements made to AP by a       Hendawi, Hamza, and Qassim Abdul-Zahra.
                                                                Ibrahim Bahr al-Oloum, a         "Despite US-led Campaign, Islamic State
                                                                member of Iraq's parliamentary   Rakes in Oil Earnings." The Big Story.       http://bigstory.ap.org/article/061e7a83299
                                                                energy committee and a former    Associated Press, 23 Oct. 2015. Web. 11 Jan. 644868c920bed0667eb9c/despite-us-led-
 Oct-15                           ~$1,300-1,700      40-50      oil minister                     2016.                                        campaign-islamic-state-rakes-oil-earnings
                                                                                                                                              http://press.ihs.com/press-
                                                                                                 "Newsroom." Islamic State Monthly Revenue release/aerospace-defense-
                                                                                                 Totals $80 Million, IHS Says. IHS, 7 Dec.    security/islamic-state-monthly-revenue-
 Dec-15                              $1,100           n/a       IHS                              2015. Web. 07 Jan. 2016.                     totals-80-million-ihs-says
                                                                                                                                              http://www.economist.com/news/middle-
                                                                                                 "Degraded, Not Yet Destroyed." The           east-and-africa/21679802-self-styled-
                                                                                                 Economist. The Economist Newspaper, 12       caliphates-income-taking-pounding-
 Dec-15                                n/a         under 40     The Economist                    Dec. 2015. Web. 07 Jan. 2016.                degraded-not-yet-destroyed
                                                                                                 Thompson, Mark. "U.S. Bombing of ISIS Oil
                                                                                                 Facilities Showing Progress." Time. Time, 13 http://time.com/4145903/islamic-state-oil-
 Dec-15                              $1,000           40        Time                             Dec. 2015. Web. 07 Jan. 2016.                syria/
                                                                                                 Torbati, Yeganeh. "U.S.-led Air Strikes Have
                                                                                                 Cut Islamic State Oil Revenues -U.S."        http://www.reuters.com/article/mideast-
             Before October                                     Reuters (quoting Defense         Reuters. Thomson Reuters, 06 Jan. 2016.      crisis-airstrikes-oil-
6-Jan-16          2015                 n/a            45        officials)                       Web. 07 Jan. 2016.                           idUSL1N14Q1BN20160106
                                                                                                 Torbati, Yeganeh. "U.S.-led Air Strikes Have
                                                                                                 Cut Islamic State Oil Revenues -U.S."        http://www.reuters.com/article/mideast-
             After October                                                                       Reuters. Thomson Reuters, 06 Jan. 2016.      crisis-airstrikes-oil-
6-Jan-16         2015                  n/a            34        Reuters                          Web. 07 Jan. 2016.                           idUSL1N14Q1BN20160106




                                                                                       49
References

 [1] Ahram. Al qaeda leaves east syria strongholds to islamic state: Monitor, 3 July 2014.

 [2] Al Arabiya. Daesh regains control of raqqa and executes a hundred nusra ﬁghters [trans-
     lated from arabic], 13 January 2014.

 [3] Al Arabiya. Isis oil ﬁeld ruined, its syria bastion bombed, 22 October 2015.

 [4] Al Arabiya. Isis militants seize another oil ﬁeld in syria’s deir el-zour, 4 July 2014.

 [5] Alhadath news. Daesh retreats from al thayem oil ﬁeld [translated from arabic], 15 January
     2015.

 [6] Aljazeera. Daesh control deir ezzour and ﬁghts in qalamoun [translated from arabic], 14

     July 2014.

 [7] Aljazeera. Syria’s oil ﬁnances daesh [translated from arabic], 18 September 2014.

 [8] Aljazeera. Iraqi forces near qayarrah... [translated from arabic], 23 Juin 2016.

 [9] Aljazeera. Fire in ajil ﬁeld [translated from arabic], 5 March 2015.

[10] Aljomhuria. Why daesh is aiming to control oil and gas ﬁelds in syria [translated from
     arabic], 18 July 2014.

[11] Asharq Alarabi. Who controls syria’s oil [translated from arabic], 22 September 2014.

[12] Asharq Awsat. 60 percent of syria’s oil in the hands of daesh [translated from arabic], 11
     July 2014.

[13] CNN. Group: Isis takes major syrian oil ﬁeld, 3 July 2014.



                                               50
[14] Deutsche Welle. Daesh ﬁghters control the entire raqqa governorate [translated from ara-
     bic], 24 August 2014.

[15] El Fagr. Fire in qayarrah under control [translated from arabic], 24 December 2016.

[16] Eqtsad. Daesh controls al kharrata oil ﬁeld [translated from arabic], 06 June 2014.

[17] International Business Times. Isis smuggling us$50m of oil monthly to fund medieval

     caliphate in iraq and syria, 23 July 2014.

[18] Reuters. Militants attack iraqi air base, overrun oil site, 25 June 2014.

[19] Reuters. Isis burns oil ﬁeld east of tikrit in defensive maneuver, witness says, 5 March
     2015.

[20] Revolutionary Forces of Syria Media Ofﬁce. Coalition planes target al omar... [translated
     from arabic], 13 November 2015.

[21] Russia Today. Daesh burns wells in qayarrah... [translated from arabic], 10 July 2016.

[22] Syriahr. Daesh controls 90 percent of deir ezzour governorate in eastern syria [translated
     from arabic], 14 July 2014.

[23] Syriahr. Airstrikes on al omar ﬁeld... [translated from arabic], 4 November 2015.

[24] The Irish Times. More us air attacks on islamic state oil ﬁelds planned, 28 October 2015.

[25] The new York Times. U.s. steps up its attacks on isis-controlled oil ﬁelds in syria, 12

     November 2015.

[26] U.S. Department of Defense. Iraq and syria: Isil’s reduced operating areas as of april
     2015, 2015.


                                                  51
[27] Wood Mackenzie. Syria upstream summary. Country report, Wood Mackenzie, December
    2014.

[28] Wood Mackenzie. Iraq upstream summary. Country report, Wood Mackenzie, December

    2015.




                                         52
