                                                WPS8132


Policy Research Working Paper                  8132




         Trains, Trade and Transaction Costs
   How Does Domestic Trade by Rail Affect Market Prices
         of Malawi Agricultural Commodities?

                                 Wouter Zant




Development Economics Vice Presidency
Operations and Strategy Team
June 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 8132


  Abstract
 This paper measures the impact of low-cost transport by rail                       by rail when the railway line was operational are inter-
 in Malawi on the dispersion of agricultural commodities                            vention observations. Railway transport services explain
 prices across markets by exploiting the quasi-experimental                         a 14 percent to 17 percent reduction in price dispersion
 design of the nearly total collapse of domestic transport                          across markets. Geographical reach of trade varies by
 by rail in January 2003 due to the destruction of a rail-                          crop, most likely related to storability and geographical
 way bridge at Rivirivi, Balaka. Estimations are based on                           spread of production. Perishability appears to increase
 monthly market prices of four agricultural commodities                             impact reflecting limited scope for arbitrage. Overall,
 (maize, groundnuts, rice, and beans) in 27 local mar-                              impacts are remarkably similar in size across commodities.
 kets for the period 1998–2006. Market pairs connected




  This paper is a product of the Operations and Strategy Team, Development Economics Vice Presidency. It is part of a larger
  effort by the World Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions
  around the world. Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The author
  may be contacted at wouter.zant@vu.nl.




         The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
         issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
         names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
         of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
         its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                       Produced by the Research Support Team
                          Trains, Trade and Transaction Costs:

                        How Does Domestic Trade by Rail Affect

                  Market Prices of Malawi Agricultural Commodities?

                                       Wouter Zant




JEL classification: D23, F14, N77, Q13, O18, O55
Key words: trade, crop prices, transaction costs, rail infrastructure, Malawi, sub-Saharan
Africa




Wouter Zant is associate professor at the Vrije Universiteit and fellow of the Tinbergen
Institute, both Amsterdam, The Netherlands. Email: wouter.zant@vu.nl. I am grateful to Hans
Quené for assistance with compiling the data and to Jasper Dekkers for constructing maps. I
also thank Peter Lanjouw, conference/seminar participants at Milan (ICAE2015), Oxford
(CSAE2016), and Amsterdam (VU), and three anonymous referees of this journal for helpful
comments. All remaining errors are my own.
                                                I. INTRODUCTION

High transport costs make trade between markets unprofitable and force farmers into subsistence
farming. Conversely, low transport costs increase trade, lead to lower prices and lower price dispersion,
and offer farmers incentives to commercialize. In the longer run, low transport costs may also increase
supply response, improve allocative efficiency, accelerate technology adoption and innovation, and
enhance economic growth. Sub-Saharan countries, particularly landlocked ones, face high transport
costs and suffer from high and volatile food prices and poorly functioning markets. Railway transport
is a low-cost alternative to road transport, and a feasible and useful complement to other modes of
transport. Rail transport contributes to lower food prices through its impact on the operation of markets,
increases welfare of households, and improves food security. Rail transport may also lead to a
reduction of overall transport prices through rail-road competition.
    In this study, we investigate the hypothesis that, due to its low cost, railway transport services
increase domestic trade in agricultural commodities. With increased trade flows of agricultural produce
from surplus to deficit areas, prices will increase in surplus markets and decrease in deficit markets.
As a result, dispersion of agricultural commodity prices across markets reduces, and, consequently,
the availability of low-cost rail transport services is associated with lower price dispersion across
markets. The key empirical challenge in measuring impacts of infrastructure is to find an identification
strategy that allows the separation of the impact of railway services from other factors. For the purpose
of this research, we exploit a natural experiment, notably the disruption of a railway bridge in the heart
of the Malawi railway network, caused by a tropical storm in January 2003. The bridge collapse also
caused a nearly total collapse of domestic freight by rail. In view of these developments, we assume
that markets located along the rail line were connected with each other through rail transport services
until January 2003 and lost this connection from January 2003 onwards. Natural experiments in
transport infrastructure are a rare event (cf. Jacoby and Minten 2008), and experimental designs in
infrastructure are usually not feasible1. Consequently, and apart from historical studies that exploit the
rollout of the railway network as identification strategy (Donaldson 2010, Burgess and Donaldson
2012, Jedwab et al. 2014, Jedwab and Moradi 2016), impact studies on railway services are not
common.
    For the empirical estimations, we make use of monthly market prices for a few selected crops
(maize, rice, groundnuts, and beans) in selected markets. These selected crops are grown in all Malawi
districts, and the selected markets are evenly spread throughout Malawi. A number of these markets
are located close to the rail line while others are remote from the rail line. The sample period stretches
a number of years before and after the date of the bridge collapse. In the estimations, we explain
(absolute) price dispersion of a number of food crops across markets. Price dispersion is assumed to
be determined by market specific factors (seasonality, trend, and fixed effects) and market pair specific
factors (e.g., transport infrastructure). The estimation results support a 14% to 17% reduction in price
dispersion across markets as a result of rail transport services. Geographical reach of trade varies by
crop, most likely related to perishability, storability, crop value, and geographical spread of production.
Perishability appears to increase impact reflecting limited arbitrage opportunities.
    The empirical literature on impacts of infrastructure is large. A substantial part is macro in nature,
often taking a historical perspective, using rollout of infrastructure as identification, and deriving its
theoretical underpinning from either new economic geography (including Davis and Weinstein) or
trade theory (Ricardian comparative advantage, Heckscher-Ohlin, Eaton-Kortum). The impact of
transport infrastructure research in the tradition of new economic geography and Davis and Weinstein
centers around the question if the equilibrium distribution of economic activity across space is
determined by locational fundamentals (geographical endowments) or economies of scale and scope
due to concentration and clustering of activities and (past) investments (Jedwab and Moradi 2016,
Jedwab et al. 2014, Redding and Sturm 2008, Bleakley and Lin 2012, Ahlfeldt et al. 2014). Jedwab
and Moradi (2016) and Jedwab et al. (2014) exploit railroad construction respectively in Ghana and

   1. Casaburi et al. (2013) is an exception.
                                                      2
Kenya over the last century to show path dependence of economic activity and local increasing returns.
Trade theory-based work looks at the impact of infrastructure on trade volumes, goods and labor
markets, trade costs, and responsiveness to shocks (e.g., Michaels 2008, Feyrer 2009, Donaldson 2010,
Burgess and Donaldson 2012, Atkin and Donaldson 2012, Allen and Atkin 2015). Donaldson (2010)
exploits, in his extensive study on colonial Indian railways (1861-1930), the roll-out of the railroad
network and finds, on the basis of a general equilibrium trade model, that railroads reduce trade costs,
reduce price dispersion between regions, increase trade volumes and welfare, and decrease income
volatility. Burgess and Donaldson (2012) use the same identification strategy and find that railroads in
India made prices and income less responsive to shocks.
    A different strand of the literature is directed toward the impact of infrastructure in
contemporaneous developing countries and makes use of data with a shorter time dimension and a
smaller space dimension, often micro-survey data (e.g., Yamauchi et al. 2011, Casaburi et al. 2013,
Asher and Novosad 2016). Using (quality) improvements in road quality jointly with Indonesian
household panel and village census data (1995–2007), Yamauchi et al. (2011) claim that the increase
on household income growth and non-agricultural labor supply due to improved connectivity supports
complementarity between education and quality of local roads. Casaburi et al. (2013) employs a
genuine experimental design in rural road rehabilitation in Sierra Leone to estimate the impact on
transport costs and market prices and test alternative models of price formation. They find price
reductions in rice and cassava, larger for cassava and for locations remote from urban centers, and
smaller in markets located in production areas. Part of the research on developing countries particularly
considers the impact of transport and trading infrastructure on transaction costs, trade margins,
commodity prices, household income, welfare, and supply response (Minten and Kyle 1999, Jacoby
2000, Jacoby and Minten 2008, Goyal 2010, Zant 2016). A key motivation for this research is the
impact of high transaction costs on low input, low productivity, and low growth agriculture, and
thereby on welfare of rural households. Studying food prices in Zaire, both across regions and between
products, Minten and Kyle (1999) show that transportation costs explain differences in food prices
between producer regions and urban Kinshasa, and that road quality is the key determinant of
transportation costs. Inspired by the difficulty of experimental designs in infrastructure, Jacoby (2000)
and Jacoby and Minten (2008) take the reverse route and use the economic impact of transport costs
on various economic variables and economic behavior (wages, value of agricultural land, household
income, migration), in the absence of road infrastructure, in order to measure the potential gains of
putting road infrastructure in place. Empirical application to Nepal data supports a substantial benefit
to the poor which is, however, not large enough to reduce income equality (Jacoby 2000). Madagascar
household data suggest large gains in income from improved infrastructure for remote households, but
gains are small relative to the improved non-farm earning opportunities in town (Jacoby and Minten
2008). Focusing on marketing infrastructure in the soy market in Madhya Pradesh, Goyal (2010) finds
increased soybean prices, decreased price dispersion, and increased area under soy cultivation, due to
the introduction of a direct marketing channel by a major private company. Zant (2016) also finds a
positive supply response of tobacco growers in Malawi due to improved market access caused by the
introduction of a new auction floor.
    In this study, we provide empirical evidence of the impact of rail transport services on dispersion
of market prices of agricultural commodities. The estimation strategy is similar to the one used in Aker
(2010), and the topic is closely related to literature that explains the impact of trade costs on prices
(e.g., Minten and Kyle 1999). The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. In section II, we
briefly characterize the Malawi economy, present details on Malawi rail infrastructure and rail freight,
and document the collapse of domestic rail freight since January 2003. In section III, we explain the
methodology underlying the empirical estimation and the identification strategy. In section IV we
present and discuss estimations, and in section V we give a summary and conclusion.




                                                   3
     II. THE MALAWI ECONOMY, TRANSPORT BY RAIL AND DOMESTIC TRADE IN AGRICULTURAL
                                    COMMODITIES

                                               The Malawi Economy

Malawi is a small landlocked country in the south of Africa, measuring approximately 800 km from
north to south and 150 km from east to west, in area size around 40% of the UK, bordering in the
northwest with Zambia, in the northeast with Tanzania, and in the south with Mozambique. A large
lake, Lake Malawi, part of the Great Rift Valley, stretches from north to south, along the east border
of the country (see figure 1). During the study period (1998-2006), the population increased from close
to ten million to 13 million and is mostly rural: only a small fraction (11% to 15%) lives in the cities
Lilongwe, Blantyre, Mzuzu, and Zomba. More than 80% of the Malawi population depends for food
and income on subsistence farming. The incidence of poverty is high: more than 50% of the population
in Malawi is poor (Integrated Household Survey 2005 [IHS-2], National Statistical Office), poverty is
extremely high in remote rural districts (e.g., Chitipa 67.2%, Nsanje 76.0%, and Chikwawa 65.8%),
and in the southern region at least ten percentage points higher relative to other regions. Malawi suffers
from occasional food shortages due to drought and poor harvests (see Zant 2012, 2013). The key food
crop is maize, followed by cassava, rice, groundnuts, and beans, all with considerably smaller shares.
Nearly every city, town, or larger village has one or more markets for agricultural food crops on a
regular basis, often daily or weekly. Both local farmers and traders operate on these markets.
    Tobacco is by far the most important cash crop. Just like the other major cash crops, sugar and tea,
tobacco cultivation dates back to the colonial period. Tobacco, however, has become nearly completely
smallholder-based in the course of the 1990s (see Zant 2016), while tea and sugar production is (still)
mainly on account of estates. The major export crops are marketed in a different way relative to food
crops: through auctions in the case of tobacco and tea, and through a large processing company (Llovo)
in the case of sugar. Tobacco and sugar exports are also transported by rail.

  Malawi Markets for Agricultural Commodities: Production, Prices, Domestic Trade and Demand

In the empirical analyses, we consider prices of a few food crops, notably maize, rice, groundnuts, and
beans. These food crops are important crops in the Malawi context where maize takes an outstanding
position, produced by nearly all farm households and accounting for 50 to 60% of the diet of most
people in Malawi. Production of maize, rice, and beans is entirely consumed domestically, although,
in case of bumper crops, small quantities are exported. Groundnuts are partly exported, but, again, the
bulk of production is consumed domestically. With the exception of rice, these crops are cultivated in
all Malawi districts (see supplemental appendix). Cultivation of groundnuts is concentrated in the
central region and less common in the southern region, and pulses is concentrated in the southern
region and less common in the north and central region.
    Seasonality in production combined with a constant demand translates into strong seasonality in
prices: prices tend to be low in the months after harvesting (April to June), and subsequently increase
continuously to reach high levels just before the next harvest is available. Differences between highs
and lows are often larger than 100% (see supplemental appendix), and this has major implications for
food security (see, for example, Kaminski et al. 2016). Since price differences across markets are an
important driver of trade in agricultural commodities, variations in price seasonality across markets
are likely to trigger trade. Seasonality in prices is more pronounced in urban areas, due to higher
income, larger population, and lower local supply. Price seasonality is, on average, largest in maize,
smallest in rice, and groundnuts and beans are in between.2 Maize is also an exception in terms of
(relative) value: rice, beans, and groundnuts are high value crops with prices of, on average, four to


    2. We calculate seasonality in prices by dividing monthly prices with average price. The average price is a centered
12-months average with a moving window. The resulting number that measures the extent to which monthly prices diverge
from the season average is dimensionless and automatically takes account of price changes over time.
                                                           4
five times the price of maize (but with distinct variations by crop, by year, and by market, see
supplemental appendix). Trade in high value crops is more attractive due to proportionately lower trade
costs.
     The predominantly small-scale domestic trading business in food crops is undertaken by farmers,
small, medium, and large traders, wholesalers, maize processing firms, and ADMARC. The dispersion
of the size distribution of trader businesses and the prevalence of many small scale businesses suggest
constant returns to scale in trade (Fafchamps et al. 2005). Most “district to district” trade of maize runs
from farmers to small and medium traders and occasionally to larger traders and wholesalers. Around
75% of all traders buy directly from farmers and sell as a retailer (Fafchamps et al. 2005). Trading
channels vary by location, but the bulk of maize trade is in the hands of the private sector. Survey data
indicate that average distance between purchase location and sale location of maize transactions is
around 55 km with a maximum of 200 km (Fafchamps et al. 2005).
     Although transport of agricultural produce by rail is a cheap transport alternative, transport by road
is the dominant mode of transport of trade in agricultural products in Malawi. For a variety of reasons,
however, domestic transport costs of transport by truck are very high: the main causes include poor
(secondary) roads, high petrol prices, inefficient small loads, no backloads, no scale economies, credit
constraints, and limited competition (see Lall et al. 2009, Zant 2013). The trunk road network (see
appendix, figure A1) connecting cities and district towns functions reasonably well, but the lack of
good secondary roads leaves many locations underserved. Cheap transport services in Malawi
potentially create large welfare gains and enhance the scope for economic growth. If fully operational,
the (extended) railway system in Malawi is therefore an interesting complement to the currently
dominant mode of transport.

                          Railway Infrastructure, Operations and Transport Costs

The Malawi rail network consists of a single rail line with a total length within Malawi of 797 km,
running from Zambia in the west (where it runs 25 km into Zambian territory to Chipata), to the east
via Lilongwe and Salima, and next to the south where—in the district of Balaka—the line splits into a
line farther south to Blantyre and Beira in Mozambique, and a line to the east to Nacala in Mozambique
(see figure 1). Historically, the line is operated by a government-owned railway company, Malawi
Railways. However, on December 1, 1999 a 20-year concession for the operation of the network and
supply railway transport services has been awarded to Central East African Railways (CEAR). This
concession, an integrated part of a larger concession (with the US-based Railroad Development
Corporation, as main concessionary), known as the Nacala corridor, further consists of the port of
Nacala in Mozambique, a railway line that runs from Nacala to the Malawi border, and a 26 km railway
line from Mchinji at the western border of Malawi to Chipata in Zambia. The Mozambique parts are
owned by the parastatal Mozambique railway company CFM and operated by the joint venture
Corredor de Desenvolvimento do Norte (CDN)3. Investment in railway lines in the region is driven, in
the first place, by the exploration of quarrying and mining companies.4




    3. See B.J. Knapp and H. Posner III, ‘A luta continua!,’ Railway Gazette International, June 2004, 160.6, 363. Since
privatization in 1999 and up to the time of writing, several other private sector parties have participated in CDN.
    4. A search on SSA railways in the archives of news sources (All Africa [www.allafrica.com], The International
Railway Journal, Railway Gazette International) generates nearly exclusively articles related to mining.
                                                           5
Figure 1. Malawi Railway Network and Selected Agricultural Markets




Source: VU SPINlab.

Note: the asterisk on the map indicates the railway bridge at Rivirivi, Balaka.




                                                             6
The rail network has not been fully operational in the past, among other things because of the civil
war in Mozambique (1977–1992), destruction by floods, and poor maintenance. Lall et al. (2009)
characterize the role of railroads in Malawi as follows: “…rail has historically been the main mode
for international freight transport, connecting Malawi with its southern neighbors of Mozambique,
Zimbabwe and South Africa. However, the civil war in Mozambique from the mid-seventies cut off
the two main rail arteries—the Nacala and Beira-Sena lines. With the Nacala line being mined and
the destruction of the main bridge across the Zambezi River on the Beira-Sena lines, the importance
of rail in Malawi’s international freight movements has declined.”
     However, the (potential) importance of the railway for domestic trade in the Malawi economy is
acknowledged in policy documents: “Rail transportation is also an important mode of transport for rural
farmers who usually use the train to move their farm produce to main markets in the cities or trading
centers. Such commodities include tomatoes, pigeon peas and other vegetables. In 2006, CEAR (Central
East African Railways) recorded approximately 480,000 passengers moved largely smallholder farmers.
Since 2000, CEAR moved over 250,000 tons of local products to main markets locally but has been
experiencing reduced usage by the locals to transport their commodities using rail transportation.”
(Millennium Challenge Corporation 2011).
     What about unit transport costs by rail relative to unit transport costs by road? World Bank (2006)
compares local road transport costs in 2003 with average per ton-kilometer tariffs for a number of sub-
Sahara African corridors and rail operators. Unit road transport costs are calculated to be a factor 1.4
to 3.1 higher.5 Donaldson (2010) claims that road transport in India is 4.5 times more costly relative
to rail transport. Various studies further stress the role of rail transport in keeping road tariffs in check,
and this is particularly relevant to Malawi which has notoriously high road transport costs (see Lall et
al. 2009). In summary, rail transport is clearly cheap relative to road transport and potentially leads to
reductions in unit road transport costs. Moreover, in many sub-Sahara African countries, road
infrastructure is supplied at less than full recovery cost, creating a road-rail competition imbalance
(World Bank 2006, Teravaninthorn and Raballand 2008)

              Transport by Rail and the January 2003 Collapse of Domestic Freight by Rail

What can we learn from data on Malawi transport by rail? Figure 2 shows Malawi transport by rail
(freight in ton/km) in the period 1997–2007. Despite fluctuations, the figure reveals a clear structural
break in trade volume starting in January 2003 when a large decrease of freight occurred. The large
decrease coincides with a nearly total collapse of domestic trade, and, somewhat less pronounced, by
a drop in passenger transport (see appendix, figures A2 and A3).
    The collapse in rail transport expressed in the figures is for a large part6 on account of the disruption
of a bridge at Rivirivi in Balaka district, located in the center of the rail network (see figure 1), in its
turn caused by a tropical storm named Delfina. Delfina started on December 30, 2002, at the northwest
coast of Madagascar, intensified while moving westward before hitting northeast Mozambique on
December 31, and weakened while moving inland by January 1, 2003 into Mozambique and Malawi.
By January 9, Delfina had died out. The major damage of the storm was done in Mozambique. In
Malawi, the storm's remnants caused flooding in several districts, although not widespread. Delfina
damaged roads, and, most importantly for our study, destroyed the railway bridge at Rivirivi, in Balaka
district. The storm further destroyed about 3,600 houses, and around 30,000 people were forced to
leave their homes; floods affected 57,000 properties, damaging 23,500 ha of agricultural land.7 Delfina

     5. Average tariffs for, respectively, road and rail transport services in US$ per ton-kilometer are: 7.9, 5.3 (Senegal-
Mali, Transrail), 7.9, 5.5 (Cote d’Ivoire-Burkina/Mali, Sitarail), 11.2, 6.3 (Cameroon-Chad, Camrail), 10.0, 5.5
(Mozambique, CCFB/CFM), and 13.5, 4.3 (Tanzania-Great Lakes, TRC), with in parentheses respectively corridor and
rail operator (World Bank 2006).
     6. The drop also coincides with the closure of a quarry at Changalume (86 km north of Blantyre) in 2002, which used
to supply clinker to a Blantyre cement plant. Unfortunately, we are unable to construct local freight data excluding freight
of clinker. The closure is unlikely to affect market prices of agricultural commodities.
     7. Despite the casualties and damage, we were unable, using annual aggregate data sourced from the Ministry of
Agriculture and Food Security, to find an adverse impact on agricultural production of the affected districts.
                                                             7
killed eight people in Malawi, prompting President Muluzi to declare the country a disaster area on
January 11 (source: Wikipedia).


Figure 2. All Trade by Rail (Monthly)
                      10000



                       9000



                       8000



                       7000



                       6000
x1000 ton-kilometer




                       5000



                       4000



                       3000



                       2000



                       1000



                          0




Source: CEAR.


    The decrease in freight was, however, not uniform across types of freight. Export and import freight
by rail has shown a different development relative to domestic freight by rail. Malawi exports tobacco,
sugar, and beans, and imports fuel, fertilizer, and food aid, all key products for the Malawi economy.
Part of imports and exports are transported by rail because of low costs for exporters and importers
and because of stable turnover for the railway company. Also, food aid is claimed to be efficiently and
cost effectively transported by rail (see the archive of All Africa [allafrica.com]). CEAR annual freight
data (ton/kilometer moved) show large increases in exports in 1999 and 2000, possibly associated with
the privatization of railway services and enhanced by the 1998 devaluation of the Malawi kwacha (see
supplemental appendix). Export and import freight were also much less affected by the 2003 bridge
collapse, although tobacco exports have come to a complete standstill.8 The average share of local
freight (vis-à-vis international trade) has dropped from around 50% before 2003 to around 10% from
2003 onwards (see supplemental appendix). The data suggest that CEAR has prioritized more
profitable imports and exports rather than local freight and passenger services.9
    Repair of the bridge in the period after the storm and restarting railway operations took quite a
while; disagreements between CEAR and the Malawi government as to who should pay to rebuild the

     8. Note that the bulk of tobacco for export is sourced from central and northern Malawi (see Zant [2016]).
     9. The bias towards international freight is apparent from the operational strategy of CEAR reported in various
newspapers (see, for example, All Africa.com). Alternatively, domestic passenger services were suspended for periods and
for segments in the network partly due to disagreements with the Malawi government about the extent of subsidy for these
services (see The Chronicle, February 7, 2006).
                                                           8
bridge caused substantial delay in making the railway line operational again. In May 2005, close to
two and a half years later, and with support from USAlD and the UK DfID, the Rivirivi railway bridge
was reconstructed, and rail transport operations were resumed.10
     The dramatic sequence of events has created an interesting opportunity to measure the impact of
rail transport services on markets. For a rigorous impact measurement, one ideally needs records of
bilateral trade flows by rail, including prices by market and traded quantities of agricultural products
by source and destination both before and after the disaster had taken place. Unfortunately, such data
on trade by rail are not available. As a matter of fact, we also do not know to what extent trade in
agricultural commodities by rail takes place in the form of passenger trade—smallholder farmers and
traders travelling by train to nearby town and city markets in order to sell their produce—or in the form
of formal freight.11 What is available is data on market prices of agricultural commodities for a large
number of markets in Malawi. Hence, in this study, we aim to measure the impact of railway services
on market prices of these agricultural products.


        III. MEASURING THE IMPACT OF RAILWAY SERVICES ON DISPERSION OF MARKET PRICES

                                                             Data

For the empirical work, we use monthly retail market prices of agricultural commodities taken from
the Agro-Economic Survey of the Ministry of Agriculture and Food Security. We have these data for
a long period (from 1991/92 to 2008/09), for a large number of markets (around 70) and for a large
number of agricultural commodities and livestock products (around 20). However, for the purpose of
this study, we use a limited subset: we use price data of only four crops (maize, rice, groundnuts, and
beans prices), for 27 markets and for the period from January 1997 to December 2007. We have
selected crops that are widely produced and consumed, markets that have the most complete price
data,12 and a sample period that covers a distinct number of years before and after the bridge collapse.
Even the selected price data are not complete, and, more troublesome, especially in the period of key
interest to our research (around January 2003), a substantial drop in the completeness of the data
occurs, most likely due to the food crises at the time (see supplemental appendix).13
    All distances used in the empirical part are distances as the crow flies, calculated using standard
Great Circle Distances, and based on latitude-longitude coordinates of locations (markets, railway
stations). We are aware that distance measured as the crow flies differs from road distance and that
road distance is the relevant concept for transport costs. However, since we do not exactly know the
(changes in) road distance at the time, we rather avoid the likely but uncertain error and prefer the clear
and transparent approximation of distance.
    In the estimations we include the following three covariates ( , ): rainfall, population density,
and per capita (gross) income. Rainfall is an annual index of crop season rainfall in mm. normalized
with the long-run average crop season rainfall in mm. Rainfall is recorded in around 30 weather
stations and attributed to markets on the basis of proximity. We expect that above average rainfall

     10. Personal communication of the author with CEAR staff. In January, 2005, The Railway Gazette International
(161.1, 12-14) reported: ”Work to repair damage to the Rivirivi Bridge caused by Cyclone Delfina in January 2003 is
nearing completion, and CEAR hopes to restore train services shortly.”
     11. Fafchamps et al. (2005) report that, in their 2000 Malawi trader survey, none of the traders made use of transport
by train. However, the impact that we are after also concerns farmers (rather than traders) who take up trading activities
and sell their output in a nearby town to fetch a higher price rather than selling at the farm gate or the local market. Evidence
on Ugandan coffee farmers suggests that such activities are not uncommon (see Fafchamps and Vargas-Hill [2005]). A
nearby railway station may make this proposition even more profitable for a farmer.
     12. In order to maintain the informational content of prices, we have refrained from imputing values for missings.
     13. Malawi and Malawi agriculture suffered from floods and inundation in 2001 and from droughts in 2002, leading
to a prolonged food crisis. Under these circumstances, one may expect that markets do not operate normally. Therefore,
we carefully verified the number of available observations in the estimations, especially in the period from January 2003
onwards.
                                                               9
increases crop production and the availability of agricultural commodities after harvest, and increased
supply will reduce prices. Hence, we expect current crop season rainfall to have a negative impact on
the following year price. In terms of price dispersion, we expect that a large difference in rainfall
between locations increases price dispersion. Rainfall data are from Department of Climate Change
and Meteorological Services, Ministry of Natural Resources, Energy and Environment in Blantyre.
    Population density is the number of people per square kilometer, by Extension Planning Area
(EPA) or district/Rural Development Project (RDP). Population size varies between districts but
moves only gradually over time. Higher population densities are associated with more trade and more
efficient trade (see Fafchamps et al. 2005). Hence, we expect price dispersion between locations to
decrease the larger the population density in both locations. Population data are from the National
Statistical Office in Zomba, and district area is taken from www.geohive.com.
    Per capita income is an annual district variable, constructed as the sum of agricultural income and
imputed urban income. Gross income from agriculture is calculated by multiplying agricultural
production with average retail market prices, both by crop season and district and by summing over
crops and livestock products.14 All prices are deflated with the consumer price index for rural areas
(source: National Statistical Office, Zomba, Malawi). We then exploit data on rural and urban
population by district: we first calculate the per capita agricultural income by using rural population
data by district. Next, we assume that the highest per capita agricultural income in the region is related
to per capita income of the urban population: we impute n times the region highest per capita
agricultural income to the urban population, where n reflects the productivity differences between
urban and rural workers.15,16 Per capita income accounts for demand, and we expect that a higher per
capita income increases demand and pushes up prices of agricultural commodities. Large differences
in income between locations will, ceteris paribus, increase price dispersion. All covariates are
expressed in terms of the natural logarithm of the absolute value of the difference of between markets
(ln|xk-xj|).

                                             Theoretical Considerations

Costs of railway transport are relatively low compared to transport costs by road, which is the standard
mode of transport in Malawi. Farmers and traders in Malawi, based in areas near to a railway station,
potentially benefit from these cheap transport services. The lower transport costs enhance trade in
agricultural commodities markets along the railway line, increasing flows of goods from surplus to
deficit areas and thereby raising low prices in surplus areas and reducing high prices in deficit areas.
Hence, availability of railway transport services should reduce price dispersion across markets along
the railway line. The key mechanism that drives this process is standard profit maximizing producer
behavior with transaction costs.




                                               Empirical Specification


     14. We distinguish the crops maize (local, composite, and hybrid), rice, millet, sorghum, cassava, sweet potatoes,
groundnuts, pulses, cotton, tobacco, tea, and sugar, and the livestock products steak, pork, mutton, and goat meat.
     15. Urban population only refers to a fraction of the population of the districts of Lilongwe, Blantyre, Zomba, and
Mzimba. We use n = 1.5; However, a range of values varying between one and three did not fundamentally change the
estimation results. We cannot calibrate the value of n with GDP data because of the subsistence character of the Malawi
economy: home-consumed production is included in our per capita income concept, but it does not show up in per capita
GDP.
     16. There is a multitude of explicit and implicit assumptions in this per capita income calculation with many arbitrary
elements, which many researchers will label as “heroic.” Nevertheless, the constructed data should give a sensible order of
magnitude approximation for per capita income.
                                                            10
For estimating impact we apply a panel fixed effect strategy and use the following regression model:

   ,   =     +              ,       +                 	   	         ,   +            ,   ,




                   +            (       .   )+             (                .   )+   +       +      +      ,



where Yjk,t is the dispersion of prices across markets j and k, at time t, ‘connected by rail’ is a variable
with a value ln(distance) if both markets are less than 20 km away from a railway station and zero
otherwise, where distance measures the distance in kilometres between the markets, Xn,jk,t is a vector
of n market-pair variables at time t, affecting the dispersion of prices across markets j and k, time is a
time trend, season is seasonal dummy, ωl, φt and ηjk are market, time, and market-pair fixed effects
and ζjk,t is a cluster robust error term.
    There are several ways to measure dispersion of prices across markets (Yjk,t), like, for example, the
coefficient of variation or the maximum minus the minimum. We follow Aker (2010) and use (the
natural logarithm of) the absolute price difference across markets (ln|pj-pk|). In the estimated
specification we have included the lagged dependent variable as explanatory variable in order to filter
out lagged responses. The vector of          , variables are determinants of price dispersion between
markets j and k, associated with either transaction costs (like transport costs, gasoline prices, and
economies of scale), or local supply and demand balances. In the estimated equations we further
include time trends and seasonality by markets.17 Crop and market-specific seasonality in prices is
supported by the data (see supplemental appendix). Monthly fixed effects are included to control for
countrywide variations in agricultural production between years (for example, caused by bumper crops
and droughts).

                                                  Identification Strategy

The exogenous collapse of railway transport services due to the disruption of the railway bridge at
Rivirivi, documented in the previous section, creates a quasi-experimental design that offers an
opportunity to identify the impact of railway services on the dispersion of agricultural commodity
prices. The regression equation represents a panel fixed effect model with markets connected by rail
when the railway was operational, as intervention observations. The coefficient of interest in the
regression equation is : this coefficient reflects the impact of the availability of railway transport
services on the dispersion of agricultural commodity prices. We expect price dispersion to be lower in
locations that have access to railway transport services. Hence, we expect to be negative.

                                                  Intervention Locations

In this study, interventions are the market pairs that are connected with each other by rail when the
railway is operational. Moreover, we have assumed that, after the bridge collapse, all segments of the
network were affected, and, hence, all market pairs formerly connected were no more connected after
the bridge collapse. This assumption is supported by communication with CEAR staff and freight
data on domestic trade (see paragraph on rail operations). We assume that markets potentially have




    17. We discarded the option to interact a time trend and seasonality with market pairs since this nearly exhausts the
degrees of freedom in estimation. Moreover, we do have empirical support for trends and seasonality in prices (which
explains part of the trend and seasonality is price dispersion), but trends and seasonality in prices dispersion are less evident
from the data.
                                                               11
access to rail transport if these markets are less than 20 km away from the nearest railway station.18
Of course, 20 km is an arbitrary cut-off: we have verified the robustness of the estimation results by
taking different cut-off distances (see Robustness of estimation results).



                                       IV. ESTIMATIONS AND DISCUSSION

                                              Other Empirical Issues

In running the estimations, we have assumed that the impact of railway services is geographically
restricted. Transport costs increase more or less proportionally with transport distance (and are, in this
respect, different from search costs). As a result, the impact of availability of transport services is
spatially restricted: transport costs are high and become prohibitive for markets that are a long distance
away. As transport costs translate into higher prices of traded goods, there is a clear trade-off between
“import” and local supply: local production or the use of close local substitutes could be cheaper
alternatives than “import” from far away locations, especially if there is no advantage from
specialization and if the agricultural product could be produced anywhere. Therefore, we assume that
(potential) domestic trade only takes place between markets that are located a limited distance away
from each other.
     How far this distance is needs to be investigated empirically. Aggregate data on freight by rail
indicate that the average distance of freight by rail in case of local freight is 80–115 km and in case of
export or import freight, 180–220 km (calculations based on aggregate CEAR data). For domestic
passengers, the average distance travelled varies from 40 to 80 km. Survey data on domestic trade and
domestic traders, generally using (pickup) trucks as mode of transport, indicate that average distance
between location of purchase and sale location of maize transactions is around 55 km with a maximum
of 200 km (Fafchamps et al. 2005).
    The distance over which crops are traded is likely to be influenced by perishability and storability
of crops, whether the crop is a high- or low-value crop, the geographical spread of production and
consumption, and how large expected gains from trade are. Since high-value crops have relatively
lower transport costs, these crops are likely to be traded over longer distances. Next, trade in perishable
crops is, by nature, spatially restricted: these crops simply degenerate if transported over long distances
and thereby become unsellable (we ignore the possibility of cooled transport which is typically not
feasible for a SSA farmer-trader.) Conversely, storable crops are more suitable to be traded over longer
distances. Trade over longer distances may arise if production areas are more remote from
consumption locations. Finally, the larger the gains the larger the distance over which crops are traded.
These expected gains from trade depend on the difference in prices in each location, which in turn
depends on differences in the supply and demand balance across locations.19 A shortfall of local
production relative to local demand will potentially give rise to high prices and is typical for urban
areas. Seasonality in production will also lead to seasonality in prices, which will be more pronounced
if demand is higher. Hence, differences in seasonality of prices across locations will affect expected
gains from trade.
    Moreover, we have also assumed that the period without railway services between the market pairs
connected by rail is restricted. With the disruption of the railway bridge at Rivirivi, Balaka, a period
started without railway services for markets along the railway line. The start of this period is 100%
accurate. However, it is not clear when this period ended. From personal communication with CEAR
staff we know that the railway bridge at Rivirivi was repaired and rail transport operations were

     18. Practically this implies we have ten markets connected by rail (and thereby 45 intervention market pairs). These
markets are: Bangula, Lilongwe, Limbe, Liwonde, Lizulu, Luchenza, Lunzu, Mchinji, Ntaja, and Salima (see also figure
1; see appendix 8 for a list with markets, distance-to-station, and latitude-longitude coordinates).
     19. Availability of information on prices in several markets is obviously a key determinant of trade flows. Several
studies highlight the importance of search costs and the availability of price information.
                                                          12
resumed in May 2005. However, in the course of time the lack of railway services will lead to
adjustments like the use of alternative modes of transport, increased local cultivation of food, and shifts
in consumption to local substitutes. The speed of adjustment will depend on the availability of cheap
alternative modes of transport, supply response of local production, and the resilience of demand to
shift to other food. These adjustments are likely to have taken place as domestic trade did not recover
after rail transport operations were resumed (see figure 2 and appendix figures A2 and A3). The CEAR
operational strategy favoring international freight may also play a role.
    On the basis of data on passenger and freight transport by rail we have assumed in the estimations
that the period in which the railway is effectively not operational is at least two years and at most three
years. The minimum of two years is further motivated by the limited availability of price data around
2003 (see appendix, figure A2). The maximum of three years is motivated by the fading out of the
impact (see estimation section) and is determined empirically, using a grid procedure (see
supplemental appendix).

                       Selecting Maximum Trading Distance and Sample Period

In the estimations we first employ a basic specification that is uniform across crops with respect to
maximum trading distance (100 km), sample period (48 months before and 36 months after collapse),
and cutoff distance to rail (20 km). All estimations include season-market dummies, a time trend for
each market, month dummies, and market-pair dummies. Higher order lags of the dependent variable
are included if statistically significant at acceptable levels of accuracy. This strategy made us include
a number of lagged dependent variables, which varied by crop. In all estimations the coefficients of
lagged dependent variables are positive, decreasing in size with the order of the lag, and statistically
significant. Estimations with a specification that is uniform across crops are fine for maize but are not
convincing for other crops (see supplemental appendix). We need to relax to assumption of a uniform
maximum trading distance and sample period/period before and after bridge collapse to allow for
heterogeneity between crops. We determine appropriate values of the maximum trading distance and
the relevant period before and after the date of the collapse empirically, using a simple grid procedure:
we estimate with a maximum trading distance varying from 70 km to 300 km (with a 10 km step), and
with 24 to 48 months before and 24 to 36 months after January 2003. We use this procedure in order
to find, simultaneously, the appropriate maximum trading distance and relevant period but also to
assess the robustness of the estimations. Selected output of this exercise is reported in the supplemental
appendix.
    On the basis of the tables and the underlying estimations reported in the supplemental appendix,
we observe for all four commodities sets of estimations with statistically significant ATEs with the
required negative sign around a specific combination of maximum trading distance and sample period.
The regularity of these estimation outcomes—both across commodities and for each individual
commodity across combinations—offers comfort in and credibility of the estimations. For all
commodities we see impacts disintegrate if the period without railway services is extended to the year
2006 (not shown, available from the author on request): apparently the period effectively without
railway services (i.e., the period with effectively higher dispersion of agricultural market prices) is
limited to the years 2003, 2004, and 2005, which is consistent with the fact that railway services
resumed operations in May 2005. In fact, this motivated us to include estimations that exactly matched
this period (January 2003 to April 2005), which further improved estimations in the case of beans,
groundnuts, and, especially, maize. Also, with a maximum trading distance of 70 km or less, and with
only two full years of observations before and after the bridge collapse (January 2003), the estimations
tend to generate spurious outcomes. Next, the impact in the case of rice becomes significant with a
maximum trading distance of 140–180 km and for groundnuts with a maximum trading distance of
200–300 km, opposed to around 100 km for maize and beans. The larger trading distance is possibly
the result of the uneven spread of rice cultivation compared to the other commodities. Also good
storability (of rice and groundnuts) will make trade over longer distances easier.

                                                    13
    The impact coefficients of all commodities with the exception of beans are around -11%, while in
the case of beans the impact tends to be slightly stronger (see supplemental appendix). We assume that
this should be associated with the higher perishability of beans and the related reduced scope for
intertemporal arbitrage (relative to storable commodities). Other studies also confirm a higher impact
in case of perishable crops (see, for example, Jensen 2007, Muto and Yamano 2009, Aker and
Fafchamps 2014).


Table 1. Impact (ATE) of Rail Transport Services on Price Dispersion: Selected Output

    Dependent variable:ln|pjt-pkt|              (1)                  (2)                (3)                  (4)
    Crop / Commodity                           Maize                 Rice            Groundnuts             Beans
    Connected by rail                          -0.119***           -0.109***              -0.094**          -0.116***
                                               (0.0395)            (0.0416)               (0.0374)          (0.0346)
  Lagged dependent variable (t-1)              0.183***             0.182***              0.245***           0.193***
                                               (0.0329)            (0.0236)               (0.0210)          (0.0552)
  Lagged dependent variable (t-2)                                   0.096***              0.056***           0.095**
                                                                   (0.0214)               (0.0223)          (0.0441)
  Lagged dependent variable (t-3)                                                          0.053**
                                                                                          (0.0262)
  Season x market dummies                          Yes                  yes                  yes                yes
  Time trend x market dummies                      Yes                  yes                  yes                yes
  Market-pair dummies                              Yes                  yes                  yes                yes
  Month dummies                                    Yes                  yes                  yes                yes
  Covariates                                       No                   no                    no                no
  R2                                             0.3898               0.4234               0.4202            0.4863
  Max trading distance (km)                        110                  160                  250               110
  Sample period                                1/99-4/05            1/99-4/05            1/99-4/05          1/00-4/05
  Months before 1/03 and after 12/02             48; 28               48; 28               48; 28             36; 28
  Number of observations                          2062                 2748                 2930               1534
  no. of intervention pairs                        251                  366                  365               157
  no. of control pairs connected by rail           161                  190                  210                107
  no. of other controls (not connected)           1650                 2192                 2355               1270
  Long term impact                               -0.146               -0.150               -0.146             -0.164
Note: The dependent variable: ln(abs(pjt-pkt)) is the natural logarithm of the price difference between locations j and k in
month t. Connected by rail has the value ln(distance) if both markets are less than 20 km away from a railway station
while the railway was operational, and zero elsewhere (in case of groundnuts less than 10 km). Prices are deflated with
the rural consumer price index (source: National Statistical Office, Zomba, Malawi). Robust standard errors in
parentheses below the coefficient are clustered by market pairs. The long term effect is calculated as /(1 − ∑         ) (see
regression model above). Estimation results with two-way clustered standard errors (by markets of each market pair) are
shown in the supplemental appendix.
∗   p < 0.10. ∗∗ p < 0.05. ∗∗∗ p < 0.01.

    Table 1 shows a selection of the estimation results that allow for different maximum trading
distances and sample periods across commodities and summarizes the key results of this study. The
estimations confirm a statistically significant reduction in the dispersion of agricultural commodity
prices across markets of around 9–12%. The size of the reduction is remarkably similar across
commodities. The inclusion of the lagged dependent variable allows the distinction of short- and long-
run impact, where the long-run impact is calculated as /(1 − ∑           ), using the notation from the
regression model. Long-run impacts range from a reduction of 14% to a reduction of 17%. These
results point at substantial welfare effects from the enhanced efficiency of markets for agricultural
commodities. The reduction in price dispersion is also likely to affect growth since lower food prices
in subsistence economies constitute an important transmission mechanism to higher productivity (see
De Janvry and Sadoulet 2010).



                                                             14
                                          Robustness of Estimation Results

A number of robustness checks are implemented. We have repeated the estimations of table 1 with
inclusion of covariates, notably (relative) per capita gross income, (the sum of market pairs) population
density, and (relative) rainfall. Estimated impacts, reported in table 2, come close to the ones reported
in table 1. Apparently the covariates are either independent of the intervention variable or well captured
by the set of fixed effects applied in the basic estimations (or both).


Table 2. Impact (ATE) of Rail Transport Services on Price Dispersion: Including Covariates

 Dependent variable: ln|pjt-pkt|               (1)             (2)              (3)          (4)
 Crop / Commodity                             Maize            Rice          Groundnuts     Beans
 Connected by rail                           -0.111**         -0.124***        -0.088**    -0.097***
                                             (0.0422)         (0.0408)        (0.0372)     (0.0342)
 Lagged dependent variable (t-1)             0.159***         0.189***         0.244***     0.171***
                                             (0.0304)         (0.0238)        (0.0219)     (0.0637)
 Lagged dependent variable (t-2)                               0.090***        0.062***      0.090*
                                                              (0.0229)        (0.0231)     (0.0342)
 Lagged dependent variable (t-3)                                                0.053*
                                                                              (0.0273)
 Season x market dummies                         yes              yes             yes          yes
 Time trend x market dummies                     yes              yes             yes          yes
 Market-pair dummies                             yes              yes             yes          yes
 Month dummies                                   yes              yes             yes          yes
 Covariates                                      yes              yes             yes          yes
 R2                                           0.4098           0.4301           0.4246      0.5026
 Max trading distance (km)                       110              160            250          110
 Sample period                               1/99-4/05        1/99-4/05       1/99-4/05    1/00-4/05
 Months before 1/03 and after 12/02            48; 28           48; 28          48; 28       36; 28
 Number of observations                         1834             2554            2801         1364
 no. of intervention pairs                       212              317            335          127
 no. of control pairs connected by rail          139              172             196          84
 no. of other controls (not connected)          1483             2065            2270         1153
 long term impact                              -0.132           -0.172          -0.137       -0.132
Note: See Table 1.



    Measured impact may be the result of already existing differences in markets not related to the
railway line as the railway track was not randomly placed. Hence, we need to show that variables
develop along a common trend and have similar means and distributions outside the intervention
period. Table 3 shows tests on the common trend assumption, outside the intervention period (January
2003 to April 2005). The tests suggest that we cannot reject the hypothesis of a common trend in all
cases with the exception of groundnuts.
    Tests on means and distribution of intervention and non-intervention market pairs, outside the
intervention period (see appendix table A1) reveal a mixed picture: some means tests are
indeterminate. Many variables, however, both at the level of markets and market pairs, have different
means and distributions. But how surprising is this? These markets are in different locations with
different population, different endowments, and climate. In fact, we need differences between markets
to generate trade. In summary, the test outcomes reported in table 3 and in the appendix do not
invalidate the impact estimations especially as long as we adequately condition the variation in price
dispersion on relevant covariates.




                                                         15
Table 3. Common Trends in Price Dispersion Outside the Intervention Period*

 Market-pair data                Differences in trends
                                 F-statistic (n,m)             p-value
 Maize price: ln|pj-pk|                 F(2, 67): 0.52           0.599
 Rice price: ln|pj-pk|                  F(2, 103): 0.16          0.856
 Groundnuts price: ln|pj-pk|            F(2,180): 5.11         0.007***
 Beans price: ln|pj-pk|                 F(2, 67): 0.82           0.444
 Maize price: |pj-pk|                   F(2, 67): 2.32           0.106
 Rice price: |pj-pk|                    F(2, 103): 0.25          0.776
 Groundnuts price: |pj-pk|              F(2,180): 9.02         0.000***
 Beans price: |pj-pk|                   F(2, 67): 1.09           0.341



    Next, we have run the estimations with two subsets of controls as a robustness check. One may
argue that using remote market pairs as controls is merely measuring the difference between remote
market pairs and market pairs along the rail line. Therefore, we have re-estimated impact by comparing
market pairs (both) connected by rail with market pairs of which one market is located along the rail
line (connected by rail) and the other market is not. Market pairs near to the rail line but not connected
are more likely to be similar to market pairs that are both connected to the rail line. In this way, we
avoid comparing remote, isolated, and exclusively rural market pairs with exclusively urban market
pairs, market pairs that are both located in a relatively densely populated area.
    Conversely, one may argue that market pairs of which only one market is connected with the rail
line are to some extent also benefitting from rail connection. Since this will blur the result, estimation
with non-connected market pairs as controls should be preferred. Therefore, we have re-estimated
impact by comparing market pairs (both) connected by rail with market pairs of which both markets
are not connected by rail. The results (see appendix tables A2 and A3) are different but to a large extent
confirm previous results: coefficients of the impact variable and lagged dependent variables have the
right sign and statistical significance is acceptable to good in most estimations. The assertion that
impacts reflect a selective choice of control market pairs is not supported by these robustness checks.
    As a final robustness check, we have re-run the estimations with a smaller/larger number of
intervention locations (see previous section). As a starting point, we have used 20 km as cutoff to
define locations to be intervention locations. Alternatively, we used as cutoff less than 10 km, leading
to eight intervention locations and 28 intervention market pairs, and less than 30 km, leading to 13
intervention locations and 78 intervention market pairs. The outcome of this exercise (not shown)
indicates that the estimated impact remains more or less the same with a smaller number of intervention
points but deteriorates substantially with a larger number of intervention points.

                               Alternative Explanations and Potential Threats

One may question the estimated impact of transport services by rail on agricultural commodity prices
on several grounds. We consider three concerns in some detail. The first concern is about the bias
caused by large cities. One may argue that the estimated impact is exclusively due to trade with the
two main cities, Lilongwe and Blantyre. In terms of population these cities are much larger than all
other cities and towns (Lilongwe and Blantyre are similar in population size, and five to six times
larger than the third largest city, Mzuzu). Consequently, proportionally more trade will take place
towards these cities and results may be driven by these cities. Omitting observations to a certain degree
confirms this, since the results deteriorate (not shown). However, we do not consider this a major
problem since domestic trade in food is naturally directed from excess supply rural areas towards high
demand urban markets.

                                                          16
     The second concern is about substitutability between rail and road transport. Since road transport
is possibly a close substitute to rail transport, measured impacts are possibly distorted, caused by other
circumstances than the collapse of rail transport or not by the collapse of rail transport alone. If this is
the case, impact is erroneously attributed to rail services or to rail services alone. With about 15,451
km of roads of which 45 percent are paved, the road network is vastly larger than the railroad network
(797 km; for a map of the road network see appendix figure A1). Road infrastructure is clearly the
dominant mode of transportation and readily and widely available. We claim, however, that
substitutability between rail transport services and road transport services is unlikely to be high for
domestic trade in agricultural products in view of transport costs, indivisibilities, and type of services
supplied.
     In sub-Saharan Africa, per ton kilometer costs of transport are on average 40% to 210% higher for
road transport than for rail transport (see descriptive section). Since these are averages calculated for
major African corridors rather than for secondary roads, and since the Malawi road transport market
is far from competitive and characterized by inefficiencies and high costs (see Lall et al. 2009), these
differences between road and rail transport costs are presumably an underestimate of the true
differences between rail and road transport in Malawi. High costs of road transport services make
profitable trade opportunities for smallholder farmers’ sales of agricultural produce in high demand
urban markets unlikely. Also the quantity of output needed to fillup a pickup truck and the (non-
)availability of backhaul cargo could create additional constraints that increase per kg costs of
transport. Conversely, rail transport services are available at lower per unit cost and on more flexible
conditions in terms of quantities transported. For large groups of smallholder farmers and petty traders,
rail transport is therefore the only option to realize income from trade in agricultural commodities.
Costs of road transport are simply prohibitive. Consequently, substitutability between road and rail
transport for this group will be close to negligible.
     The third and final concern is the assumption that the bridge collapse has affected the operationality
of the entire rail network. While this is indeed a strong assumption, we argue that this is a reasonable
assumption in view of the available evidence and also due to the response of the railway operator
(CEAR). The bridge collapse certainly affected the link between the two big cities, Lilongwe and
Blantyre, and also the link between Nacala (Mozambique) and Lilongwe. The total collapse of tobacco
freight by rail—primarily sourced from central and northern Malawi—from 2003 onwards,
corroborates this assertion. Nevertheless, the link between Blantyre, the commercial capital of Malawi,
to the ports of Nacala and Beira remained unaffected by the collapse of the bridge. This is especially
important since it allowed Malawi to maintain essential levels of highly needed imports (fuel and
fertilizer) and exports (sugar and tobacco exports, yielding foreign exchange to finance imports). In
fact, despite a modest drop in import and export freight by rail since 2003, substantial levels of export
and import freight were maintained jointly with a complete wipe-out of domestic freight (see
supplemental appendix). Apparently whatever capacity, operational rail infrastructure, and personnel
was available after the bridge collapse was used for imports and exports. Or, alternatively, the railway
operator has deliberately prioritized high return import and export activities. Import and export freight
only concerns a few mainly non-food products: trade in these products will not affect prices of
agricultural commodities in local domestic markets. The key trade channel that affects supply and
demand of agricultural commodities in local markets is domestic freight and passenger services: these
transport services directly influence the opportunities for trade in agricultural commodities by
smallholder farmers and petty traders. As already mentioned, jointly with the sustained levels of
exports and imports we observe a complete drop of domestic freight since 2003 (see appendix figures
A2 and A3). Also, passenger services appear to have decreased since 2003. The evidence suggests that
the rail operator has deliberately stepped down its activities in domestic trade and passenger services
in view of the setbacks and in an attempt to improve commercial viability of its operations. Officially,
passenger services are claimed to have been suspended after the bridge collapse for lack of subsidy
from the Malawi government. Hence, any impact of rail transport services on local markets of
agricultural commodities through these channels was completely blocked.

                                                    17
                                   V. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION

In this study, we have measured the impact of railway services on the dispersion of market prices of
agricultural commodities in Malawi. For this purpose, we have exploited the quasi-experimental
design of the nearly total collapse of domestic transport by rail in January 2003 due to the destruction
of a railway bridge at Rivirivi, Balaka. Estimations are based on monthly market prices of four
agricultural commodities (maize, groundnuts, rice, and beans), in 27 local markets, for the period
1998–2006. The measured impact varies from a reduction in price dispersion of 9.5% to 12% in the
short run to 14% and 17% in the long run, when railway transport is possible. Perishable and low value
crops (respectively beans and maize) tend to be traded over smaller distances and storable high-value
crops over larger distances (rice and groundnuts). There is some support for a relatively larger impact
on perishable commodities (beans) reflecting the limited scope for intertemporal arbitrage. Results
depend critically on the maximum distance between market pairs, the period included before and after
the collapse, and which markets are assumed to be connected by rail. Estimations are robust for
including covariates and various subsets of control groups.

Conflict of interest: none declared.

                                             REFERENCES

Ahlfeldt, G.M., S.J. Redding, D.M. Sturm, and N. Wolf. 2014. “The Economics of Density:
    Evidence from the Berlin Wall.” NBER Working Paper 20354.
Aker, J.C. 2010. “Information for Markets Near and Far: Mobile Phones and Agricultural Markets in
    Niger.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 2 (3): 46–59.
Aker, J.C., and M. Fafchamps. 2014. “Mobile Phone Coverage and Producer Markets: Evidence
    from West Africa.” World Bank Economic Review 29 (2): 262–92.
Allen, T., and D. Atkin. 2015. “Volatility, Insurance, and the Gains from Trade.” Working Paper
    22276. National Bureau Of Economic Research. Cambridge.
Atkin, D., and D. Donaldson. 2012. “Who’s Getting Globalized? The Size and Implications of
    Intranational Trade Costs.” Working Paper 21439. National Bureau Of Economic Research.
    Cambridge.
Bleakley, H., and J. Lin. 2012. “Portage and Path Dependence.” Quarterly Journal of Economics
    127: 587–644.
Burgess, R., and D. Donaldson. 2012. “Railroads and the Demise of Famine in Colonial India.”
    Working Paper. London School of Economics & Political Science. London.
Casaburi, L., Glennerster R., and T. Suri. 2013. “Rural Roads and Intermediated Trade: Regression
    Discontinuity Evidence from Sierra Leone.” Working Paper. Department for International
    Development. London.
Donaldson, D. 2010. “Railroads of the Raj: Estimating the Impact of Transportation Infrastructure.”
    Working Paper 41. London School of Economics & Political Science. London. (also forthcoming
    in American Economic Review).
Fafchamps, M., E. Gabre-Madhin, and B. Minten. 2005. “Increasing Returns and Market Efficiency
    in Agricultural Trade.” Journal of Development Economics 78: 406–42.
Fafchamps, M., and B. Minten. 2012. “Impact of SMS-Based Agricultural Information on Indian
    Farmers.” World Bank Economic Review 27: 1–32.
Fafchamps, M., and R. Vargas-Hill. 2005. “Selling at the Farmgate or Travelling to the Market.”
    American Journal of Agricultural Economics 87 (3): 717–34.
Feyrer, J. 2009. “Distance, Trade, and Income—The 1967 to 1975 Closing of the Suez Canal as a
    Natural Experiment.” Working Paper 15557. National Bureau Of Economic Research.
    Cambridge.
Goyal, A. 2010. “Information, Direct Access to Farmers and Rural Market Performance in Central
    India.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 2 (3): 22–45.
                                                  18
Jacoby, H.G. 2000. “Access to Markets and the Benefits of Rural Roads.” The Economic Journal
    110: 713–37.
Jacoby, H.G., and B. Minten. 2008. “On measuring the Benefits of Lower Transport Costs.” Policy
    Research Working Paper 4484. World Bank. Washington.
De Janvry, A., and E. Sadoulet. 2010. “Agriculture for Development in Africa: Business-as Usual or
    New Departures.” Journal of African Economies 19 (Suppl 2): ii7–39.
Jedwab, R., E. Kerby, and A. Moradi. 2014. “History, Path Dependence and Development: Evidence
    from Colonial Railroads, Settlers and Cities in Kenya.” Working Paper WPS/2014-04. Centre for
    the Study of African Economies. Oxford.
Jedwab, R., and A. Moradi. 2016. “The Permanent Effects of Transportation Revolutions in Poor
   Countries: Evidence from Africa.” Review of Economics and Statistics 98 (2): 268-284.
Jensen, R. 2007. “The Digital Provide: Information (Technology), Market Performance, and Welfare
    in the South Indian Fisheries Sector.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 72 (3): 879–924.
Kaminski, J., L. Christiaensen, and C.L. Gilbert. 2016. “Seasonality in Local Food Prices and
    Consumption: Evidence from Tanzania.” Oxford Economic Papers 68 (3): 736–57.
Lall, S.V., H. Wang, and T. Munthali. 2009. “Explaining High Transport Costs Within Malawi, Bad
    Roads or Lack of Trucking Competition?” Policy Research Working Paper 5133. World Bank.
    Washington.
Michaels, G. 2008. “The Effect of Trade on the Demand for Skill: Evidence from the Interstate
    Highway System.” Review of Economics and Statistics 90 (4): 683–701.
Millennium Challenge Corporation. 2011. “Millennium Challenge Corporation: Malawi Compact
    Program Development 2011—2016. Project Concept Paper For The Transport Sector: Promoting
    Economic Growth And Poverty Reduction Through Addressing Transport Infrastructure
    Constraints in Malawi.” Millennium Challenge Account—Malawi Country Office Secretariat.
    www.mca-m.gov.mw. Accessed September 2013.
Minten, B., and S. Kyle. 1999. “The effect of Distance and Road Quality on Food Collection,
    Marketing Margins, and Traders’ Wages: Evidence from the Former Zaire.” Journal of
    Development Economics 60: 467–95.
Muto, M., and T. Yamano. 2009. “The Impact of Mobile Phone Coverage Expansion on Market
    Participation: Panel Data Evidence from Uganda.” World Development 37 (12): 1887–96.
Redding, S.J., and D.M. Sturm. 2008. “The Costs of Remoteness: Evidence from German Division
    and Reunification.” American Economic Review 98 (5): 1766–97.
Teravaninthorn, S., and G. Raballand. 2008. “Transport Prices and Costs in Africa: A Review of the
    Main International Corridors, July, Africa Infrastructure Country Diagnostic, Report No. 14.”
World Bank. 2006. “Sub-Saharan Africa Review of Selected Railway Concessions, Report No.
    36491.” Washington DC, World Bank.
Yamauchi, F., M. Muto, S. Chowdurry, R. Dewina, and S. Sumaryanto. 2011. “Are Schooling and
    Roads Complementary? Evidence from Income Dynamics in Rural Indonesia.” World
    Development 39 (12): 2232–44.
Zant, W. 2012. “The Economics of Food Aid Under Subsistence Farming with an Application to
    Malawi.” Food Policy 37 (1): 124–41.
———. 2013. “How is the Liberalization of Food Markets Progressing? Market Integration and
    Transaction Costs in Subsistence Economies.” World Bank Economic Review 27 (1): 28–54.
———. 2016. “How does Market Access affect Export Supply? The Case of Tobacco Marketing in
    Malawi.” Discussion Paper 16-054/V. Tinbergen Institute.




                                                19
Appendix

Figure A1. Malawi Road Network




Source: VU SPINlab.




                                 20
Figure A2. Domestic Trade by Rail (Annuals)*
                    300 000




                    250 000




                    200 000
Tonnes




                    150 000




                    100 000




                               50 000           total local freight

                                                other local freight (total excluding, empty containers, tobacco and fuel)




                                     -
                                           1997             1998          1999            2000           2001           2002     2003     2004     2005     2006     2007




Source: CEAR

* For the year 2004, we only have data on aggregate tonnage: composition is computed by interpolation.




Figure A3. Number of Domestic Rail Passengers (Annuals)

                               700




                               600




                               500
     thousends of passengers




                               400




                               300




                               200




                               100




                                 0
                                         1997            1998          1999            2000           2001           2002      2003     2004     2005     2006     2007




Source: CEAR.



                                                                                                                    21
Table A1. Mean and Distribution of (Un)treated Observables Outside the Intervention Period*

                                  Unconditional mean              Difference in means           Difference in
                                 (SE)                                                           distributions
                                 Connected Not                    F test (p-value)              D-         p-value
                                 by rail     connected                                          statistic
                                             by rail
  Market pair data
    Maize price: |pj-pk|           4.10 (0.25)    4.34 (0.23)      F(1,75): 0.51 (0.48)             0.047     0.80
    Rice price: |pj-pk|           16.47 (1.64)    17.77 (0.96)     F(1,212): 0.47 (0.50)            0.052     0.41
    Groundnuts price:|pj-pk| 41.70 (5.96)         45.80 (1.98)     F(1,103): 0.43 (0.52)            0.143     0.03**
    Beans price: |pj-pk|          34.67 (3.32)    36.71 (1.89)     F(1,75): 0.29 (0.60)             0.048     0.18
    Distance: distjk               4.57 (0.10)    4.55 (0.05)      F(1,121): 0.03 (0.87)            0.094     0.00***
    Rainfall: |rfj-rfk|            0.18 (0.02)    0.19 (0.01)      F(1,121): 0.38 (0.54)            0.107     0.00***
                                                                                          ***
    Population density:           10.71 (0.16)    10.18 (0.08)     F(1,21): 8.97 (0.00)             0.316     0.00***
    Pc gross income:               0.57 (0.09)    0.50 (0.04)      F(1,121): 0.55 (0.46)            0.189     0.00***
  Market data
    Maize price: pj                3.18 (0.02)    3.15 (0.03)      F(1,26): 0.55 (0.47)             0.107     0.11
    Rice price: pj                 4.51 (0.04)    4.56 (0.03)      F(1,26): 1.19 (0.29)             0.104     0.13
    Groundnuts price: pj           4.87 (0.07)    4.84 (0.05)      F(1,26): 0.06 (0.81)             0.083     0.46
    Beans price: pj                4.80 (0.05)    4.75 (0.06)      F(1,26): 0.30 (0.59)             0.145     0.01**
    Rainfall: rfj                 -0.04 (0.04)    0.00 (0.02)      F(1,26): 0.85 (0.37)             0.230     0.00***
    Population density: pdj        5.41 (0.21)    4.83 (0.12)      F(1,26): 5.95 (0.02)             0.483     0.00***
    pc gross income: gij           6.91 (0.15)    6.82 (0.10)      F(1,26): 0.29 (0.60)             0.191     0.00***
*Outside the intervention period is from January 2003 to April 2005. Market pairs “connected by rail” are market pairs
where both markets are located within a distance of 20 km of a railway station. Market pairs “not connected by rail” are
market pairs of which at least one market is located more than 20 km away from a railway station. The number of markets
is 27 and hence the (potential) number of market pairs 351, but practically less due to imposing a maximum trading distance.
Robust standard errors are clustered by market pairs or markets according to the type of data tested. Prices are deflated
with the rural consumer price index (source: National Statistical Office, Zomba, Malawi).




                                                            22
Testing robustness of the impact of rail transport services on price dispersion.

Table A2. Using Remote Market pairs as Control Group

 Dependent variable: ln|pjt-pkt|            (1)              (2)          (3)          (4)
 Crop / commodity                          Maize            Rice       Groundnuts     Beans
 Connected by rail                        -0.177**         -0.172**       -0.151**   -0.189*
                                          (0.0817)          (.0769)      (0.0715)    (0.1110)
 Lagged dependent variable (t-1)          0.140***          0.182***      0.312***   0.225***
                                          (0.0498)         (0.0317)      (0.0312)    (0.0529)
 Lagged dependent variable (t-2)                            0.105***      0.099***
                                                           (0.0317)      (0.0715)
 Season x market dummies                      yes              yes           yes         yes
 Time trend x market dummies                  yes              yes           yes         yes
 Market-pair dummies                          yes              yes           yes         yes
 Month dummies                                yes              yes           yes         yes
 Covariates                                   no               no            no          no
 R2                                        0.5038           0.4803         0.5194     0.6405
 Max trading distance (km)                   110               180          200         110
 Sample period                            1/99-4/05        1/99-4/05     1/99-4/05   1/00-4/05
 Months before 1/03 and after 12/02         48; 28           48; 28        48; 28      36; 28
 Number of observations                      998              1635          1559        846
 No. of intervention pairs                   251               502          422         178
 No. of control pairs connected by rail      161              235           219         135
 No. of other controls (not connected)       586               898          918         533
 Long term impact                           -0.206           -0.242        -0.257      -0.244
Note to table: see Table 1, main text.




Table A3. Using Nearby Market pairs as a Control Group

 Dependent variable: ln|pjt-pkt|            (1)             (2)           (3)          (4)
 Crop / Commodity                          Maize            Rice       Groundnuts     Beans
 Connected by rail                        -0.130**         -0.174***      -0.109*     -0.203**
                                          (0.0572)         (0.0649)      (0.0581)    (0.0846)
 Lagged dependent variable (t-1)          0.170***          0.194***      0.265***     0.178**
                                          (0.0519)         (0.0278)      (0.0255)    (0.0743)
 Lagged dependent variable (t-2)                            0.087***      0.056**      0.120**
                                                           (0.0279)      (0.0276)    (0.0578)
 Season x market dummies                      yes              yes           yes         yes
 Time trend x market dummies                  yes              yes           yes         yes
 Market-pair dummies                          yes              yes           yes         yes
 Month dummies                                yes              yes           yes         yes
 Covariates                                    no              no            no           no
 R2                                        0.4675           0.4572        0.4111       0.4903
 Max trading distance (km)                     90              140           225         110
 Sample period                            1/99-4/05        1/99-4/05     1/99-4/05   1/00-4/05
 Months before 1/03 and after 12/02         48; 28           48; 28        48; 28      36; 28
 Number of observations                      1036             1859          2225        1058
 No. of intervention pairs                    175              342          451          128
 No. of control pairs connected by rail       110             178           241           97
 No. of other controls (not connected)        751             1339          1533         833
 Long term impact                           -0.157           -0.243        -0.160      -0.290
Note: see Table 1, main text.




                                                      23
Supplemental Appendix to



Trains, Trade and Transaction Costs:

How does Domestic Trade by Rail affect Market Prices

of Malawi Agricultural Commodities?

Wouter Zant*




                                       24
Table S1 Impact (ATE) of rail transport services on price dispersion: uniform specification
 dependent variable: ln|pjt-pkt|
                                                 (1)                    (2)                 (3)                (4)
 crop / commodity                              maize                   rice           groundnuts              beans
 connected by rail                            -0.107**               -0.074              -0.019              -0.031
                                              (0.0494)              (0.0596)            (0.0770)            (0.0305)
  lagged dependent variable (t-1)             0.187***              0.203***            0.236***            0.236***
                                              (0.0297)              (0.0344)            (0.0344)            (0.0459)
  lagged dependent variable (t-2)                                   0.095***             0.0664*            0.116***
                                                                    (0.0243)            (0.0399)            (0.0366)
  season x market dummies                         yes                  yes                  yes                yes
  time trend x market dummies                     yes                  yes                  yes                yes
  market-pair dummies                             yes                  yes                  yes                yes
  month dummies                                   yes                  yes                  yes                yes
  Covariates                                      no                    no                  no                  no
  R2                                           0.3479                0.4948              0.5232              0.5071
  max trading distance (km)                      100                   100                 100                 100
  sample period                              1/99-12/05            1/99-12/05          1/99-12/05          1/99-12/05
  months before 1/03 and after 12/02            48; 36               48; 36               48; 36             48; 36
  number of observations                         2146                 1806                 1435               1853
Note to table: The dependent variable: ln(abs(pjt-pkt)) is the natural logarithm of the price difference between locations j
and k, in month t. Connected by rail has the value ln(distance) if both markets are less than 20km away from a railway
station, while the railway was operational, and zero elsewhere (in case of groundnuts less than 10km). Prices are deflated
with the rural consumer price index (source: National Statistical Office, Zomba, Malawi). Robust standard errors in
parentheses below the coefficient are clustered by market pairs. Estimation results with two-way clustered standard errors
(by markets of each market pair) are shown in the Appendix, Table A2. ∗p < 0.10, ∗∗p < 0.05, ∗∗∗p < 0.01.




                                                            25
Table S2      Samples varying over time and geographical space by commodity
MAIZE                domestic trade between markets within a maximum distance of:
Period       ←|→          80km                90km                  100km               110km              120km
1/98-12/04   60,24     -0.069 (.057)      -0.056 (.055)         -0.102**   (.050)   -0.096**   (.041)   -0.057 (.044)
                       1191; 0.4551       1449; 0.4322           1678; 0.3913        2024; 0.3768       2288; 0.3620
1/99-12/04   48,24    -0.107* (.063)      -0.107* (.061)        -0.137** (.055)     -0.125*** (.043)    -0.079 (.049)
                       1067; 0.4849       1310; 0.4604           1519; 0.4233        1820; 0.4004       2054; 0.3831
1/00-12/04   36,24     -0.103 (.077)      -0.095 (.069)         -0.135** (.057)     -0.111** (.044)     -0.061 (.051)
                       919; 0.5350        1144; 0.5038           1330; 0.4666        1584; 0.4411       1794; 0.4148
1/98-12/05   60,36     -0.053 (.047)      -0.042 (.041)         -0.076* (.045)       -.063* (.035)      -0.039 (.037)
                       1614; 0.3835       2009; 0.3592           2306; 0.3324        2772; 0.3186       3123; 0.3089
1/99-12/05   48,36     -0.076 (.055)      -0.056 (.048)         -0.092* (.050)      -0.071* (.040)      -0.050 (.040)
                       1490; 0.3924       1870; 0.3673           2147; 0.3453        2568; 0.3277       2889; 0.3163
1/00-12/05   36,36     -.078 (.058)       -0.043 (.051)         -0.093* (.051)       -0.058 (.042)      -0.037 (.040)
                       1342; 0.4159       1704; 0.3887           1958; 0.3686        2332; 0.3487       2629; 0.3338
1/98-4/05    60,28    -0.084* (.050)      -0.086* (.049)        -0.113** (.048)     -0.095** (.037)     -0.063 (.041)
                       1329; 0.4458       1630; 0.4253           1882; 0.3856        2266; 0.3716       2558; 0.3610
1/99-4/05    48,28    -0.126** (.051)    -0.130** (.050)        -0.147*** (.051)    -0.119*** (.039)    -0.083*(.044)
                       1205; 0.4665       1491; 0.4453           1723; 0.4097        2062; 0.3898       2324; 0.3775
1/00-4/05    36,28    -0.124** (.050)    -0.106** (.047)        -0.139*** (.052)    -0.102** (.040)     -0.065* (.043)
                       1057; 0.5009       1325; 0.4757           1534; 0.4410        1826; 0.4199       2064; 0.4031
RICE                 domestic trade between markets within a maximum distance of:
Period       ←|→          140km              150km                  160km               170km              180km
1/98-12/04   60,24     -0.072 (.047)     -0.100** (.049)        -0.115** (.049)     -0.076* (.046)      -0.077* (.042)
                       2529; 0.4415       2678; 0.4290           2791; 0.4249        3086; 0.4114       3292; 0.3945
1/99-12/04   48,24    -0.108** (.045)    -0.133*** (.047)       -0.138*** (.046)    -0.088* (.045)      -0.085** (.042)
                       2259; 0.4539       2393; 0.4411           2494; 0.4364        2752; 0.4250       2938; 0.4077
1/00-12/04   36,24     -0.069 (.052)      -0.091* (.054)        -0.091* (.053)       -0.063 (.047)      -0.056 (.043)
                       1892; 0.4677       2007; 0.4537           2102; 0.4549        2317; 0.4424       2476; 0.4289
1/98-12/05   60,36     -0.058 (.040)      -0.078* (.041)        -0.088** (.041)     -0.062* (.035)      -0.064* (.032)
                       3305; 0.4187       3506; 0.4106           3647; 0.4084        4036; 0.3986       4308; 0.3868
1/99-12/05   48,36    -0.073* (.038)     -0.092** (.039)        -0.094** (.038)     -0.063* (.035)      -0.060* (.032)
                       3035; 0.4235       3221; 0.4161           3350; 0.4141        3702; 0.4066       3954; 0.3957
1/00-12/05   36,36     -0.040 (.042)      -0.058 (.042)          -0.058 (.041)       -0.035 (.036)      -0.031 (.033)
                       2668; 0.4345       2835; 0.4273           2958; 0.4303        3267; 0.4221       3492; 0.4121
1/98-4/05    60,28     -0.062 (.043)      -0.086* (.044)        -0.100** (.044)     -0.072* (.039)      -0.075** (.037)
                       2761; 0.4323       2924; 0.4203           3045; 0.4168        3372; 0.4058       3595; 0.3915
1/99-4/05    48,28    -0.081* (.042)     -0.102** (.042)        -0.109*** (.042)    -0.073* (.038)      -0.072** (.036)
                       2491; 0.4387       2639; 0.4269           2748; 0.4234        3038; 0.4142       3241; 0.4005
1/00-4/05    36,28     -0.042 (.046)      -0.061 (.046)          -0.063 (.046)       -0.042 (.040)      -0.040 (.037)
                       2124; 0.4483       2253; 0.4370           2356; 0.4390        2603; 0.4284       2779; 0.4174




                                                           26
 GROUNDNUTS                  domestic trade between markets within a maximum distance of:
 Period           ←|→             200km                 225km                    250km               275km               300km
 1/98-12/04       60,24        -0.073 (.047)         -0.068 (.043)            -0.064 (.040)       -0.063* (.037)      -0.056* (.033)
                               2329; 0.4386          2735; 0.4256             3035; 0.4077        3356; 0.3995        3679; 0.3902
  1/99-12/04      48,24       -0.105** (.051)       -0.104** (.046)          -0.098** (.041)     -0.086** (.038)      -0.083** (.035)
                               2007; 0.4645          2359; 0.4544             2622; 0.4385        2901; 0.4346        3174; 0.4269
 1/00-12/04       36,24        -0.101*   (.051)     -0.104**   (.047)        -0.098**   (.042)   -0.082**    (.038)   -0.085** (.037)
                               1582; 0.5116          1869; 0.4963             2089; 0.4854        2316; 0.4733        2540; 0.4633
 1/98-12/05       60,36        -0.021 (.035)         -0.038 (.032)            -0.033 (.030)       -0.035 (.028)       -0.029 (.026)
                               3280; 0.4039          3845; 0.3958             4291; 0.3830        4747; 0.3725        5204; 0.3688
 1/99-12/05       48,36        -0.035 (.035)        -0.056* (.032)           -0.051* (0.029)      -0.044 (.027)       -0.042 (.026)
                               2958; 0.4240          3469; 0.4185             3878; 0.4081        4292; 0.3981        4699; 0.3950
 1/00-12/05       36,36        -0.014 (.038)         -0.039 (.036)            -0.034 (.033)       -0.027 (.031)       -0.039 (.030)
                               2533; 0.4511          2979; 0.4415             3345; 0.4349        3707; 0.4190        4065; 0.4148
 1/98-4/05        60,28        -0.071 (.044)         -0.065 (.039)            -0.059 (.037)       -0.062* (.034)      -0.055* (.030)
                               2554; 0.4175          3003; 0.4080             3343; 0.3906        3700; 0.3785        4066; 0.3709
 1/99-4/05        48,28       -0.104** (.047)       -0.102** (.042)          -0.094** (.037)     -0.080** (.034)      -.077** (.031)
                               2232; 0.4418          2627; 0.4363             2930; 0.4202        3245; 0.4103        3561; 0.4040
 1/00-4/05        36,28       -0.094** (.044)       -0.097** (.040)          - 0.091** (.037)    -0.075** (.034)      -0.083** (.033)
                               1807; 0.4794          2137; 0.4691             2397; 0.4580        2660; 0.4392        2927; 0.4310
 BEANS                       domestic trade between markets within a maximum distance of:
 Period           ←|→              80km                  90km                    100km               110km               120km
 1/99-12/04       48,24        -0.074 (.077)         -0.060 (.066)            -0.078(.054)       -0.107***(.039)      -0.038 (.059)
                                988; 0.5452          1190; 0.5512             1401; 0.5243        1690; 0.4953        1917; 0.47111
 1/00-12/04       36,24        -0.140*   (.071)     -0.129**   (.060)        -0.098*    (.050)   -0.122***   (.038)   -0.048 (.060)
                                813; 0.5602          991; 0.5601              1168; 0.5267        1393; 0.4973        1586; 0.4797
 1/01-12/04       24,24       -0.183*** (.059)     -0.179*** (.054)          -0.141*** (.042)    -0.166*** (.039)     -0.072 (.081)
                                597; 0.6367          742; 0.6146              873; 0.5829         1032; 0.5427        1182; 0.5181
 1/99-12/05       48,36        -0.007 (.052)         -0.006 (.044)            -0.036 (.030)      -0.081*** (.027)     -0.026 (.040)
                               1259; 0.5104          1581; 0.5343             1833; 0.5103        2206; 0.4766        2483; 0.4553
 1/00-12/05       36,36        -0.028 (.058)         -0.028 (.052)            -0.038 (.036)      -0.085** (.033)      -0.041 (.039)
                               1084; 0.5173          1382; 0.5400             1600; 0.5125        1909; 0.4806        2152; 0.4652
 1/01-12/05       24,36        -0.096 (.074)         -0.082 (.066)           -0.095** (.041)     -0.131*** (.045)     -0.054 (.052)
                                868; 0.5640          1133; 0.5786             1305; 0.5534        1548; 0.5172        1737; 0.4742
 1/99-4/05        48,28        -0.064 (.064)         -0.069 (.057)           -0.078* (.044)      -0.099*** (.033)     -0.034 (.050)
                                1060; .5271          1298; 0.5402             1518; 0.5182        1831; 0.4830        2068; 0.4644
 1/00-4/05        36,28       -0.121** (.055)       -0.122** (.055)          -0.094** (.041)     -0.116* ** (.034)    -0.040 (.051)
                                885; 0.5402          1099; 0.5479             1285; 0.5147        1534; 0.4833        1752; 0.4709
 1/01-4/05        24,28       -0.196*** (.049)     -0.201*** (.053)          -0.162*** (.043)    -0.198*** (.040)     -0.115 (.073)
                                669; 0.5987          850; 0.5925              990; 0.5601         1173; 0.5244        1333; 0.5060
Note to table: The table reports Population Average Treatment Effects (ATE) with data that are restricted to market pairs within a range
of specified maximum distance of each other and restricted to a varying pre- and post-intervention sample period. ←|→ is the number
of months before and since January 2003; ∗ p < 0.10, ∗∗ p < 0.05, ∗∗∗ p < 0.01. Next to the ATE coefficient in brackets are robust standard
errors clustered by market pairs, and below the coefficient the number of observations and R2. Estimated specification is identical to the
specification reported in Table 1.




                                                                        27
Table S3         Impact (ATE) of rail transport services on price dispersion:
                         selected output with two-way clustered standard errors
 dependent variable: ln|pjt-pkt|                  (1)                (2)                 (3)           (4)
 crop / commodity                               maize               rice            groundnuts       beans
 connected by rail                            -0.119***          -0.109***           -0.094***     -0.116***
                                              (0.0288)           (0.0352)            (0.0316)      (0.0154)
 lagged dependent variable (t-1)               0.183***           0.182***            0.245***      0.193***
                                              (0.0203)           (0.0249)            (0.0134)      (0.0426)
 lagged dependent variable (t-2)                                  0.096***            0.056***      0.095**
                                                                 (0.0238)            (0.0110)      (0.0149)
 lagged dependent variable (t-3)                                                       0.053*
                                                                                     (0.0282)
 season x market dummies                         yes                  yes                yes           yes
 time trend x market dummies                     yes                  yes                yes           yes
 market-pair dummies                             yes                  yes                yes           yes
 month dummies                                   yes                  yes                yes           yes
 Covariates                                      no                   no                 no            no
 centered R2                                   0.3280              0.3926             0.3908        0.4623
 max trading distance (km)                       110                  160               250           110
 sample period                               1/99-4/05            1/99-4/05          1/99-4/05     1/00-4/05
 months before 1/03 and after 12/02            48; 28               48; 28             48; 28        36; 28
 number of observations                         2062                 2748               2930          1534
 no. of intervention pairs                      251                  366                365           157
 no. of control pairs connected by rail         161                  190                210           107
 no. of other controls (not connected)          1650                 2192               2355          1270
 long term impact                              -0.146               -0.150             -0.146        -0.164
Note to table: See Table 1. Robust standard errors are clustered by each market of market pairs.




                                                           28
Availability of market price data of agricultural commodities (27 markets)

Figure S1                                         Number of market price observations per year (upper) and per month (lower)
350




300




250




200




150




100
                                                                    beans
                                                                    groundnuts
                                                                    maize
 50                                                                 rice




     0
                       1997                                1998                                1999                                2000                                2001                                2002                             2003                                2004                               2005                               2006                                2007




25




20




15




10




                                          beans
                                          groundnuts
 5
                                          maize
                                          rice




 0
     Jan-97
              Apr-97


                                Oct-97
                                         Jan-98
                                                  Apr-98


                                                                    Oct-98
                                                                             Jan-99
                                                                                      Apr-99


                                                                                                        Oct-99
                                                                                                                 Jan-00
                                                                                                                          Apr-00


                                                                                                                                            Oct-00
                                                                                                                                                     Jan-01
                                                                                                                                                              Apr-01


                                                                                                                                                                                Oct-01
                                                                                                                                                                                         Jan-02
                                                                                                                                                                                                  Apr-02


                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Oct-02
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Jan-03
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Apr-03


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Oct-03
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Jan-04
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Apr-04


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Oct-04
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Jan-05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Apr-05


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Oct-05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Jan-06
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Apr-06


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Oct-06
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Jan-07
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Apr-07


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Oct-07
                       Jul-97




                                                           Jul-98




                                                                                               Jul-99




                                                                                                                                   Jul-00




                                                                                                                                                                       Jul-01




                                                                                                                                                                                                            Jul-02




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Jul-03




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Jul-04




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Jul-05




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Jul-06




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Jul-07




                                                                                                                                                                                                           29
                                                                                                                                          0
                                                                                                                                              2
                                                                                                                                                  4
                                                                                                                                                      6
                                                                                                                                                          8
                                                                                                                                                              10
                                                                                                                                                                   12
                                                                                                                                                                                                        14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                       16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        16
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              4
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  6
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      8
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               12
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    14
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   16

                                                                                                                                 Jan-97                                                                                     Jan-97                                                                                           Jan-97
                                                                                                                                 Apr-97                                                                                     Apr-97                                                                                           Apr-97
                                                                                                                                 Jul-97                                                                                     Jul-97                                                                                           Jul-97
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Figure S2-1



                                                                                                                                 Oct-97                                                                                     Oct-97                                                                                           Oct-97
                                                                                                                                 Jan-98                                                                                     Jan-98                                                                                           Jan-98
                                                                                                                                 Apr-98                                                                                     Apr-98                                                                                           Apr-98
                                                                                                                                 Jul-98                                                                                     Jul-98                                                                                           Jul-98
                                                                                                                                 Oct-98                                                                                     Oct-98                                                                                           Oct-98
                                                                                                                                 Jan-99                                                                                     Jan-99                                                                                           Jan-99
                                                                                                                                 Apr-99                                                                                     Apr-99                                                                                           Apr-99
                                                                                                                                 Jul-99                                                                                     Jul-99                                                                                           Jul-99
                                                                                                                                 Oct-99                                                                                     Oct-99                                                                                           Oct-99
                                                                                                                                 Jan-00                                                                                     Jan-00                                                                                           Jan-00
                                                                                                                                 Apr-00                                                                                     Apr-00                                                                                           Apr-00
                                                                                                                                 Jul-00                                                                                     Jul-00                                                                                           Jul-00
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Prices of agricultural commodities




                                                                                                                                 Oct-00                                                                                     Oct-00                                                                                           Oct-00
                                                                                                                                 Jan-01                                                                                     Jan-01                                                                                           Jan-01
                                                                                                                                 Apr-01                                                                                     Apr-01                                                                                           Apr-01
                                                                                                                                 Jul-01                                                                                     Jul-01                                                                                           Jul-01
                                                                                                                                 Oct-01                                                                                     Oct-01                                                                                           Oct-01
                                                                                                                                 Jan-02                                                                                     Jan-02                                                                                           Jan-02
                                                                                                                                 Apr-02                                                                                     Apr-02                                                                                           Apr-02




30
                                                                                                                                 Jul-02                                                                                     Jul-02                                                                                           Jul-02
                                                                                                                                 Oct-02                                                                                     Oct-02                                                                                           Oct-02
                                                                                                                                 Jan-03                                                                                     Jan-03                                                                                           Jan-03
                                                                                                                                 Apr-03                                                                                     Apr-03                                                                                           Apr-03




     and each market and these relative prices are averaged over all markets.
                                                                                                                                 Jul-03                                                                                     Jul-03                                                                                           Jul-03
                                                                                                                                 Oct-03                                                                                     Oct-03                                                                                           Oct-03
                                                                                                                                 Jan-04                                                                                     Jan-04                                                                                           Jan-04
                                                                                                                                 Apr-04                                                                                     Apr-04                                                                                           Apr-04
                                                                                                                                 Jul-04                                                                                     Jul-04                                                                                           Jul-04
                                                                                                                                 Oct-04                                                                                     Oct-04                                                                                           Oct-04
                                                                                                                                 Jan-05                                                                                     Jan-05                                                                                           Jan-05
                                                                                                                                 Apr-05                                                                                     Apr-05                                                                                           Apr-05
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Rice, groundnuts and bean prices relative to maize prices




                                                                                                                                 Jul-05                                                                                     Jul-05                                                                                           Jul-05
                                                                                                                                 Oct-05                                                                                     Oct-05                                                                                           Oct-05
                                                                                                                                 Jan-06                                                                                     Jan-06                                                                                           Jan-06
                                                                                                                                 Apr-06                                                                                     Apr-06                                                                                           Apr-06
                                                                                                                                 Jul-06                                                                                     Jul-06                                                                                           Jul-06
                                                                                                                                                                                                        rice / south
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       rice / central




                                                                                                                                 Oct-06                                                                                     Oct-06                                                                                           Oct-06
                                                                                                                                                                   beans / south
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    rice / north




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              beans / central
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               beans / north




                                                                                                                                 Jan-07                                                                                     Jan-07                                                                                           Jan-07
                                                                                                                                                                                   groundnuts / south
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                groundnuts / central




                                                                                                                                 Apr-07                                                                                     Apr-07                                                                                           Apr-07
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               groundnuts / north




                                                                                                                                 Jul-07                                                                                     Jul-07                                                                                           Jul-07
                                                                                                                                 Oct-07                                                                                     Oct-07                                                                                           Oct-07




     Note to figure: monthly price series of rice, groundnuts and beans are expressed relative to maize prices, for each month
Figure S2-2       Seasonality of market prices of agricultural commodities
200%



180%



160%



140%



120%



100%
                                    1998

                                    1999
 80%                                2000

                                    2001
 60%                                2002

                                    2003
 40%                                2004

                                    2005
 20%                                2006                 seasonality in market prices: maize / Mitundu
                                    2007

 0%
       January   February   March          April   May   June        July   August   September   October   November   December



200%



180%



160%



140%



120%



100%
                                    1998

                                    1999
 80%                                2000

                                    2001
 60%                                2002

                                    2003
 40%                                2004

                                    2005
 20%                                2006                 seasonality in market prices: maize / Nkhotakota
                                    2007

 0%
       January   February   March          April   May   June        July   August   September   October   November   December




                                                                31
200%



180%



160%



140%



120%



100%                                1996
                                    1997

80%                                 1998
                                    1999
                                    2000
60%
                                    2001
                                    2002

40%                                 2003
                                    2004
                                    2005
20%
                                    2006                 seasonality in market prices: rice / Ntaja
                                    2007
 0%
       January   February   March          April   May   June        July   August   September   October   November   December



200%



180%



160%



140%



120%



100%
                                    1996

                                    1997
80%                                 1998

                                    1999
60%                                 2000

                                    2001
40%                                 2004

                                    2005
20%                                 2006                 seasonality in market prices: rice / Lunzu
                                    2007

 0%
       January   February   March          April   May   June        July   August   September   October   November   December




                                                                32
180%



160%



140%



120%



100%



                 1996
80%
                 1997
                 1998

60%              1999
                 2000
                 2001
40%              2002                                       seasonality in market prices: groundnuts / Mitundu
                 2003
                 2004
20%
                 2005
                 2007

 0%
       January      February   March          April   May   June        July   August   September   October   November   December



200%



180%



160%



140%



120%



100%
                                       1998

                                       1999
80%                                    2000

                                       2001
60%                                    2002

                                       2003
40%                                    2004

                                       2005
20%                                    2006                 seasonality in market prices: groundnuts / Liwonde
                                       2007

 0%
       January      February   March          April   May   June        July   August   September   October   November   December




                                                                   33
200%



180%



160%



140%



120%



100%
                                    1998

                                    1999
80%                                 2000

                                    2001
60%                                 2002

                                    2003
40%                                 2004

                                    2005
20%                                 2006                 seasonality in market prices: beans / Mitundu
                                    2007

 0%
       January   February   March          April   May   June        July   August   September   October   November   December



200%



180%



160%



140%



120%



100%
                                    1998

                                    1999
80%                                 2000

                                    2001
60%                                 2002

                                    2003
40%                                 2004

                                    2005
20%                                 2006                 seasonality in market prices: beans / Liwonde
                                    2007

 0%
       January   February   March          April   May   June        July   August   September   October   November   December




                                                                34
Geographical distribution of crop production

Figure S3-1                 Per capita production by district (averages of annuals 1995/96-2007/08)
            400


                     maize
            350




            300




            250
 kilogram




            200




            150




            100




             50




                 0




            60


                     groundnuts
            50




            40
 kilogram




            30




            20




            10




             0




            70


                     rice
            60




            50




            40
 kilogram




            30




            20




            10




             0




            140


                     pulses
            120




            100




             80
 kilogram




             60




             40




             20




                 0




                                                            35
Figure S3-2      Concentration of crop production by district (Hirschman-Herfindhal index)
 18%



 16%



 14%



 12%



 10%



  8%



  6%



  4%                                                                                           maize

                                                                                               rice

  2%                                                                                           groundnuts

                                                                                               pulses

  0%
       1997/98    1998/99   1999/2000   2000/01   2001/02        2002/03   2003/04   2004/05            2005/06   2006/07




                                                            36
Table S4         Markets: location names, district, coordinates and distance to railway station
 Market              district/RDP*              coordinates               distance to nearest
                                                                            railway station
                                         latitude        longitude
 Chitipa             Chitipa             -9.69958        33.27001                459.6
 Karonga             Karonga            -9.93926         33.92713                431.4
 Mzimba              Mzimba             -11.8946         33.59682                225.2
 Mzuzu               Mzimba              -11.4561        34.01450                263.0
 Nkhatabay           Nkhata Bay          -11.6074        34.29762                242.6
 Rumphi              Rumphi             -11.0155         33.85760                314.4

 Chimbiya               Ntcheu                  -15.0822           34.58972                     39.5
 Dowa                   Dowa                    -13.6532           33.93434                     32.1
 Kasungu                Kasungu                 -13.0332           33.48348                    104.4
 Lilongwe               Lilongwe                -13.9810           33.78668                      5.8
 Lizulu                 Ntcheu                  -14.4377           34.42248                     19.3
 Mchinji                Mchinji                 -13.7998           32.88052                      1.6
 Mitundu                Lilongwe                -14.2418           33.77091                     24.4
 Nkhotakota             Nkhotakota              -12.9254           34.28384                     96.8
 Ntchisi                Ntchisi                 -13.3761           33.86522                     63.8
 Salima                 Salima                  -13.7796           34.45818                      2.7

 Bangula                Nsanje                  -16.5817           35.11641                      4.0
 Limbe                  Blantyre                -15.8082           35.05741                      1.2
 Liwonde                Machinga                -15.0662           35.23374                      0.2
 Luchenza               Thyolo                  -16.0018           35.30928                      0.7
 Lunzu                  Blantyre                -15.6515           35.02027                      3.4
 Mangochi               Mangochi                -14.4777           35.26370                     57.5
 Namwera                Mangochi                -14.3449           35.48377                     72.2
 Nchalo                 Chikwawa                -16.2727           34.86774                     40.5
 Nsanje                 Nsanje                  -16.9213           35.26095                     22.6
 Ntaja                  Machinga                -14.8667           35.52608                     16.9
 Zomba                  Zomba                   -15.3805           35.33286                     27.0
Note to table: RDP = Rural Development Project; Source: Euclidean distance calculated using lat-lon coordinates from
www.geonames.org. Distance Nsanja-railway station = distance Nasanje to Tengani station, which is the nearest station.




                                                         37
Figure S5 Price & production of maize, groundnuts, rice & pulses, 1997/98-2006/07
              1600000

                                maize production
              1400000




              1200000




              1000000
 x 1000kg




                  800000




                  600000




                  400000


                                                                                                                           north

                  200000                                                                                                   central

                                                                                                                           south


                           0
                               1997/98   1998/99   1999/00   2000/01   2001/02    2002/03   2003/04   2004/05   2005/06           2006/07


                       70000

                                rice production
                       60000




                       50000




                       40000
            x 1000kg




                       30000




                       20000



                                                                                                                           north
                       10000
                                                                                                                           central

                                                                                                                           south


                           0
                               1997/98   1998/99   1999/00   2000/01   2001/02    2002/03   2003/04   2004/05   2005/06           2006/07


                  200000

                                groundnuts production
                  180000



                  160000



                  140000



                  120000
     x 1000kg




                  100000                                                                                                  north

                                                                                                                          central
                       80000                                                                                              south


                       60000



                       40000



                       20000



                           0
                               1997/98   1998/99   1999/00   2000/01   2001/02    2002/03   2003/04   2004/05   2005/06           2006/07




                  250000

                                pulses production


                  200000




                  150000
     x 1000kg




                  100000




                       50000
                                                                                                                           north

                                                                                                                           central

                                                                                                                           south


                           0
                               1997/98   1998/99   1999/00   2000/01   2001/02    2002/03   2003/04   2004/05   2005/06           2006/07




                                                                             38
Figure S5 Price & production of maize, groundnuts, rice & pulses, 1997/98-2006/07(cont.)
                          35

                                 maize price
                          30




                          25
  Malawi kwacha per kg




                          20




                          15



                                                                                                                   north
                          10                                                                                       central

                                                                                                                   south


                           5




                           0
                               1997/98   1998/99   1999/00   2000/01   2001/02    2002/03   2003/04   2004/05   2005/06      2006/07



                         120

                                 rice price

                         100




                          80
  Malawi kwacha per kg




                          60




                          40                                                                                       north

                                                                                                                   central

                                                                                                                   south

                          20




                           0
                               1997/98   1998/99   1999/00   2000/01   2001/02    2002/03   2003/04   2004/05   2005/06      2006/07



                         140

                                 groundnuts price
                         120




                         100
  Malawi kwacha per kg




                          80




                          60



                                                                                                                   north
                          40                                                                                       central

                                                                                                                   south


                          20




                           0
                               1997/98   1998/99   1999/00   2000/01   2001/02    2002/03   2003/04   2004/05   2005/06      2006/07



                         120

                                 beans price

                         100




                          80
  Malawi kwacha per kg




                          60




                          40                                                                                       north

                                                                                                                   central

                                                                                                                   south

                          20




                           0
                               1997/98   1998/99   1999/00   2000/01   2001/02    2002/03   2003/04   2004/05   2005/06      2006/07




                                                                             39
Figure S6                 Freight by rail
          250000


                                                                   Goods transported by rail: local freight, imports and exports
                                                                             Source: Central East African Railways

          200000




                                                                                                  total local freight
          150000                                                                                  total imports
                                                                                                  total exports
 Tonnes




          100000




           50000




               0
                   1995    1996    1997    1998    1999    2000    2001    2002   2003   2004    2005       2006        2007       2008   2009



100%



 90%


                                                                                                                  LOCAL (tons)
 80%
                                                                                                                  IMPORTS and EXPORTS (tons)
                                                                                                                  IMPORTS and EXPORTS (ton/km)
 70%                                                                                                              LOCAL (ton/km)


 60%



 50%



 40%



 30%



 20%


             share of local versus international freight by rail
 10%
                              (source: CEAR)

   0%




                                                                          40
