                                                   WPS8206


Policy Research Working Paper                     8206




         Trade Creation and Trade Diversion
                in Deep Agreements
                                 Aaditya Mattoo
                                 Alen Mulabdic
                                  Michele Ruta




Development Research Group
Trade and International Integration Team
  &
Trade and Competitiveness Global Practice Group
September 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 8206


  Abstract
  Preferential trade agreements have boomed in recent years                          Vinerian question of trade creation and trade diversion. The
  and extended their reach well beyond tariff reduction, to                          results indicate that deep agreements lead to more trade
  cover policy areas such as investment, competition, and                            creation and less trade diversion than shallow agreements.
  intellectual property rights. This paper uses new information                      Furthermore, some provisions of deep agreements have a
  on the content of preferential trade agreements to examine                         public good aspect and increase trade also with non-members.
  the trade effects of deep agreements and revisit the classic




  This paper is a product of the Trade and International Integration Team, Development Research Group and the Trade and
  Competitiveness Global Practice Group. It is part of a larger effort by the World Bank to provide open access to its research
  and make a contribution to development policy discussions around the world. Policy Research Working Papers are also
  posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The authors may be contacted at amattoo@worldbank.org; amulabdic@
  worldbank.org; mruta@worldbank.org.




          The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
          issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
          names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
          of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
          its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                        Produced by the Research Support Team
             Trade Creation and Trade Diversion in Deep Agreements1

                   By AADITYA MATTOO, ALEN MULABDIC AND MICHELE RUTA2




Keywords: Preferential Trade Agreements, Deep Integration, Regionalism.
JEL Codes: F13, F15.




         1
           We are grateful to Richard Baldwin, Nuno Limão, Andrés Rodríguez-Clare, Robert Staiger, and
seminar participants at the World Bank, the OECD, the Fifth IMF-WB-WTO Trade Workshop, the conference on
“The Economics of Trade Agreements” organized by the University of Geneva, the Seventh Washington Area
International Trade Symposium (WAITS) Conference at George Washington University and the European Trade
Study Group Conference in Florence for helpful comments and suggestions. Errors are our responsibility only.
         2
           World Bank, 1818 H Street, Washington DC, USA. Aaditya Mattoo, Email: amattoo@worldbank.org;
Alen Mulabdic, Email: amulabdic@worldbank.org; Michele Ruta, Email: mruta@worldbank.org. Research for
this paper has been supported in part by the World Bank’s Multidonor Trust Fund for Trade and Development,
and by the Strategic Research Program. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are
entirely those of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for
Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors
of the World Bank or the governments they represent.
I.       Introduction
         If a trade economist were abruptly woken up by somebody shouting, “preferential trade
agreements” (PTAs), their first thought is likely to be “trade creation and trade diversion”.3
That is a measure of the influence of Jacob Viner’s classic book The Customs Union Issue
(Viner, 1950) on the profession and the policy debate on the trade effects and, hence, the
desirability of preferential arrangements. However, Vinerian analysis was developed in a world
where trade agreements were “shallow” and focused only on bilateral tariff liberalization.
Today, PTAs are increasingly “deep” and cover also behind-the-border policy areas, such as
competition policy, intellectual property rights and other regulatory issues.4 In this paper, we
empirically investigate how far classic Vinerian logic helps us to understand the trade effects
of modern preferential trade arrangements.


         Do deep agreements simply lead to more trade creation and more trade diversion than
shallow agreements? Intuitively, Vinerian logic does not fully apply to deep agreements
because their nature is in part different from shallow PTAs. Shallow agreements are
controversial because they are inherently discriminatory. Members grant tariff concessions to
each other, leaving tariffs on imports from non-members unconstrained. The resulting tariff
preferences are likely to increase trade between members (trade creation), but they can also
lead members to substitute imports previously sourced from non-members for within PTA
products (trade diversion).5 Deep agreements can reduce trade costs and discrimination beyond
tariff liberalization and hence are expected to lead to even more trade creation. But differently
from tariffs, provisions relating to competition policy or subsidies tend to be non-
discriminatory in nature and may reduce trade costs and discrimination also vis-à-vis outsiders,
creating a positive spillover effect, or “negative” trade diversion (Baldwin and Low, 2009;
Baldwin, 2014). Ultimately, the verdict on what forces dominate is empirical and will crucially
depend on the content of the trade agreements.


         3
           We refer to PTAs as any trade agreement between a subset of countries (two or more). PTAs have been
also referred to in the literature as Free Trade Agreements, Regional Trade Agreements, Economic Integration
Agreements, etc. As we will further clarify below, we will also use the term Deep Agreements to stress the fact
that many of these arrangements have features that go beyond trade policy and are not preferential in nature.
         4
           The terms “shallow” and “deep” trade agreements were first defined in Lawrence (1996). There is a
voluminous literature on the purpose of shallow trade agreements (e.g. Grossman, 2016). The rationale for deep
agreements has not received the same attention. Two references that help explain the changing scope of trade
agreements include Ederington and Ruta (2016) and Maggi (2016).
         5
           As it is well known, preferential tariff liberalizations have an ambiguous welfare effect. Trade creation
is welfare improving for members. Trade diversion has a negative impact on the welfare of non-members through
lower market access as well as on members through reduced tariff revenue. The net welfare effect of shallow
PTAs, therefore, depends on which of these two forces dominates.

                                                         2
         To empirically address the question of the trade effects of deep agreements, we exploit
a new database on the content of PTAs (Hofmann et al., 2017). Since the early 1990s, a large
number of trade agreements have entered into force. Focusing on the PTAs still in force in
2015, the number of preferential arrangements increased from 20 in 1990 to 279 at the end of
2015. The content of PTAs too has changed. Newer agreements are “deeper” in the sense that
they generally expand the set of policy areas covered by older agreements. Specifically, older
PTAs focused on fewer than 10 policy areas, mostly commitments on tariffs on industrial and
agricultural goods and other border measures such as export taxes. As agreements become
deeper, they increasingly extend their reach first to areas such as trade remedies (i.e.
countervailing measures, antidumping duties) and subsidies and then to a broader set of behind
the border measures such as intellectual property rights and standards.


         To assess the impact of deep agreements on members’ and non-members’ trade, we
augment a standard gravity model, which is widely used in the literature to assess the effects
of PTAs on trade flows (see Head and Mayer, 2014; Limão, 2016). We include a variable of
depth of agreements between PTA members, and a variable that captures the depth of the
agreements of a trading partner with other countries. Using information from the content of
PTAs database, we construct different measures of depth based on the policy areas regulated
by the agreements and their legal enforceability. As standard in the literature, we include
importer and exporter-year fixed effects to control for country-year specific shocks and for the
multilateral resistance terms, and we introduce country-pair fixed effects to partially address
endogeneity concerns (Baier and Bergstrand, 2007).6 We also include measures of bilateral
tariffs and preference margins (Kee et al. 2008, 2009; Fugazza and Nicita, 2013) to isolate the
impact of changes in depth from changes in tariffs. Finally, we include additional controls,
such as dummies to identify shallow PTAs, PTAs that are no longer in force, and the presence
of other international agreements that may affect bilateral trade. Our sample covers 96
countries, including all major economies, for the period 2002-2014.7 During this period, the
share of country pairs with PTAs increased from 9 to 29 percent, average tariffs were cut by
half, while depth (measured as the count of provisions included in the PTA) increased by a
factor of three.


         6
           See Piermartini and Yotov (2016) for a useful guide on estimating trade policy effects with structural
gravity models.
         7
           The country coverage is determined by the availability of comprehensive tariff data for the entire period.

                                                         3
       We find that the formation of deep agreements has a meaningful positive impact on the
trade flows among members. In particular, we find that trade between country pairs that sign a
deep agreement increases by 44 percent. As we control for tariffs and for a PTA dummy, the
estimate suggests that deep provisions induce more trade creation than shallow PTAs. When
we look at the dynamic effects of deep agreements, we find that future levels of PTA depth are
statistically uncorrelated with current levels of trade flows, suggesting that depth of agreements
is not determined by the closeness of current trade relations. On average, it takes two years for
deep agreements to increase trade flows, consistently with the evidence that reforms of behind
the border measures take time to be implemented.


       Despite this strong evidence of trade creation, the deepening of trade agreements does
not appear to happen at the expense of trade with non-members. Specifically, a standard
deviation increase in the depth of the partner’s trade agreements with other countries increases
bilateral trade by around 19 percent. As hypothesized in Baldwin and Low (2009) and Baldwin
(2014), we find that this “negative” trade diversion of deep agreements is driven by the
inclusion of non-discriminatory provisions, such as those that regulate competition policy,
subsidies and standards. Tariff preferences (and other preferential provisions) are still found to
divert trade with non-members. For instance, a 1 percent increase in the average tariffs faced
by a non-member relative to a member (i.e. the relative preference margin) decreases bilateral
trade by 4 percent. Furthermore, deep agreements tend to moderate the trade-diverting effect
of tariff preferences: the negative impact of relative preferences on trade becomes insignificant
and is eventually reversed for deeper agreements.


       Some examples may help put these findings in perspective. We focus on three trade
agreements with increasing levels of depth, as measured by the number of policy areas covered
by the treaty: Peru-Chile, the Republic of Korea-US, and the EU. Based on our preferred
specifications, a shallow agreement such as Peru-Chile increased bilateral trade by an estimated
10 percent, but had a negligible impact on non-members. Korea-US, a medium depth PTA,
increased trade by 14 percent and also raised exports from outsiders by 4 percent. Finally, our
estimates suggest that the deepest agreement in our sample, the EU, increased trade flows
among members by 44 percent, while exports from non-EU countries would be around 30
percent lower in the absence of the agreement.



                                                4
          This paper contributes to a large body of literature on the trade effects of preferential
trade arrangements by including the notion of “depth” in the analysis of PTAs.8 Previous work
in this area suffers from a well-known measurement error problem (Baier and Bergstrand,
2007). Due to lack of data, most studies use dummies to identify the presence of a PTA or
distinguish between broad types of trade arrangements (e.g. partial scope agreements, free trade
agreements or custom unions, as in Baier et al., 2014). This approach does not adequately
capture the variation in the content of preferential trade agreements. Indeed, we show that this
variation has important implications for the effects of PTAs both on members’ and non-
members’ trade flows. Our analysis also has relevant implications for the longstanding debate
on regionalism versus multilateralism (Bhagwati, 1993). A key question in this debate is
whether PTAs are building blocks or stumbling blocks of the multilateral trade system. Both
formal models and empirical studies in this literature assume that PTAs are mostly about tariff
liberalization.9 The positive impact of deep PTAs on members’ and non-members’ trade that
we find in our analysis supports the view that deep provisions in trade agreements can
complement rather than undermine the world trading system (WTO, 2011).


          The rest of the paper is organized as follows. The next section discusses the database
on the content of trade agreements and the other data used in the analysis. Section 3 presents
the empirical strategy. Econometric results are presented in Section 4. Concluding remarks
follow.


II.       Data
          Our measures of depth of preferential trade agreements are based on detailed
information on the content of PTAs from a new database (Hofmann et al., 2017). The database
covers 279 treaties, which are all the preferential agreements notified to the WTO and in force
up to December 2015.10 Following the methodology proposed by Horn et al. (2014), the focus
is on 52 policy areas (see Table A1 in Appendix A), divided into areas that are currently under
the mandate of the WTO such as tariffs, antidumping duties and subsidies (referred to as “WTO

          8
            For recent surveys, see Freund and Ornelas (2010), WTO (2011), Head and Mayer (2014) and Limão
(2016). There is a small literature on deep agreements. Osnago, Rocha and Ruta (2017a) look at the impact of
deep agreements on countries’ participation in global value chains. Mulabdic, Osnago and Ruta (2017) study the
effect of Brexit (i.e. the undoing of a deep agreement) on future EU-UK trade relations. Other studies that have
looked at the impact of deep agreements based on a more limited database covering around 100 PTAs are Orefice
and Rocha (2014) and Osnago, Rocha and Ruta (2015 and 2017b).
          9
            Informal arguments on the relationship between deep PTAs and the multilateral trade system have been
made in Baldwin and Low (2009) and WTO (2011).
          10
             The data are freely accessible at http://data.worldbank.org/data-catalog/deep-trade-agreements.

                                                       5
+”) and areas where the WTO has no comprehensive mandate such as investment and
competition policy (“WTO X”).11 For each agreement, the data set identifies whether a policy
area is covered by the agreement and whether the provision is legally enforceable.12 This
information allows us to capture the expanding scope of trade agreements beyond a narrowly
defined set of traditional trade measures.13


         As noted by Anderson and van Wincoop (2004) “[t]here is extensive evidence that free
trade agreements and customs unions increase trade and therefore reduce trade barriers …
but it is less clear what elements of these trade agreements play a role (tariffs, NTB’s, or
regulatory issues)”. There are three main advantages of using the information on the content
of PTAs (instead of dummy variables) to assess their trade effects. First, the new data help us
define deep trade agreements more precisely. As discussed below, we define the depth of a
PTA based on the extent to which different regulatory issues and policy areas are covered by
the agreement and the legal enforceability of such provisions. Second, the information present
in the database also allows us to isolate the trade effect of specific sets of provisions. For
instance, we dissect the PTAs to assess the impact of provisions based on their economic
relevance (named “core provisions”), or the feasibility of preferential treatment (i.e. whether
they improve the conditions for PTA members only or for all trading partners). Finally, the
data set can capture the evolving nature of trade agreements over time. A notable example is
the European Union with its enlargements, which cover an increasing number of members and
policy areas.


         The data show that the number of trade agreements and their content have changed
dramatically since the early 1990s (Figure 1). The number of PTAs in force increased slowly
in the 1970s and 1980s and then remained constant until the beginning of the 1990s, after which
a large number of agreements entered into force. Focusing on the agreements covered in our
database (i.e. those still in force in 2015), the number of PTAs has increased exponentially
from 20 agreements in 1990 to 279 in 2015. Along with the number, the content of trade
agreements has changed. While older PTAs focused on few policy areas (“shallower” trade

         11
             The WTO’s General Agreement on Trade in Services (GATS) covers commercial presence as a mode
of supply but there are currently no rules covering investment in goods.
          12
             See Hofmann et al. (2017) for a detailed description of the methodology and of the data.
          13
             Hofmann et al. (2017) refer to the expanding scope of PTAs as “horizontal depth”. Another dimension
of the depth of a trade agreement is “vertical”, reflecting the liberalizing content of commitments or the stringency
of rules. This information, however, is widely available only for tariffs (see below) and a small subset of policy
areas.

                                                         6
agreements covering fewer than 10 policy areas dominated up to the late 1990s), an increasing
share of PTAs over time has tended to cover a larger number of policy areas, suggesting a
deepening of trade agreements.


Figure 1: Number of legally enforceable provisions in PTAs notified and in force, December 2015
                          25                                                                                                                                                                     300
                                                                                                                                                                Cumulative




                                                                                                                                                                                                       Cumulative Number of Agreements
                                                                                                                                                                                                 250
                          20
   Number of Agreements




                                                                                                                                                                                                 200
                          15
                                                                                                                                                                                                 150
                          10
                                                                                                                                                                                                 100

                           5
                                                                                                                                                                                                 50


                           0                                                                                                                                                                     0
                               1970
                                      1972
                                             1974
                                                    1976
                                                           1978
                                                                  1980
                                                                         1982
                                                                                1984
                                                                                       1986
                                                                                              1988
                                                                                                     1990
                                                                                                            1992
                                                                                                                   1994
                                                                                                                          1996
                                                                                                                                 1998
                                                                                                                                         2000
                                                                                                                                                2002
                                                                                                                                                       2004
                                                                                                                                                              2006
                                                                                                                                                                     2008
                                                                                                                                                                            2010
                                                                                                                                                                                   2012
                                                                                                                                                                                          2014
                                              More than 20                             Between 10 and 20                                Less than 10                        Cumulative

Source: Authors' calculations based on the Content of Deep Trade Agreements database.

                           Table 1 shows that there is an ordering in terms of which provisions are included in
trade agreements with different values of depth. Specifically, we divide the agreements into
three categories, based on the number of legally enforceable provisions and calculate the share
of agreements that include each policy area. We find that policy areas included in shallower
agreements (“Less than 10”), are at least as frequent in deeper agreements (cooperation on
“statistics” is an exception). The majority of these agreements tend to cover tariffs and other
border measures such as export taxes and customs. Competition policy is the only policy area
outside the mandate of the WTO appearing in a majority of shallower PTAs. As agreements
become deeper (“Between 10-20”), they increasingly extend their reach to a broader set of
WTO + areas, including state aid, anti-dumping and countervailing measures. Finally, deeper
agreements (“More than 20”) tend to cover areas related to intellectual property rights,
movement of capital, and standards, in addition to the areas covered by shallower agreements.14




         14
            Figure A1 in Appendix A shows that recent agreements signed by the US and the EU include a larger
number of areas than earlier agreements. These new areas were often covered in other countries’ earlier PTAs,
suggesting there may be learning from other countries’ PTAs.

                                                                                                               7
Table 1: Share of provisions over different levels of depth
                                                Between 10 and
                                 Less than 10                    More than 20
No. Provisions                                       20
Tariffs on manufacturing goods       97%             100%            100%
Tariffs on agricultural goods        96%             100%            100%
Export taxes                         73%             81%             95%
Customs                              67%             95%             100%
Competition policy                   58%             73%             88%
State aid                            39%             69%             88%
Anti-dumping                         35%             88%             98%
Countervailing measures              22%             77%             98%
Statistics                           20%             0%              23%
TRIPS                                18%             75%             98%
STE                                  18%             69%             68%
TBT                                  17%             73%             95%
Movement of capital                  15%             68%             93%
GATS                                 14%             67%             98%
SPS                                  12%             72%             98%
Public procurement                   12%             59%             80%
IPR                                  6%              56%             75%
Environmental laws                   3%              14%             83%
Labor market regulations             3%              13%             75%
Investment                           2%              58%             75%
TRIMS                                2%              42%             73%
Visa and asylum                      2%              37%             57%
Industrial cooperation               2%              5%              33%
Social matters                       2%              5%              30%
Agriculture                          1%              10%             45%
Energy                               1%              8%              40%
Data protection                      1%              5%              20%
Anticorruption                       1%              5%              18%
SME                                  1%              4%              25%
Regional cooperation                 1%              3%              15%
Taxation                             1%              2%              30%
Approximation of legislation         1%              2%              25%
Political dialogue                   1%              1%               8%
Research and technology              0%              6%              38%
Public administration                0%              6%               5%
Consumer protection                  0%              5%              38%
Mining                               0%              5%              13%
Education and training               0%              4%              33%
Information society                  0%              4%              15%
Innovation policies                  0%              4%               5%
Illegal immigration                  0%              3%              23%
Illicit drugs                        0%              3%               3%
Economic policy dialogue             0%              2%              43%
Cultural cooperation                 0%              2%              38%
Financial assistance                 0%              2%              25%
Audiovisual                          0%              2%              18%
Terrorism                            0%              2%               8%
Money laundering                     0%              2%               3%
Health                               0%              1%              38%
Human rights                         0%              1%               3%
Nuclear safety                       0%              0%              15%
Civil protection                     0%              0%               5%




                                                          8
         Based on this evidence, we build several measures of the depth of trade agreements
which reflect the extent to which the different policy areas are covered and legally enforceable
in a PTA.15 An area is considered as weakly legally enforceable if the language used is
sufficiently precise and binding, but the area has been excluded from dispute settlement
procedures under the PTA. While strong legal enforceability refers to areas where the language
used is sufficiently precise and binding, and if the area is subject to dispute settlement
procedures under the PTA. Using this information, we define alternative measures of depth of
an agreement. Specifically, the depth variables are equal to the count of all (“depth all”), weakly
legally enforceable (“depth wle”), or legally enforceable (“depth le”) provisions included in an
agreement. Each measure is normalized between 0 and 1, with 1 indicating the agreement with
the highest number of provisions. In characterizing trade agreements, we also consider the
policy areas that have been identified in the literature as being more economically relevant
(“core” provisions). These core provisions include all WTO + areas and four areas that fall
outside the domain of the WTO: competition policy, rules on investment, movements of
capital, and intellectual property rights protection.16 As shown in Hofmann et al. (2017), these
policy areas are also the ones that appear more frequently in PTAs.


         A useful distinction for our subsequent discussion is between discriminatory and non-
discriminatory policy areas. Here we follow Baldwin and Low (2009) to classify PTA
provisions in these two groups. The traditional view of PTAs is that their benefits accrue only
to PTA partners. This is indeed the case for traditional trade policies (i.e. tariffs on industrial
goods, tariffs on agricultural goods, export taxes, countervailing measures and antidumping
duties) that can be implemented on a discriminatory basis based on the origin of the product.
Similarly, government procurement provisions in PTAs tend to open state purchasing to foreign
firms on a strictly preferential basis. For other policy areas, however, the traditional view does
not appear to hold as PTA provisions may improve the conditions of access in a non-
discriminatory manner (i.e. on a “most-favored-nation,” or MFN basis). According to Baldwin
and Low (2009), these areas include customs administration, domestic regulation (SPS and
TBT measures), competition (state trading enterprises, competition policy), services (GATS),
investment (TRIMS and investment rules), property rights (TRIPS and IPR protection), and


         15
            Given the fact that provisions tend to be highly correlated with each other (see Table A2 of Appendix
A), regressions that include individual variables indicating the presence of each provision would suffer from the
problem of multicollinearity.
         16
            Core areas have been identified in Damuri (2012) based on Baldwin (2008).

                                                       9
rules on subsidies and on movements of capital. In some cases, discrimination is simply not
possible: if a country limits subsidies to domestic producers or establishes a competition
authority in fulfillment of its PTA commitments, these reforms benefit both members and non-
members of the PTA. In other cases, discrimination is feasible but unlikely for economic or
legal reasons: in services, market access is generally granted through reforms of domestic
regulation, such as rules on foreign participation or access to essential facilities, which are hard
to undertake in a way that grants privileged access.


        The sample covers 96 countries, including all major economies, for the period 2002-
2014. The choice of the initial year is due to the poor quality and availability of tariff data
before 2002. In addition to the database on the content of deep trade agreements, we use trade
and trade policy data from standard sources. Export data at the HS product level are from the
United Nations Commodity Trade Statistics Database (UN-COMTRADE). Additional data on
bilateral time-invariant covariates, used in a series of robustness checks, come from the CEPII
geodist and gravity databases. Tariff data, from the United Nations Conference on Trade and
Development TRAINS, and import demand elasticities at the at the 6-digit level, from Kee et
al. (2008), are used to construct the Tariff Trade Restrictiveness Index (TTRI) and the Relative
Preferential Margin index (RPM). Finally, data on PTAs no longer in force come from Egger
and Larch (2008) and Bilateral Investment Treaties (BITs) from the United Nations Conference
on Trade and Development’s Investment Policy Hub.17


        Before moving to the econometric analysis, we take a first look at the data. Over the
2002-2014 period, the share of country pairs with PTAs increased from 9 to about 29 percent
(Table 2). During the same period, average tariffs (TTRI) were cut by half while depth,
irrespective of legal feasibility, increased by a factor of three. As countries reduced bilateral
tariffs, the average relative preference margins (RPM) and its standard deviation decreased as
well. The two trends together indicate widespread tariff reductions which are less likely to have
increased trade diversion. In terms of the content of PTAs, the summary statistics show that
there were minor differences (before 2014) between depth constructed using legally
enforceable provisions subject to dispute settlement (“Depth LE” or “Depth Legally
Enforceable”), and depth constructed on the basis of legally enforceable language (“Depth
WLE” or “Depth Weakly Legally Enforceable”). There is also some evidence that the newest

         17
             The data are freely accessible at http://www.ewf.uni-bayreuth.de/en/research/RTA-data/index.html
and http://investmentpolicyhub.unctad.org/IIA respectively.

                                                     10
agreements tend to be deeper. The average maximum depth (“max Depth LE” or “max Depth
Core LE”) by importer almost doubled from 2002 to 2014. Part of these increases are due to
countries signing agreements for the first time, but this trend is also observed when we restrict
the sample to country pairs which already have a PTA.

Table 2: Descriptive Statistics (means and standard deviations in parentheses)
                               2002          2005           2008            2011          2014
 PTA (dummy)                   .088           .161           .196           .223           .286
                              (.283)         (.368)         (.397)         (.416)         (.452)

 TTRI (tariffs)                .041           .034           .028           .027           .019
                              (.195)         (.077)         (.066)          (.08)         (.069)

 RPM (relative tariffs)        .009           .008           .007           .007           .004
                              (.062)         (.036)         (.033)         (.035)         (.029)

 Depth All                     .054           .111           .134           .145           .197
                              (.191)         (.272)         (.293)         (.296)         (.344)

 Depth WLE (Weakly             .038           .083           .103           .111           .142
 Legally Enforceable)         (.153)          (.23)         (.251)         (.253)         (.281)

 Depth LE (Legally             .038           .082           .102           .108           .132
 Enforceable)                 (.153)         (.229)         (.249)          (.25)         (.273)

 Depth Core LE (Legally        .057           .118           .148           .162           .199
 Enforceable)                 (.202)         (.288)         (.318)         (.325)         (.342)

 max Depth LE (Legally         .307           .423           .482           .499           .529
 Enforceable)                 (.295)         (.313)         (.291)         (.283)         (.308)

 max Depth Core LE             .493           .646           .746           .769           .787
 (Legally Enforceable)        (.366)         (.319)         (.275)         (.259)         (.246)

 max MFN LE (Legally           .445           .594           .714           .733           .759
 Enforceable)                 (.365)          (.35)         (.303)         (.289)         (.275)

 max PREF LE (Legally          .596           .764           .828           .861           .872
 Enforceable)                 (.392)         (.297)         (.248)         (.227)         (.207)

 Trade (millions of US$)      631.588       994.542        1495.1         1668.34        1680.574
                            (4829.109)    (6974.361)     (9243.604)     (10284.256)    (11246.587)


        Figure 2 plots the distribution of trade flows for different intervals of “depth all”. In the
left panel, groups are defined according to different levels of depth in bilateral agreements,
while the right panel uses the average depth of the destination country’s agreements with the
rest of the world weighted by imports. Figure 2 shows that country-pairs with higher levels of
depth trade more on average. The right panel shows that on average, countries export relatively


                                                  11
less to partners involved in shallow agreements (i.e. “Low depth”) than partners without PTAs.
However, this negative effect is reversed as partners sign deeper agreements (“Medium depth”
and “High depth”) which are associated with distributions shifted to the right of the “no PTA”.
This suggests that deep agreements tend to benefit excluded countries as well, possibly due to
the inclusion of provisions that are de jure or de facto MFN.


Figure 2: Distribution of trade over levels of legally enforceable depth (“Depth LE”)
                                Depth                                                            Others Depth




                                                                                   .15
       .2
       .15




                                                                                   .1
   Density




                                                                         Density
     .1




                                                                                   .05
       .05
       0




                                                                                   0


              5                     10                         15                        5                10                         15
                            Total imports (log)                                                   Total imports (log)

                       no PTA                     Low depth                                  no PTA                     Low depth
                       Medium depth               High depth                                 Medium depth               High depth




III.         Trade effects of deep agreements: Empirical strategy
             In this section, we begin the empirical investigation of the trade impact of deep
agreements. A number of policy-related factors contribute to trade costs between countries,
which create a gap between the price in the importing country and the export price. Trade
agreements allow members to reduce these costs and hence increase bilateral trade. A concern,
well understood since Viner (1950), is that this mechanism could also generate trade diversion,
that is, a substitution of trade away from non-members. Deep agreements can reduce trade costs
among members by eliminating tariffs and by reducing other frictions. Examples of the latter
are contingent protection measures like antidumping, countervailing and safeguard actions, and
differences in national regulations that create an adaptation cost for foreign producers. Even
other provisions of PTAs, such as disciplines on subsidies or strengthened protection of
intellectual property rights, reduce the risk of exporting due to policy uncertainty, and hence
can be seen as reducing trade costs (Limão and Maggi, 2015).18 Therefore, we expect PTAs


             18
           The assumption that trade agreements reduce trade costs helps us to cast the following discussion in
the framework of the gravity model. We recognize that other provisions of agreements, such as those relating to
labor or environmental standards, do not necessarily lead to a reduction in trade costs. The extent of the aggregate
impact of these heterogeneous provisions is, therefore, an empirical question. We come back to this issue below.

                                                                    12
that cover more areas to have a positive impact on members’ trade that goes beyond the impact
of shallow agreements.


         The impact of a deep agreement on non-members is more complicated. The rules in a
deep PTA can be implemented either to reduce costs only for members (e.g. by exempting only
them from burdensome regulatory requirements) or also for non-members (e.g. by simplifying
customs procedures for all trading partners). If these rules are implemented in a discriminatory
way, they inflict a further competitive disadvantage on third countries. Since member countries
must now pay neither tariffs nor frictional costs, they can expand sales in their markets, driving
down prices and hurting exports of third countries. However, if frictional barriers are eliminated
in a non-discriminatory way, third countries also benefit from the reduction in associated
costs.19 In these circumstances, third countries still suffer from the decline in price in destination
markets due to preferential access granted to members of PTAs, but the price they actually
receive is closer to the destination price because the elimination of the frictional costs reduces
the total trade tax they pay. If the decline in trade costs for non-members is sufficiently large
relative to the preferences members receive, then we may observe “negative trade diversion”
(Baldwin, 2014): third countries see an increase in the export price they receive and expand
quantity exported as a result of a deep PTA.20


         Below, we introduce the empirical model and identification strategy used to analyze the
effect of deep agreements on members’ and non-members’ trade. In line with the above
discussion, we augment a standard gravity model to include a variable of depth between PTA
members and another variable that captures the depth of agreements trading partners conclude
with the rest of the world. We also use information on relative tariff preferences (Fugazza and
Nicita, 2013) to assess how their impact is affected by existence of deep agreements.


    a. Trade creation
       Our main specification is based on the gravity model of trade, which is widely used in
the literature to assess the effects of policy variables on trade flows (see Head and Mayer, 2014;
Limão, 2016). We begin by discussing how the depth of PTAs can be incorporated into the

         19
             There is some evidence of these positive externalities. Chen and Mattoo (2008) examine the
consequences of harmonization and mutual recognition of standards within PTAs. They show that when these
agreements are concluded with restrictive rules of origin which deny their benefit to non-members, the latter suffer
a decline in exports to PTA countries. However, when the agreements do not have restrictive rules of origin, non-
members’ exports to PTA countries also increase.
         20
            Appendix B provides a graphical example of these effects.

                                                        13
standard gravity framework. As shown in Costinot and Rodríguez-Clare (2013), the following
gravity equation emerges from different theoretical frameworks:


                                                  χ                                                   (1)
                                              =
                                                  ∑


where         is the bilateral trade flow from country           to country ,       is country j’s total
expenditure,      =∑        is country i’s income, is the trade elasticity with respect to variable
trade costs     , and      is a function of structural parameters distinct from        .


        We can define trade costs        as a collection of different components:


                                                  =        1+                                         (2)



where     is the ad-valorem import tariff imposed by country on goods imported from ,
are the iceberg trade costs that the exporter incurs to ship to country . Since deep provisions
in PTAs could lower the policy frictions that limit international trade, we account for the term
    in the empirical model by including a measure of the depth of an agreement between
country-pairs and .


        Taking the log of both sides of equation (1) and using tariffs and depth to proxy for
trade costs in equation (2), we obtain the following modified gravity equation which accounts
for the depth of trade agreements as a determinant of bilateral trade:


                  =             ℎ    +     	1+
                                           (                )+     +    +       +           +         (3)


where         are bilateral exports from country i to country j in year t and         ℎ    is a measure
of the PTA depth between i and j (normalized between 0 and 1). As discussed in Section II, we
use different definitions of depth based on the legal enforceability and the economic relevance
of the policy areas covered in the agreement.              and    are importer-year and exporter-year
fixed effects, respectively, that control for any country-year specific shocks and also for the
theoretically motivated multilateral resistance. As shown in Baldwin and Taglioni (2006),
failing to account for the country-specific time-varying multilateral resistance biases

                                                      14
downward the effects of PTAs, or in our case the effect of               ℎ    on trade. Finally, we
include several additional controls: dummies to capture the presence of a PTA (i.e. a shallow
PTA dummy), of a PTA no longer in force, or of other international agreements that can have
an impact on trade flows, such as a Bilateral Investment Treaty (BIT).


           An important issue in the estimation of the effects of any policy variable is endogeneity.
In the trade literature, it has been shown that countries are more likely to sign agreements with
partners with whom they already trade more intensively because of geography or cultural
proximity or other common characteristics. If countries tend to sign trade agreements with their
“natural” trading partners (Krugman, 1991), this would bias the effects of trade agreements
upwards especially with cross-sectional data. This bias may be even stronger for depth to the
extent that countries may be more willing to sign deeper agreements with their natural trading
partners. The issue of endogeneity of trade policies is well known since Trefler (1993), but it
is hard to address due to the lack of reliable instruments for panel data. To partially address the
endogeneity problem, we follow Baier and Bergstrand (2007) and introduce country-pair fixed
effects,      , to capture country-pair time-invariant factors determining bilateral trade such as
distance or common language. This set of fixed effects accounts for unobserved time-invariant
heterogeneity among country pairs which can bias estimates in cross-sectional studies, and
hence attenuates the endogeneity bias stemming from omitted variables.


           A limitation of previous work is that the use of a dummy variable to identify the trade
effect of a PTA is generally associated with a negative bias in the variable’s coefficient. We
improve with respect to earlier studies on the bias due to measurement error of the trade policy
variables by following the suggestion outlined in Baier and Bergstrand (2007) “the best method
for eliminating this [measurement error] bias is construction of a continuous variable that
would more accurately measure the degree of trade liberalization from various PTAs.” First,
we include a variable for the depth of trade agreements to capture the degree of trade
liberalization between PTA partners. Second, we also include the                   , the tariff trade
restrictiveness index, to isolate the effect of changes in tariffs between country i and j (Kee et
al. 2008, 2009; Fugazza and Nicita, 2013) from the impact of changes in depth. The index is
obtained using the following formula:




                                                  15
                                                 ∑        (        ),   	    ,           ,                          (4)
                                            =
                                                     ∑         (        ),       	   ,




where      is the average product level exports from country i to country j between 1995 and
1997,    is the bilateral import elasticity and          is the applied tariff rate on product ℎ . We use
export weights based on pre-sample data to reduce the potential endogeneity problem of trade
to tariff. The obtained index aggregates bilateral product level tariffs to a uniform tariff
equivalent that would maintain exports between i and j constant.


        As discussed in Section II, the              ℎ        variable is defined as the count of provisions
included in each agreement normalized between 0 and 1. Our baseline specification relies on
the count of legally enforceable provisions, i.e. those which have binding language and are
subject to dispute settlement (“depth LE”). We also construct alternative measures of depth by
counting the areas covered irrespective of their legal enforceability (“depth all”) and by
including provisions that are more likely to be economically relevant (“depth core”).21 The
coefficient of depth captures the effect of changes in the coverage of areas in a PTA net of
changes in tariffs. Given the set of fixed effects, the identification strategy relies on the
variation in depth within country-pairs variation to identify the effect on exports.


    b. Trade diversion
        To capture effects on a trading partner i from country ’s trade agreements, we modify
the definition of trade cost in equation (2) to


                                             =                          1+                                           (5)



where iceberg trade costs        are divided into an “MFN” component,                                when ≠ , which
is a destination specific cost common to all exporters, and                                     that can be eliminated
between specific country-pairs. Deep agreements affect non-members in two different ways.
First, as in the case of shallow PTAs, they make non-members less competitive in members’
countries by reducing bilateral trade costs of members. This effect results both from the
preferential reduction in tariffs (    ) and of other trade costs (                          ). Second, deep agreements


        21
           We also construct a depth variable based on the first component of a Principal Component Analysis
(PCA) of the provisions (see Orefice and Rocha, 2014).

                                                         16
can have a positive impact on non-members to the extent that they reduce the MFN component
of trade costs (          ).


           To capture the trade effects of deep agreements on non-members we proceed by steps.
First, we augment equation (3) to include the average depth and relative tariffs for each
importing partner with respect to the rest of the world.22 Thus, equation (3) becomes:


                  =                ℎ       +           	1+
                                                       (                            )+                                                    +        ℎ    	   ℎ +    (3’)

                               +       +        +                           +


where the difference with respect to the trade creation model is the inclusion of the relative
preference margin (            ) and the importer's average depth of trade agreements with the rest
of the world (        ℎ    	       ℎ). The two variables are constructed adapting the formula for the
trade weighted average tariff from Fugazza and Nicita (2013). In more formal terms,                                                                               and
   ℎ       	     ℎ are defined as follows:


                                                   ∑           (        ),          	       ,           (             ,           −           ,   )                (6)
                                               =                                                                                                   ,	
                                                                   ∑                    (                   ),        	       ,

                                                                   ∑            (                   ),       	                ,
                                           ℎ	          ,   =                                                                          ,       ≠
                                                                       ∑                    (                    ),       	


                                                               ∑            (                   )   	                     ℎ                                        (7)
                               ℎ       	           ℎ       =                                                                          ,       ≠
                                                                        ∑                       (                )    	

       ,   is the average tariff the rest of the world is facing at the HS product level, which is then
aggregated at the country pair level by weighting each product by country i's exports to country
j during the 1995-1997 period to avoid endogeneity. Note that we can retain importer-year
fixed effects because both RPM and Others Depth vary by origin country i: RPM more
obviously because it incorporates the tariff faced by source country i; Others Depth because it
is calculated for any ij pair by taking the weighted average of j’s depth vis-à-vis all countries
except i. Intuitively, if trading partner j gives better market access to countries that export




           22
          We assume that         = (      ℎ ). In particular, to keep the functional form similar to        , we
proxy for     by country j’s trade weighted depth with the rest of the world. For a theoretical derivation of the
RPM, see Fugazza and Nicita (2013).

                                                                       17
goods that are important for i we would expect country i’s exports to decrease; similarly, if j
signs deep agreements with i competitors, this should have an impact on bilateral trade.


        As a second step, we decompose the depth of the PTA into its preferential and MFN
components, as suggested in the literature (e.g. Baldwin and Low, 2009). Specifically, an
increase in the      denotes a loss in market access for the exporter relative to the rest of the
world, while increases in     ℎ       	       ℎ capture the deepening of importer's trade relations
with other partners. The effect of relative tariffs is unambiguously negative since they directly
impact the final prices paid by consumers in destination markets, while deep provisions could
have ambiguous effects on trade. On the one hand, if countries can set policies to discriminate
between members and non-members and reduce costs for PTA member-countries only, as in
the case of tariffs, export taxes or other duties, we would expect a negative impact on third
countries. On the other hand, if deeper agreements have a public good component, such as
improvements in customs, increased competition or the reduction in subsidies to domestic
producers, then the effect on excluded countries could be positive. To capture the two opposing
effects that deep agreements may have, we include two variables in equation (3’) to capture the
depth of preferential and MFN core provisions following the classification provided in Baldwin
and Low (2009).


        Apart from their direct impact on third countries, deep provisions in agreements may
also influence the impact on these countries of conventional tariff preferences. How an MFN
reduction in the frictional trade tax for all trading partners influences the marginal effect of
tariff preferences on third countries is analytically ambiguous. Therefore, it is worth examining
the empirical evidence. We test the following equation:


                    =                 ℎ   +       	1+
                                                  (           )+             +    (                (3’’)

                                  ∗       ℎ )+     +     +     +


where       ℎ is interpreted in two different ways. The first is, as before, an average of the
depth of the importers’ agreements with the rest of the world. The second is the maximum
number of provisions that importer j has in its deepest agreement at time t. This captures the
idea that MFN provisions, once introduced in a PTA, may have an impact on all partners
because of their intrinsic public good nature. Coefficient         of the interaction term in equation


                                                   18
(3’’) identifies the effect of deep agreements on tariff preferences. A negative coefficient would
suggest that tariff preferences have a stronger marginal effect once the importing country signs
deeper agreements, whereas a positive coefficient would suggest that tariff preferences matter
less when trading partners implement deep agreements.



IV.      Econometric results
         In this section, we present the results of the estimations from the gravity model. The
first subsection focuses on the impact of deep agreements on members’ trade. We then study
how deep agreements affect trade with non-members.

      a. Trade creation
         This subsection discusses and presents the estimates from equation (3) and its
extensions. The objective is to identify the effect of deep trade agreements on member
countries’ trade flows.


         Table 3 reports the PPML estimates from the gravity equation (3). Results point to a
significant effect of depth on bilateral trade. In the first column, we use the count of all the
legally enforceable provisions included in PTAs and normalize the variable between 0 and 1
for ease of interpretation. Results suggest that trade between country pairs that sign an
agreement with the highest depth (43 provisions) increases by around 12.5 percent.23 The effect
changes only slightly when we include all provisions whether legally enforceable or not
(       ℎ	    ). The effects are reduced by half once we count the strictly economically relevant
provisions (         ℎ	       ). Since the maximum number of provisions in Depth Core is about
half the maximum number of provisions in the other variables, the impact of an additional
provision is similar across all the depth variables. The finding that even measures which a priori
seem peripheral, like cooperation on health and human rights, matter for bilateral trade on
average as much as core provisions is puzzling. One explanation could be that the inclusion of
non-economic areas in trade agreements facilitates deeper commitments in more directly trade
related areas – a form of “issue-linkage” (Maggi, 2016) that is not adequately captured by
binary representation of provisions in this paper.24

         23
            Since the Depth variables are normalized between 0 and 1, the following formula provides the
percentage change in trade flows of signing the deepest agreement:            − 1.
        24
           In a series of robustness checks, we find similar results when controlling for the presence of bilateral
investment treaties (BITs) and using alternative definitions of depth based on the legal language. Results for depth

                                                        19
Table 3. PPML Regression: Trade Creation
                   Depth PPML
                     (1)      (2)            (3)        (4)         (5)         (6)          (7)
 VARIABLES          Trade    Trade          Trade      Trade       Trade       Trade        Trade

 Depth LE           0.118**                                      0.195***     0.366***    0.356***
                    (0.053)                                       (0.065)      (0.125)     (0.122)
 Depth All                     0.099**
                               (0.042)
 Depth Core LE                             0.059*
                                           (0.034)
 Depth Core All                                       0.053*
                                                      (0.030)
 old PTAs                                                        0.143***     0.185***  0.171***
                                                                  (0.050)      (0.057)   (0.055)
 PTA                                                                           -0.074    -0.079*
                                                                               (0.049)   (0.048)
 ln(1+TTRI)                                                                               -0.206
                                                                                         (0.562)
 N                  110,739 110,739 110,739 110,739 110,739                 110,739       94,057
 Exp.-Year            yes        Yes        yes       yes          yes         yes          yes
 Imp.-Year            yes        Yes        yes       yes          yes         yes          yes
 Exp.-Imp.            yes        Yes        yes       yes          yes         yes          yes
 Period             2002-14 2002-14 2002-14 2002-14 2002-14 2002-14 2002-14
 Note: LE stands for legally enforceable. Robust standard errors, clustered at the country-pair
 level, are in parentheses.
 *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




         We find that controlling for old PTAs (columns 5 to 7), agreements that are no longer
in force and on the content of which we have no information, increases the magnitude and
statistical significance of the impact of depth on trade. Specifically, in this specification trade
between country pairs that sign an agreement with the highest depth increases by 44 percent.
Intuitively, the inclusion of the old PTA variable increases the magnitude and precision of the
depth estimates because it allows us to distinguish between country-pairs in the control group
that had a PTA at some point in time and those that never had a PTA and for which depth is
equal to zero.25

core LE become insignificant in a specification where we include controls for old PTA, PTA, and bilateral tariffs
together, for which there is limited variation within country-pairs. Finally, results are robust to an alternative
definition of depth based on the principal component analysis “PCA,” as in Orefice and Rocha (2014). Moreover,
we find that results are also robust to the exclusion of crises years (i.e., 2008 and 2009) with coefficients around
10 percent higher than those in specifications using the full sample.
         25
            The old PTA dummy captures the pre-accession agreements for countries that joined the EU after 2002
and a small number of other PTAs no longer in force: the trade agreement between Mexico and the three Northern
Triangle countries – El Salvador, Guatemala and Honduras – that was active between 2001 and 2012, the trade
agreement between Mexico and Nicaragua (1998-2012), and Closer Economic Partnership Arrangement (CEPA)

                                                        20
         It is important to note that with the inclusion of a PTA dummy in columns 6 and 7 of
Table 3, we capture the effect of depth due to variations within country-pairs and within PTAs.
The PTA dummy could be interpreted either as a trade agreement fixed effect or as an
interaction variable that captures the effect of an agreement with zero provisions. Therefore, a
positive and significant coefficient indicates that country-pairs with deep agreements trade
more with respect to those that have shallower agreements. This suggests that results in the
first four columns are not merely due to the presence of a PTA. Moreover, results are robust to
the inclusion of bilateral tariffs as well, which suggests that the finding that deep trade
agreements increase bilateral trade is not driven by tariff liberalization.


         Our baseline specification could suffer from several econometric problems. On the one
hand, the relatively small effects of                 ℎ on trade we find in Table 3 compared to the
literature may suggest a downward bias in our coefficients.26 On the other hand, the potential
endogeneity of deep agreements and trade could bias our estimates in the opposite direction.
More specifically, a first econometric issue could be that trade flows tend to adjust slowly to
trade cost changes and by using annual data without lags we may not capture the full effect of
trade agreements. 27 The issue may be particularly relevant for deep agreements as they tend to
have longer implementation phases, which could bias downwards the estimates of depth.
Second, coefficients of the anticipation effects of PTAs may also be a confounding factor in
our regression analysis. If trade flows increase in anticipation of the agreement even before its
entry into force, we would fail to assign these effects to the agreements when using
contemporaneous variables. Evidence of anticipatory effects could also raise concerns about
the identification strategy and causality because of the difficulty in distinguishing between
anticipation effects and pre-existing trends. Finally, a third concern is that the absence of intra-


between China and Hong Kong SAR, China. The coefficient on old PTAs in column 5 is 0.18 which suggests that
older PTAs increased bilateral trade by around 20 percent on average during the 2002-2014 period. This impact
is equivalent to signing an agreement that includes 30 legally enforceable provisions and reflects the depth of EU
pre-accession agreements.
          26
             According to a meta-analysis of the effect of trade agreements on trade by Head and Mayer (2014),
the median coefficient of a PTA dummy is 0.28. In the case of deep trade agreements such as the EU, the
coefficient found in the literature is 0.98, which is higher than our estimate for the trade effect of the agreement
with highest depth.
          27
             Trefler (2004) suggests that trade flows adjust slowly to changes in trade costs and criticizes the use
of yearly data. Therefore, we use 3-year intervals to allow more time for trade to adjust to changes in depth of
trade agreements. We find that results in Table A3, in Appendix A, are qualitatively and quantitatively similar to
results obtained using consecutive years, with the exception for core depth which becomes statistically
insignificant. In the rest of the paper, we favor yearly data over 3-year intervals because it is more common in the
gravity literature.

                                                        21
national trade flows limits the identification to the comparison between PTA member countries
and country-pairs without PTAs in a way that is not completely consistent with the theoretical
basis of the gravity equation (Larch et al., 2017).


         To address these concerns, we extend our baseline specification in equation (3) in
several directions. First, we use yearly data and include lags and leads of the depth variables to
estimate the dynamic effects of PTAs. Figure 3 presents the results on the dynamic effects of
deep agreements. Results are based on specifications (1) to (4) in Table 3, modified to include
two leads and four lags of the depth variables to accommodate heterogeneous effects over time
and to test for anticipatory effects of agreements. The inclusion of the leads thus also provides
for an informal test for the “strict exogeneity” of trade agreements (see Bergstrand et al.,
2015).28 The results suggest that both current and future levels of PTA depth are statistically
uncorrelated with current levels of trade flows. It takes at least two years for a deep agreement
to increase trade flows and the effects are twice as large as the ones we find in specifications
without lags and leads (Table 3). As shown in Figure 3, these results are robust to the use of
different measures of depth.

Figure 3: Dynamic effects of Depth




         28
            As an alternative way to address the problem of reverse causality, we check whether previous trade
flows predict depth. In results available upon request, we find no significant relationship between past trade flows
and depth in both OLS and PPML regressions.

                                                        22
Note: LE stands for legally enforceable. Results are based on specifications (1) to (4) in Table 2 which is modified
to include two leads and four lags of the depth variables. The solid lines depict the cumulative effect and the
broken lines the 95% confidence intervals. Results are robust to alternative numbers of lags and leads.


         Second, to further test that coefficients on depth are not capturing a positive export
trend between PTA country pairs, we test the significance of future levels of depth at different
points prior to the entry into force of trade agreements.29 A positive and significant coefficient
could suggest that there is a positive export trend, or that trade flows increase due to
expectations of future reductions in trade costs, or that countries sign agreements because of
increases in trade flows. All these scenarios would invalidate a causal interpretation of our
results. Specifically, we augment specifications 1 to 4 of Table 3 by the following variable


                              ℎ	1	     	       	 	                   =        ℎ   (   )   ∗                             (8)


where            ℎ   (    )   is the future level of depth between country i and j, and                            is an
indicator variable equal to one in the year prior to an agreement entering into force and zero
otherwise. If results in Table 3 are due to the presence of trends or if country pairs sign
agreements because of increases in trade flows, we would expect the coefficient on the variable
in equation (8) to be positive and significant. As an additional check, we also define a similar


         29
              See Arnold et al. (2016) for a similar falsification test in the context of a services reform in India.

                                                            23
          variable two years prior to an agreement taking effect. Table 4 shows that trade flows are not
          statistically correlated with future levels of depth. Depth estimates obtained in Table 3 are
          unaffected by the inclusion of these additional variables. This evidence suggests a causal
          relationship between depth and trade.30


Table 4: Trade Creation Falsification Test
                            Depth PPML
                                  (1)          (2)            (3)           (4)                (5)             (6)             (7)              (8)
 VARIABLES                   Depth LE       Depth LE      Depth All      Depth All        Depth Core LE   Depth Core LE   Depth Core All   Depth Core All


 Depth                        0.133**       0.124**        0.107**       0.104**             0.062           0.062*          0.057*           0.057*
                              (0.064)        (0.058)       (0.049)        (0.045)            (0.039)         (0.036)         (0.034)          (0.031)
 Falsification test:           0.077                        0.052                            0.035                            0.035
    Depth 1 year prior to     (0.058)                      (0.042)                           (0.037)                         (0.032)
                agreement
 Falsification test:                          0.042                        0.033                             0.019                             0.021
   Depth 2 years prior to                    (0.037)                      (0.027)                            (0.023)                          (0.019)
             agreement


 Observations                 105,107       104,696        105,107       104,696            105,107         104,696          105,107          104,696
 Importer-Year FE                 yes          Yes           yes            yes                yes             yes             Yes              yes
 Exporter-Year FE                 yes          Yes           yes            yes                yes             yes             Yes              yes
 Country-Pair FE                  yes          Yes           yes            yes               yes             yes              Yes              yes
 Period                     2002-2014      2002-2014      2002-2014     2002-2014          2002-2014       2002-2014       2002-2014        2002-2014
 Note: Robust standard errors, clustered at the country-pair level, are in parentheses.
 *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                       Another concern with our main specification is that the absence of intra-national trade
          flows limits the identification to the comparison between members of a PTA and country-pairs
          without PTAs. To address this concern, we follow Bergstrand et al. (2015) and construct intra-
          national trade flows using GDP data from the Penn World Tables.31 In this specification, the
          control group comprises country-pairs without trade agreements and countries' trade with
          themselves, neither of which sees any change in depth. Results in Table 5 suggest that the
          exclusion of internal flows plays an important role in explaining the relatively small effects of
          depth we found earlier, as already documented in the trade gravity literature for the PTA
          dummy (e.g. Dai et al., 2014; Larch et al., 2017). The coefficients of depth on trade are around
          three times larger than those presented in Table 3. These results are more in line with the
          literature in which, for instance, the coefficient for a common currency is 0.98 while we find

                  30
                     In an additional falsification test, we assign random levels of depth to trade agreements in our sample.
          Figure A2 of Appendix A shows the distribution of the coefficients of random depth variable obtained from 500
          random draws of depth, obtained from a PPML model that includes a PTA dummy, is normally distributed.
                  31
                     The main advantage of constructing intra-national flows with GDP data is the extensive time and
          country coverage compared to gross output data (e.g. CEPII’s TradeProd data are available until 2006). The
          drawback is that GDP is measured as value added which is an imperfect proxy of gross output.

                                                                             24
    in column 6 that the coefficient for the deepest agreement in our sample (the European Union)
    is 0.97. Additionally, we find the expected negative and significant impact of tariffs on trade
    which is not captured in regressions with international flows only. Unfortunately, due to data
    limitations on product level output, we limit our analysis to international trade when we study
    the effects of trade diversion.


    Table 5. PPML Regression: Trade Creation Internal Flows
                   Depth PPML Internal Flows
                      (1)         (2)         (3)             (4)          (5)          (6)          (7)
VARIABLES            Trade      Trade        Trade           Trade        Trade        Trade        Trade

Depth LE            0.849***                                            1.023***      0.972***     0.996***
                     (0.045)                                             (0.070)       (0.132)      (0.130)
Depth All                        0.722***
                                  (0.041)
Depth Core LE                                 0.555***
                                               (0.033)
Depth Core All                                             0.483***
                                                            (0.032)
old PTAs                                                                0.282***      0.267***      0.261***
                                                                         (0.061)       (0.067)        (0.066)
PTA                                                                                     0.026         -0.031
                                                                                       (0.055)        (0.055)
ln(1+TTRI)                                                                                         -2.131***
                                                                                                      (0.551)
N                     116,134      116,134     116,134      116,134      116,134      116,134         97,825
Exp.-Year FE            yes          yes          yes         yes           yes          yes            yes
Imp.-Year FE            yes          yes          yes         yes           yes          yes            yes
Exp.-Imp. FE            yes          yes          yes         yes           yes          yes            yes
Period               2002-14       2002-14     2002-14      2002-14      2002-14      2002-14        2002-14
Note: LE stands for legally enforceable. Robust standard errors, clustered at the country-pair level, are in
parentheses.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1


             To better understand the impact, and to quantify the effect, of additional provisions in
    trade agreements, we consider three agreements that are characterized by different levels of
    depth. First, we calculate the trade impact of the Peru-Chile FTA, a relatively shallow
    agreement signed in 2009, which includes 11 legally enforceable provisions. Second, we
    calculate the trade impact of the United States-Korea Free Trade Agreement (KORUS FTA)
    signed in 2007, an agreement with a medium level of depth which includes 15 provisions.
    Third, we estimate the impact of the EU which comprises eight agreements, Treaty of Rome
    and successive enlargements, which cover 43 legally enforceable provisions.32

            32
               Details on the policy areas covered by the Peru-Chile FTA, KORUS FTA and the EU Treaties are in
    Table A4 in the Appendix.

                                                           25
       Based on the estimates in column 6 of Tables 3 and 5, we find that the Peru-Chile FTA
increased members’ bilateral trade between 10 and 30 percent. For the case of KORUS FTA,
which includes additional provisions on state trading enterprises, public procurement, and
provisions on intellectual property rights, we find a larger effect, ranging between 14 and 40
percent. Finally, we find that the inclusion of all depth core provisions and 25 other provisions
spanning from taxation and money laundering to labor market regulation and visa and asylum,
increased trade between 44 and 164 percent among EU countries.


   b. Trade diversion
       Table 6 presents the results on the effect of deep trade agreements on excluded
countries. Note first that the depth of PTAs (depth LE) continues to have a consistently
significant impact on trade between member countries. Even though the coefficients in Table
6 are slightly different from those in Table 4, the difference is not statistically significant. To
ease interpretation all Others variables are standardized and the coefficients capture one
standard deviation shocks. We find that the importer's average depth, when counting all the 52
areas, has a positive effect on bilateral trade. In column 2 we limit the analysis to core
provisions and find that while the magnitude drops, the estimates increase in statistical
significance. The results suggest that a standard deviation increase in partner’s depth (depth
core LE) increases trade by around 19 percent. These positive effects on third-countries could
potentially explain the difference between trade creation estimates with and without internal
flows. If deep trade agreements benefit all trade partners, then the effect of signing a deep trade
agreement (or unilaterally reducing tariffs) would be absorbed by the country-year fixed effects
when using international trade flows only.


       We find that the positive effect of deep agreements on third countries is driven by the
inclusion of MFN provisions, while the inclusion of preferential provisions has a negative but
insignificant impact (columns 3 and 6). The negative effect of preferential provisions becomes
significant once we account for the presence of old PTA, agreements for which we do not have
information on their content, in columns 9 and 12. Results in columns 7 to 12 reveal that old
PTA is associated with a negative average effect on third-countries’ trade. This finding suggests
that early agreements were more trade diverting, which is consistent with the evidence
presented in Section II that PTAs have become deeper over time. Both results for depth and



                                                26
older PTAs are robust to the inclusion of relative and bilateral tariff preferences, which are
insignificant for different specifications.


        A comparison of the effects of trade creation and trade diversion is helpful to put these
results in perspective. As before, we focus on three trade agreements with different levels of
depth: Peru-Chile, United States-Korea and the EU. Using estimates from column 9, we find
that a medium depth agreement such as KORUS FTA increased exports from excluded
countries to members by around 4 percent. We find large effects of the European Union (the
deepest agreement in our data) for non-member countries. Estimates suggest that exports from
non-EU countries would be around 30 percent lower in the absence of the agreement. Finally,
we find shallow agreements between smaller countries such as the Peru-Chile agreement
increased trade between members but had a negligible impact on non-members trade. In
general, the positive impact on non-members’ trade flows is driven by the inclusion of MFN
provisions, while preferential provisions have a negative effect.




                                               27
Table 6. PPML Regression: Trade Diversion
                      Depth PPML Diversion
                         (1)        (2)           (3)          (4)          (5)         (6)         (7)        (8)        (9)         (10)       (11)       (12)
 VARIABLES              Trade      Trade         Trade        Trade        Trade       Trade       Trade      Trade      Trade       Trade      Trade      Trade

 Depth LE             0.177***     0.177***     0.157**     0.173***     0.172***     0.149**     0.232***   0.240***   0.238***    0.229***   0.235***   0.229***
                       (0.064)      (0.060)     (0.062)      (0.065)      (0.062)     (0.063)      (0.080)    (0.078)    (0.078)     (0.081)    (0.079)    (0.080)
 Others Depth LE       0.290*                                0.295*                                0.284*                            0.290*
                       (0.151)                               (0.153)                               (0.152)                           (0.154)
 Others Depth                       0.181**                               0.185**                            0.180**                           0.183**
 Core LE                            (0.078)                               (0.078)                            (0.078)                           (0.078)
 Others MFN LE                                  0.661**                               0.670**                           0.769***                          0.780***
                                                (0.315)                               (0.313)                            (0.297)                            (0.295)
 Others PREF LE                                  -0.476                                -0.479                           -0.590**                           -0.594**
                                                (0.312)                               (0.312)                            (0.294)                            (0.294)
 RPM.                                                         -0.255       -0.295      -0.515                                        -0.240     -0.280      -0.536
                                                             (0.899)      (0.892)     (0.863)                                       (0.899)    (0.892)      (0.860)
 ln(1+TTRI)                                                   -0.116       -0.112      -0.050                                        -0.120     -0.115      -0.046
                                                             (0.689)      (0.686)     (0.678)                                       (0.689)    (0.686)      (0.677)
 old PTAs                                                                                          0.066      0.078        0.061      0.065      0.077       0.058
                                                                                                  (0.060)    (0.061)      (0.061)   (0.059)    (0.060)      (0.061)
 Others old PTAs                                                                                  -0.044*    -0.044*    -0.116***   -0.045*    -0.045*    -0.117***
                                                                                                  (0.026)    (0.025)      (0.042)   (0.026)    (0.025)      (0.042)
 N                      100,157      100,157     100,157      94,057       94,057      94,057     100,157    100,157     100,157     94,057     94,057      94,057
 Exp.-Year FE             Yes          Yes         yes         yes           yes         yes        yes        yes          yes        yes        yes         yes
 Imp.-Year FE             Yes          Yes         yes         yes           yes         yes        yes        yes          yes        yes        yes         yes
 Exp.-Imp. FE             Yes          Yes         yes         yes           yes         yes        yes        yes          yes        yes        yes         yes
 Period                 2002-14      2002-14     2002-14     2002-14      2002-14     2002-14     2002-14    2002-14     2002-14    2002-14    2002-14     2002-14
 Note: LE stands for legally enforceable. Robust standard errors, clustered at the country-pair
 level, are in parentheses.
 *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
                  Finally, we investigate if the depth of trade agreements concluded by countries
       influences the marginal effect of trade preferences on third countries. Specifically, we identify
       the effect of deep PTAs on tariff preferences by estimating equation (3’’). Results are reported
       in Table 7. We interact the RPM variable with the importer’s average depth of trade agreements
       with the rest of the world and with the importer's maximum value of depth (i.e. its deepest trade
       agreement) in a given year. Therefore, we test if commitments, for instance, to improve customs
       efficiency or to reduce subsidies, soften the consequences of trade preferences for excluded
       countries.



       Table 7. PPML Regression: The Influence of Depth on the Impact of Trade Preferences
                          Depth PPML Diversion Revisited
                            (1)        (2)         (3)          (4)         (5)         (6)        (7)        (8)
VARIABLES                  Trade     Trade       Trade         Trade       Trade       Trade      Trade      Trade

Depth LE                  0.189***    0.184***    0.234***    0.231***    0.191***    0.185***   0.236***   0.229***
                           (0.064)     (0.060)     (0.080)     (0.079)     (0.064)     (0.063)    (0.080)    (0.079)
RPM                        -0.254      -0.546      -0.242      -0.532      -2.169      -3.659*    -2.131     -3.609*
                           (0.864)     (0.909)     (0.865)     (0.910)     (1.543)     (1.871)    (1.550)    (1.882)
(RPM * Others             1.618***                1.608***
 Depth LE)                 (0.617)                 (0.619)
(RPM * Others                         1.903***                1.893***
 Depth Core LE)                        (0.676)                 (0.678)
(RPM * Max                                                                3.776**                3.726**
 Depth LE)                                                                (1.790)                (1.799)
(RPM * Max                                                                            4.174***              4.127***
 Depth Core LE)                                                                        (1.554)               (1.564)
ln(1+TTRI)                 -0.009       0.057       -0.013      0.052      -0.052      -0.063     -0.057      -0.068
                           (0.671)     (0.668)     (0.671)     (0.668)     (0.685)     (0.687)   (0.685)     (0.687)
Others Depth LE            0.278*                   0.274*                 0.292*      0.285*     0.286*      0.281*
                           (0.151)                 (0.152)                 (0.153)     (0.153)   (0.154)     (0.154)
old PTAs                                             0.039       0.044                            0.044       0.042
                                                   (0.060)      (0.062)                          (0.060)     (0.059)
Others old PTAs                                    -0.049*     -0.050**                          -0.047*     -0.048*
                                                   (0.027)      (0.025)                          (0.027)     (0.027)
Others Depth Core LE                    0.167**                0.165**
                                         (0.076)                (0.077)
N                             94,057     94,057     94,057      94,057       94,057    94,057     94,057     94,057
Exp.-Year FE                   yes         yes       yes           yes         yes      yes        yes        yes
Imp.-Year FE                   yes         yes       yes           yes         yes      yes        yes        yes
Exp.-Imp. FE                   yes         yes       yes           yes         yes      yes        yes        yes
Period                       2002-14 2002-14 2002-14           2002-14 2002-14        2002-14    2002-14    2002-14
Note: LE stands for legally enforceable. Robust standard errors, clustered at the
country-pair level, are in parentheses.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
        We find that the effect of tariff preferences does depend on the depth of trade agreements
concluded by an importing country. The interaction of the relative preference margin is
significant with measures of both the average depth vis-à-vis the rest of the world (Others Depth
LE or Others Core Depth LE) and of maximum level of commitments that importers undertake
(Max Depth LE and Max Depth Core LE) (Table 7). Figure 4, based on results in column 6 of
Table 7, shows that when maximum depth core is close to zero, a 1 percent increase in RPM
decreases bilateral trade by 4 percent. This negative impact of relative preferences on trade is
statistically significant for values of depth core lower than 0.3, while it is completely offset
when more than 80 percent of depth core provisions are included. This suggests that tariff
preferences have a discriminatory effect in countries that have “shallow” agreements, while the
effect is reversed when a country undertakes deep commitments. The statistical insignificance
of relative tariff preferences we find in some of our specifications may, therefore, be due to
pooling across agreements with different levels of depth.


Figure 4. Marginal Effect of Relative Tariff Preferences (90% C.I.)
   2
   0
   -2
   -4
   -6




        0           .2            .4                .6               .8   1
                                       Depth Core

                                MFX RPM                   90% C.I.




                                                     30
V.      Concluding remarks
        Most of the work on PTAs in the literature is based on the implicit assumption that trade
agreements are about tariff liberalization. In this literature, the impact of preferential trade
agreements is captured by the standard Vinerian analysis of trade creation and trade diversion.
Recent data on the content of trade agreements show, however, that PTAs are deepening, in
the sense that they include an expanding set of provisions, often covering behind the border
policy areas. The evidence presented in this paper confirms the view that Vinerian logic may
provide an incomplete guide to the effects of deep agreements. Intuitively, the reason is that
deep provisions do not necessarily act as preferential tariffs. In fact, we find that deep
agreements create more trade than shallow agreements and that they can have a positive
spillover effect on trade with outsiders when they are non-discriminatory in design or
implementation.


        The increasing number and complexity of preferential trade agreements justifies the
growing interest in this area. This paper is only a first step to better understand the trade effects
of deep agreements. Many questions remain open. First, we would like to uncover the specific
channels through which the depth of PTAs affects trade flows. Deep agreements can influence
the ability of firms to produce different products, to engage in global value chains, and to access
new markets. They can also have a differing impact on developed and developing economies,
particularly as they have different institutional capacities. Second, the detailed content of PTAs,
i.e. the legal commitments embedded in different policy areas covered by the agreement, are
likely to matter for trade and beyond. Deep provisions on services and competition will
influence the ability of countries to integrate in trade markets; investment rules will affect the
ability to attract and retain foreign investment; and the protection granted to intellectual
property rights will have an impact on the ability to innovate. As new data are collected on the
detailed content of PTAs, an exciting research agenda lies ahead.




                                                 31
     REFERENCES

Anderson, James E., and Eric Van Wincoop. 2004. "Trade costs." Journal of Economic literature
    42 (3): 691-751.

Arnold, Jens Matthias, Beata Javorcik, Molly Lipscomb, and Aaditya Mattoo. 2016. “Services
    Reform and Manufacturing Performance: Evidence from India.” Economic Journal 126
    (590): 1-39, 02

Baier, Scott L., and Jeffrey H. Bergstrand. 2007. “Do free trade agreements actually increase
     members' international trade?.” Journal of International Economics 71 (1): 72-95.

Baier, Scott L., Jeffrey H. Bergstrand, and Michael Feng. 2014. “Economic integration agreements
     and the margins of international trade.” Journal of International Economics 93 (2): 339-350.

Baldwin, Richard. 2008. “Big‐Think Regionalism: A Critical Survey.” NBER Working Paper
    14056. National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

———. 2014. “Multilateralising 21st Century Regionalism.” Paper prepared for the OECD
  conference "Global Forum on Trade Reconciling Regionalism and Multilateralism in a Post-
  Bali World." http://www.oecd.org/tad/ events/OECD-gft-2014-multilateralising-21st -
  century-regionalism-baldwin-paper.pdf.

Baldwin, Richard, and Patrick Low, eds. 2009. Multilateralizing regionalism: challenges for the
    Global Trading System. Cambridge University Press.

Baldwin, Richard and Charles Wyplosz, 2012. The Economics of European Integration. McGraw-
    Hill Higher Education, Berkshire, UK.

Baldwin, Richard, and Daria Taglioni. 2006. “Gravity for Dummies and Dummies for Gravity
    Equations.” NBER Working Paper 12516. National Bureau of Economic Research, Inc.

Bergstrand, Jeffrey H., Mario Larch, and Yoto V. Yotov. 2015. “Economic integration
    agreements, border effects, and distance elasticities in the gravity equation.” European
    Economic Review 78 (C): 307-327.

Bhagwati, Jagdish. 1993. “Regionalism and Multilateralism: An Overview.” In New Dimensions
    in Regional Integration, edited by Jaime de Melo and Arvind Panagariya. Cambridge:
    Cambridge Univ. Press.

Chen, Maggie Xiaoyang, and Aaditya Mattoo. 2008. “Regionalism in Standards: Good or Bad for
    Trade.” Canadian Journal of Economics 41: 838-863

Costinot, Arnaud, and Andrés Rodríguez-Clare. 2013. “Trade Theory with Numbers: Quantifying
     the Consequences of Globalization.” NBER Working Paper 12516. National Bureau of
     Economic Research, Inc.

Dai, Mian, Yoto V. Yotov, and Thomas Zylkin. 2014. “On the trade-diversion effects of free trade
     agreements.” Economics Letters 122 (2): 321-325.



                                                   32
Damuri, Yose Rizal. 2012. “21st Century Regionalism and Production Sharing Practice.” Center
   for Trade and Economic Integration Working Paper No. CTEI‐2012‐4.

Ederington, Josh and Michele Ruta. 2016. “Non-Tariff Measures and the World Trading System.”
    In Kyle Bagwell and Robert W. Staiger (eds.), The Handbook of Commercial Policy, vol 1B.
    Amsterdam, Netherlands: Elsevier, North Holland, 211-277 (chapter 5).

Egger, Peter, and Mario Larch. 2008. “Interdependent preferential trade agreement memberships:
    An empirical analysis.” Journal of International Economics 76 (2): 384-399.

Freund, Caroline, and Emanuel Ornelas. 2010. “Regional Trade Agreements.” Annual Review of
    Economics 2 (1): 139-166.

Fugazza, Marco, and Alessandro Nicita. 2013. “The Direct and Relative Effects of Preferential
    Market Access.” Journal of International Economics 89 (2): 357–68.

Grossman, Gene M. 2016. “The Purpose of Trade Agreements.” In Kyle Bagwell and Robert W.
    Staiger (eds.), The Handbook of Commercial Policy, vol 1A. Amsterdam, Netherlands:
    Elsevier, North Holland, 379-434 (chapter 7).

Head, Keith, and Thierry Mayer. 2014. “Gravity Equations: Workhorse, Toolkit, and Cookbook.”
    Handbook of International Economics. Elsevier.

Hofmann Claudia, Alberto Osnago, and Michele Ruta. 2017. “Horizontal Depth: A New Database
    on the Content of Preferential Trade Agreements.” Policy Research Working Paper Series
    7981, World Bank, Washington, DC.

Horn, Henrik, Petros C. Mavroidis, and André Sapir. 2009. “Beyond the WTO? An Anatomy of
    EU and US Preferential Trade Agreements.” Blueprints. Bruegel. Accessed August 25.

Kee, Hiau Looi, Alessandro Nicita, and Marcelo Olarreaga. 2008. “Import Demand Elasticities
     and Trade Distortions.” The Review of Economics and Statistics 90 (4): 666–82.

———. 2009. “Estimating Trade Restrictiveness Indices.” Economic Journal 119 (534): 172–99.

Krugman, Paul R. 1991. “The Move Toward Free Trade Zones.” Proceedings - Economic Policy
    Symposium - Jackson Hole, 7–58.

Larch, Mario, Joschka Wanner, Yoto V. Yotov, and Thomas Zylkin. 2017. “The Currency Union
    Effect: A PPML Re-assessment with High-Dimensional Fixed Effects.” Mimeo.

Lawrence, R. Z. 1996. Regionalism, Multilateralism, and Deeper Integration, Washington, DC:
    Brookings Institution Press.

Limão, Nuno. 2016. “Preferential Trade Agreements.” In Kyle Bagwell and Robert W. Staiger
    (eds.), The Handbook of Commercial Policy, vol 1B. Amsterdam, Netherlands: Elsevier,
    North Holland, 279-367 (chapter 6).

Limão, Nuno, and Giovanni Maggi, 2015. “Uncertainty and Trade Agreements.” American
    Economic Journal: Microeconomics 7 (4): 1-42.


                                                 33
Maggi, Giovanni. 2016. “Issue Linkage.” In Kyle Bagwell and Robert W. Staiger (eds.), The
   Handbook of Commercial Policy, vol 1B. Amsterdam, Netherlands: Elsevier, North Holland,
   513-564 (chapter 9).

Mulabdic, Alen, Alberto Osnago, and Michele Ruta. 2017. “Deep integration and UK-EU trade
    relations.” Policy Research Working Paper Series 7947, World Bank, Washington, DC.

Orefice, Gianluca, and Nadia Rocha. 2014. “Deep Integration and Production Networks: An
     Empirical Analysis.” The World Economy 37: 106–136.

Osnago, Alberto, Nadia Rocha, and Michele Ruta. 2015. “Deep trade agreements and vertical FDI:
    the devil is in the details.” Policy Research Working Paper Series 7464, World Bank,
    Washington, DC.

———. 2017a. “Deep Trade Agreements and Global Value Chains.” Mimeo, World Bank.

———. 2017b. “Do Deep Trade Agreements Boost Vertical FDI?.” World Bank Econ Review 30,
  SUPPLEMENT: S119–S125.

Piermartini, Roberta, and Yoto Yotov. 2016. “Estimating Trade Policy Effects with Structural
    Gravity.” WTO Working Paper ERSD-2016-10.

Trefler, Daniel. 1993. “Trade Liberalization and the Theory of Endogenous Protection: An
     Econometric Study of U.S. Import Policy.” Journal of Political Economy 101 (1): 138–60.

———. 2004. “The Long and Short of the Canada-U. S. Free Trade Agreement.” American
  Economic Review 94 (4): 870–95.

Viner, Jacob. 1950. The Customs Union Issue. New York: Carnegie Endowment for International
    Peace.

World Trade Organization (WTO). 2011. World Trade Report 2011: The WTO and Preferential
    Trade Agreements: From Co-Existence to Coherence, Geneva: WTO.




                                                 34
APPENDIX A – ADDITIONAL TABLES AND FIGURES

Table A1: Description of the 52 provisions in the Content of Deep Trade Agreements Database
                    WTO-plus areas

 FTA Industrial     Tariff liberalization on industrial goods; elimination of non-tariff measures
 FTA                Tariff liberalization on agriculture goods; elimination of non-tariff measures
 Agriculture
 Customs            Provision of information; publication on the Internet of new laws and regulations; training
 Export Taxes       Elimination of export taxes
 SPS                Affirmation of rights and obligations under the WTO Agreement on SPS; harmonization of SPS measures
 TBT                Affirmation of rights and obligations under WTO Agreement on TBT; provision of information;
                    harmonization of regulations; mutual recognition agreements
 STE                Establishment or maintenance of an independent competition authority; nondiscrimination regarding
                    production and marketing condition; provision of information; affirmation of Art XVII GATT provision
 AD                 Retention of Antidumping rights and obligations under the WTO Agreement (Art. VI GATT).
 CVM                Retention of Countervailing measures rights and obligations under the WTO Agreement (Art VI GATT)
 State Aid          Assessment of anticompetitive behaviour; annual reporting on the value and distribution of state aid given;
                    provision of information
 Public             Progressive liberalisation; national treatment and/or non-discrimination principle; publication of laws and
 Procurement        regulations on the Internet; specification of public procurement regime
 TRIMs              Provisions concerning requirements for local content and export performance of FDI
 GATS               Liberalisation of trade in services
 TRIPs              Harmonisation of standards; enforcement; national treatment, most-favoured nation treatment


                    WTO-X areas

 Anti-              Regulations concerning criminal offence measures in matters affecting international trade and investment
 Corruption
 Competition        Maintenance of measures to proscribe anticompetitive business conduct; harmonisation of competition
 Policy             laws; establishment or maintenance of an independent competition authority
 Environmental      Development of environmental standards; enforcement of national environmental laws; establishment of
 Laws               sanctions for violation of environmental laws; pubblications of laws and regulation
 IPR                Accession to international treaties not referenced in the TRIPs Agreement
 Investment         Information exchange; Development of legal frameworks; Harmonisation and simplification of procedures;
                    National treatment; establishment of mechanism for the settlement of disputes
 Labour Market      Regulation of the national labour market; affirmation of International Labour Organization (ILO)
 Regulation         commitments; enforcement
 Movement of        Liberalisation of capital movement; prohibition of new restrictions
 Capital
 Consumer           Harmonisation of consumer protection laws; exchange of information and experts; training
 Protection
 Data               Exchange of information and experts; joint projects
 Protection
 Agriculture        Technical assistance to conduct modernisation projects; exchange of information
 Approximation      Application of EC legislation in national legislation
 of Legislation
 Audio Visual       Promotion of the industry; encouragement of co-production
 Civil Protection   Implementation of harmonised rules
 Innovation         Participation in framework programmes; promotion of technology transfers
 Policies
 Cultural           Promotion of joint initiatives and local culture
 Cooperation
 Economic           Exchange of ideas and opinions; joint studies
 Policy
 Dialogue
 Education and      Measures to improve the general level of education
 Training
 Energy             Exchange of information; technology transfer; joint studies
 Financial          Set of rules guiding the granting and administration of financial assistance
 Assistance
 Health             Monitoring of diseases; development of health information systems; exchange of information
 Human Rights       Respect for human rights
 Illegal            Conclusion of re-admission agreements; prevention and control of illegal immigration
 Immigration
 Illicit Drugs      Treatment and rehabilitation of drug addicts; joint projects on prevention of consumption; reduction of drug
                    supply; information exchange



                                                                 35
 Industrial       Assistance in conducting modernisation projects; facilitation and access to credit to finance
 Cooperation
 Information      Exchange of information; dissemination of new technologies; training
 Society
 Mining           Exchange of information and experience; development of joint initiatives
 Money            Harmonisation of standards; technical and administrative assistance
 Laundering
 Nuclear Safety   Development of laws and regulations; supervision of the transportation of radioactive materials
 Political        Convergence of the parties’ positions on international issues
 Dialogue
 Public           Technical assistance; exchange of information; joint projects; Training
 Administration
 Regional         Promotion of regional cooperation; technical assistance programmes
 Cooperation
 Research and     Joint research projects; exchange of researchers; development of public-private partnership
 Technology
 SME              Technical assistance; facilitation of the access to finance
 Social Matters   Coordination of social security systems; non-discrimination regarding working conditions
 Statistics       Harmonisation and/or development of statistical methods; training
 Taxation         Assistance in conducting fiscal system reforms
 Terrorism        Exchange of information and experience; joint research and studies
 Visa and         Exchange of information; drafting legislation; training
 Asylum
Source: World Trade Report 2011

Figure A1: Evolution of US and EU agreements




                                                              36
Table A2: Correlation atrix
                                  Tariffs on
                                  manufact     Tariffs on                                                               Counterv
                                    uring      agricultur              Export                                  Anti-     ailing
                                   goods        al goods    Customs     taxes     SPS       TBT       STE    dumping    measures
 Tariffs on manufacturing goods     1.00         0.99        0.95          0.93   0.69      0.74      0.79     0.86       0.82
 Tariffs on agricultural goods      0.99         1.00        0.95          0.93   0.69      0.74      0.80     0.87       0.83
 Customs                            0.95         0.95        1.00          0.94   0.72      0.73      0.83     0.89       0.85
 Export taxes                       0.93         0.93        0.94          1.00   0.72      0.73      0.80     0.85       0.82
 SPS                                0.69         0.69        0.72          0.72   1.00      0.86      0.66     0.70       0.68
 TBT                                0.74         0.74        0.73          0.73   0.86      1.00      0.68     0.66       0.70
 STE                                0.79         0.80        0.83          0.80   0.66      0.68      1.00     0.83       0.84
 Anti-dumping                       0.86         0.87        0.89          0.85   0.70      0.66      0.83     1.00       0.95
 Countervailing measures            0.82         0.83        0.85          0.82   0.68      0.70      0.84     0.95       1.00
 State aid                          0.82         0.83        0.85          0.83   0.69      0.71      0.84     0.84       0.81
 Public procurement                 0.73         0.74        0.73          0.78   0.77      0.85      0.71     0.63       0.66
 TRIMS                              0.55         0.55        0.57          0.58   0.75      0.73      0.62     0.62       0.65
 GATS                               0.75         0.75        0.74          0.77   0.84      0.92      0.66     0.67       0.68
 TRIPS                              0.86         0.86        0.90          0.87   0.72      0.78      0.86     0.86       0.89
 Competition policy                 0.84         0.84        0.84          0.84   0.64      0.64      0.86     0.86       0.83
 IPR                                0.80         0.80        0.84          0.81   0.67      0.75      0.89     0.80       0.82
 Investment                         0.74         0.74        0.73          0.78   0.81      0.84      0.68     0.68       0.67
 Movement of capital                0.86         0.87        0.87          0.90   0.72      0.70      0.80     0.85       0.80
                                                 Public                                                                 Moveme
                                               procurem                                   Competiti          Investme     nt of
                                  State aid       ent       TRIMS          GATS   TRIPS   on policy   IPR       nt       capital
 Tariffs on manufacturing goods     0.82         0.73        0.55          0.75   0.86      0.84      0.80     0.74       0.86
 Tariffs on agricultural goods      0.83         0.74        0.55          0.75   0.86      0.84      0.80     0.74       0.87
 Customs                            0.85         0.73        0.57          0.74   0.90      0.84      0.84     0.73       0.87
 Export taxes                       0.83         0.78        0.58          0.77   0.87      0.84      0.81     0.78       0.90
 SPS                                0.69         0.77        0.75          0.84   0.72      0.64      0.67     0.81       0.72
 TBT                                0.71         0.85        0.73          0.92   0.78      0.64      0.75     0.84       0.70
 STE                                0.84         0.71        0.62          0.66   0.86      0.86      0.89     0.68       0.80
 Anti-dumping                       0.84         0.63        0.62          0.67   0.86      0.86      0.80     0.68       0.85
 Countervailing measures            0.81         0.66        0.65          0.68   0.89      0.83      0.82     0.67       0.80
 State aid                          1.00         0.73        0.63          0.65   0.88      0.87      0.82     0.76       0.84
 Public procurement                 0.73         1.00        0.70          0.85   0.76      0.67      0.73     0.86       0.78
 TRIMS                              0.63         0.70        1.00          0.73   0.62      0.56      0.61     0.71       0.62
 GATS                               0.65         0.85        0.73          1.00   0.73      0.63      0.73     0.84       0.76
 TRIPS                              0.88         0.76        0.62          0.73   1.00      0.81      0.89     0.74       0.82
 Competition policy                 0.87         0.67        0.56          0.63   0.81      1.00      0.79     0.70       0.86
 IPR                                0.82         0.73        0.61          0.73   0.89      0.79      1.00     0.71       0.78
 Investment                         0.76         0.86        0.71          0.84   0.74      0.70      0.71     1.00       0.80
 Movement of capital                0.84         0.78        0.62          0.76   0.82      0.86      0.78     0.80       1.00




                                                                      37
      Table A3: PPML Regression: Trade Creation data every 3 years
                        Depth PPML 3yrs
                           (1)        (2)                  (3)           (4)        (5)         (6)              (7)
VARIABLES                Trade      Trade                 Trade         Trade      Trade       Trade            Trade

Depth LE                  0.117*                                                   0.136      0.298*           0.291*
                          (0.060)                                                 (0.084)     (0.162)          (0.159)
Depth All                                0.098**
                                         (0.050)
Depth Core LE                                             0.062
                                                         (0.041)
Depth Core All                                                          0.056
                                                                       (0.037)
old PTAs                                                                           0.036       0.094             0.083
                                                                                  (0.062)     (0.072)          (0.071)
PTA                                                                                           -0.067            -0.077
                                                                                              (0.073)          (0.070)
ln(1+TTRI)                                                                                                      -0.286
                                                                                                               (0.608)
N                         41,925          41,925          41,925        41,925     41,925     41,925            35,724
Exp.-Year                  yes             yes             yes           yes        yes        yes                yes
Imp.-Year                  yes             yes             yes           yes        yes        yes                yes
Exp.-Imp.                  yes             yes             yes           yes        yes        yes                yes
                         2002-14         2002-14         2002-14       2002-14    2002-14    2002-14           2002-14
Period                     3yrs            3yrs            3yrs          3yrs       3yrs       3yrs               3yrs
Note: LE stands for legally enforceable. Robust standard errors, clustered at the country-pair level, are in
parentheses.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




      Figure A2: Falsification test with random levels of depth (500 reps)

                                               Kernel density estimate
            5
            4  3
         Density
         2  1
            0




                         -.2             -.1              0            .1         .2           .3
                                                          beta_depth

                                                        Kernel density estimate
                                                        Normal density
                   kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 0.0272




                                                                        38
Table A4:Content of the EU Treaties, Korea-US FTA, and Peru-Chile FTA
                                      EU        Korea - US Peru - Chile
              Provision                     Legally enforceable
 Tariffs on agricultural goods        Yes            Yes         Yes
 Tariffs on industrial goods          Yes            Yes         Yes
 Customs                              Yes            Yes         Yes
 Export taxes                         Yes            Yes         Yes
 GATS                                 Yes            Yes         Yes
 TBT                                  Yes            Yes         Yes
 TRIMS                                Yes            Yes         Yes
 Public procurement                   Yes            Yes         No
 SPS                                  Yes            No          Yes
 STE                                  Yes            Yes         No
 TRIPS                                Yes            Yes         No
 Anti-dumping                         Yes            No          No
 Countervailing measures              Yes            No          No
 State aid                            Yes            No          No
 Investment                           Yes            Yes         Yes
 Movement of capital                  Yes            Yes         Yes
 Agriculture                          Yes            Yes         Yes
 IPR                                  Yes            Yes         No
 Energy                               Yes            No          No
 Environmental laws                   Yes            No          No
 Labor market regulations             Yes            No          No
 Anticorruption                       Yes            No          No
 Approximation of legislation         Yes            No          No
 Audiovisual                          Yes            No          No
 Competition policy                   Yes            No          No
 Consumer protection                  Yes            No          No
 Cultural cooperation                 Yes            No          No
 Data protection                      Yes            No          No
 Economic policy dialogue             Yes            No          No
 Education and training               Yes            No          No
 Financial assistance                 Yes            No          No
 Health                               No             Yes         No
 Illegal immigration                  Yes            No          No
 Industrial cooperation               Yes            No          No
 Mining                               Yes            No          No
 Nuclear safety                       Yes            No          No
 Regional cooperation                 Yes            No          No
 Research and technology              Yes            No          No
 SME                                  Yes            No          No
 Social matters                       Yes            No          No
 Statistics                           Yes            No          No
 Taxation                             Yes            No          No
 Terrorism                            Yes            No          No
 Visa and asylum                      Yes            No          No




                                              39
    Table A5: OLS Regression: Trade Creation
                     Depth OLS 2002-14                                 Depth OLS 2002-14 3yrs                         Depth OLS 2002-14 w/Internal Flows
                        (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)         (5)          (6)         (7)       (8)         (9)       (10)        (11)          (12)
VARIABLES              Trade       Trade        Trade       Trade        Trade       Trade        Trade     Trade      Trade       Trade      Trade         Trade


Depth LE             0.273***                                          0.273***                                       0.291***
                      (0.036)                                           (0.044)                                       (0.036)
Depth All                         0.152***                                          0.148***                                     0.167***
                                   (0.028)                                           (0.036)                                      (0.028)
Depth Core LE                                 0.161***                                          0.169***                                    0.175***
                                               (0.027)                                           (0.034)                                     (0.026)
Depth Core All                                             0.114***                                        0.122***                                        0.126***
                                                            (0.023)                                        (0.029)                                         (0.023)
N                     87,579       87,579      87,579       87,579      33,118       33,118      33,118     33,118     88,767     88,767     88,767         88,767
Exp.-Year FE           yes          yes         yes          yes         yes          yes         yes        yes        yes        yes        yes            yes
Imp. -Year FE           yes          yes         yes          yes         yes          yes         yes       yes        yes         yes        yes           yes
Exp.-Imp. FE             yes         yes          yes        yes          yes          yes          yes      yes        yes         yes        yes           yes
Note: LE stands for legally enforceable. Robust standard errors, clustered at the country-pair level,
are in parentheses.
*** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
APPENDIX B - A MOTIVATING EXAMPLE OF DEEP AGREEMENTS

        Trade creation and trade diversion in deep agreements can be illustrated using a standard
diagram of the impact of PTAs.33 The diagram assumes that there are three countries symmetric
in size (Home, Partner and RoW), each country exports two goods and imports the other. The
diagram displays the market for the good imported by Home, showing the export supply curves
(XS) and the import demand curve MD (Figure B1). All countries have a specific import tariff,
t, on all imports. In addition, and for simplicity, assume that the frictional barriers created by
non-tariff measures have an ad valorem equivalent tariff T. This implies that the gap between
Home’s domestic price P and the price of the two exporting countries is precisely given by the
sum of the tariff and the frictional barrier, so that the export price is P-t-T.


        In this framework, the trade impact of a deep relative to a shallow PTA can be easily
assessed. While a shallow agreement would only eliminate the tariff between members, a deep
agreement eliminates both the tariff and the frictional barriers, resulting in larger trade creation.
In the diagram, the shift to the right of the export supply curve is larger under a deep relative to
a shallow agreement and Partner sees a sharper increase in its export price, leading to a larger
increase in exports to Home. Now consider the impact of the agreement on non-members. The
deep PTA still eliminates tariffs and other trade costs preferentially, but also reduces part of the
frictional barriers on an MFN basis (TMFN, Figure B1). The ultimate impact of a deep PTA on
RoW’s price and export is ambiguous. The figure also shows that the larger is the proportion
of TMFN in total trade costs, the greater is the positive impact of PTAs’ on third countries’
exports and the lower is the trade diverting effect of preferential tariffs.




        33
             See Chapter 5 in Baldwin and Wyplosz (2012).
Figure B1: Trade Creation and Trade Diversion




Note: Based on Baldwin (2014).




                                                42
