                                                      WPS8107


Policy Research Working Paper                        8107




         Fast, Easy and Cheap Job Matching
                   Social Networks in Bangladesh

                                  Norihiko Matsuda
                                  Shinsaku Nomura




Education Global Practice Group
June 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 8107


  Abstract
 This paper uncovers the reason why social networks are used                        paper concludes that social networks play the role as fast
 in a job market. The data are novel: a nationally represen-                        and easy but narrow-spectrum matching. That is, social net-
 tative matched employer-employee data set in Bangladesh                            works allow job seekers to find jobs quickly and easily and
 with detailed information, including direct measures of                            thereby reduce search costs, but the types of jobs available
 the use of social networks. The empirical analysis shows                           from social networks are narrower than those from open
 that compared with those who used open channels to find                            channels. As a consequence, those who choose to use social
 jobs, the employees who used social networks found jobs                            networks are more likely to end up having mismatched
 more easily, have lower observable abilities, and achieved                         jobs, that is jobs in which they cannot take advantage of
 lower employment outcomes conditional on observable                                their specialties. In the context of developing countries, a
 and unobservable abilities. These results are robust whether                       considerable number of poor job seekers may use social
 firm-occupation fixed effects are controlled for or not. By                        networks out of necessity even if the returns to finding good-
 comparing these findings with theoretical predictions, the                         match jobs through open channels are sufficiently high.




  This paper is a product of the Education Global Practice Group. It is part of a larger effort by the World Bank to provide
  open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions around the world. Policy Research
  Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The authors may be contacted atsnomura@
  worldbank.org.




         The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
         issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
         names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
         of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
         its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                       Produced by the Research Support Team
Fast, Easy and Cheap Job Matching: Social Networks
                  in Bangladesh∗


              Norihiko Matsuda, University of Wisconsin-Madison †
                             Shinsaku Nomura, World Bank ‡




JEL Codes : J64, J63, J31
Key words : Social networks, referrals, job search, labor markets




   ∗
     The authors are grateful to Yoko Nagashima and Iﬀath Sharif for their review and feedback. The
ﬁndings, interpretations, and conclusions in this paper are entirely those of the authors and should not
be attributed to the World Bank or its aﬃliated organizations.
   †
     Corresponding author. Department of Agricultural and Applied Economics. Madison, WI.
nmatsuda@wisc.edu
   ‡
     Education Global Practice. Washington, D.C. snomura@worldbank.org
1       Introduction
There is a consensus in the literature that social networks are widely used in job markets
across the world.1 While there are various theories about the roles of social networks
in labor markets, mixed empirical evidence does not allow the literature to reach a
consensus about the roles.
    This paper uncovers the role of social networks in a job market, i.e., why social
networks are used, by testing theoretical predictions under major hypotheses in the lit-
erature. The hypotheses examined are information transmission, screening, peer eﬀects,
and nepotism hypotheses. Using nationally representative matched employer-employee
data in Bangladesh, we comprehensively estimate empirical counterparts of the theoret-
ical predictions based on diﬀerent regression speciﬁcations including a ﬁrm ﬁxed eﬀect
model and a ﬁrm-occupation ﬁxed eﬀect model.
    We ﬁnd that employees who used social networks found jobs more quickly and easily,
have lower observable abilities and similar unobservable ones, have a higher turnover,
earn less salary persistently across job tenure, and are seemingly less productive, com-
pared to employees at either the same or diﬀerent ﬁrms who found jobs through formal
channels. These empirical results agree with the information transmission hypothesis
where job information via social networks and via formal channels originates from dif-
ferent sources. On the other hand, the results reject the screening, peer, and nepotism
hypotheses.
    Given the correspondence between the empirical results and the predictions, we con-
clude that the role of social networks in the Bangladeshi labor market is fast and easy but
narrow-spectrum matching, as suggested by Bentolila et al. (2010) in the case of the U.S.
and Europe. That is, social networks help job seekers quickly and easily ﬁnd jobs, but
the types of jobs available from social networks are narrower than those available from
open channels. By using open channels, job seekers can ﬁnd good-match jobs although
the search costs are higher since they have to go through longer search spells and apply
for more vacancies.2 By using social networks, on the other hand, they can reduce search
costs while social networks may bring mismatched jobs. Given this trade-oﬀ, those for
whom job search through open channels is not worthwhile choose to use social networks
and accept mismatched jobs.
    On the employer-side too, we ﬁnd evidence that social networks are used as fast
    1
     For example, Topa (2011); Ioannides and Datcher Loury (2004) for developed countries, and Beaman
and Magruder (2012); Larsen et al. (2011); Heath (2016) for developing countries.
   2
     Throughout this paper, a good-match job means a job in which a worker can exploit his specialty.
A mismatched job is a job in which he cannot exploit his specialty.



                                                 2
and easy job match. The employers who used social networks as a common mode of
job advertisements ﬁlled vacancies in a shorter period and felt less diﬃculty in ﬁlling
vacancies compared with the employers who did not so commonly use social networks.
This ﬁnding suggests that social networks allow employers to quickly and easily ﬁll
vacancies. Social networks do not necessarily bring the best workers, but employers set
lower wages for worse workers.
    In developing countries, many job seekers may have insuﬃcient ﬁnancial sources
for job search and be very responsive to search costs. In particular, there may be a
substantial number of poor job seekers who cannot help but using social networks due
to lack of credits even if their returns to ﬁnding good-match jobs through open channels
are suﬃciently high.
    This paper relates to the broad literature on social networks in labor markets (Bea-
man, 2016; Topa, 2011; Ioannides and Datcher Loury, 2004 for excellent reviews). We
contribute to it by providing solid empirical evidence showing that social networks serve
as fast and easy but narrow-range job matching. This aspect of social networks in la-
bor markets, as well as the negative consequence that network-based job search causes
mismatches, has been largely missed in the literature. The aspect is studied only by
Bentolila et al. (2010) and Pellizzari (2010), to the best of our knowledge. Most of the
previous studies highlight other aspects, such as implied by the screening and the peer
eﬀects hypotheses, which lead to the positive consequence that social networks generally
improve labor market eﬃciency and do not bring about job mismatches.
    Our empirical ﬁndings that social networks use is associated positively with turnover
and negatively with salary are exceptional. The literature mostly ﬁnds opposite results.
For example, using novel datasets of nine large ﬁrms, most of which are based in the U.S.
and all of which have employee referrals programs, Burks et al. (2015) show that referred
workers have lower turnover and similar or higher earnings. Brown et al. (2016) use
data of a single ﬁrm and observe that referred workers have lower turnover and higher
wage. Simon and Warner (1992) and Kugler (2003) also identify positive associations
between social networks use and wages in the U.S. Outside the U.S., Hensvik and Skans
(2016) and Dustmann et al. (2016) identify the positive associations with wages in Swe-
den and Germany, respectively. Conducting experiments in an online job marketplace,
Pallais and Sands (2016) observe that referred workers have lower turnover. By con-
trast, only a handful of papers ﬁnd similar results to ours. Using datasets from the U.S.
(the Multi-City Study of Urban Inequality 1992–1994) and Europe (the European Com-
munity Household Panel, ECHP), Bentolila et al. (2010) ﬁnd that workers who found
jobs through social networks earned less. Pellizzari (2010) uses the same European data


                                           3
(the ECHP) as Bentolila et al. (2010) and identiﬁes the negative association between
social networks use and wages in some countries. In the case of Ethiopia’s cut ﬂower
farms, Mano et al. (2011) ﬁnd that workers recruited through social networks received
discounted wages at entry, which quickly disappeared with job tenure, however.
    This paper also adds to the literature by providing clean and country-level evidence.
First, our estimation results are robust to controlling for ﬁrm ﬁxed eﬀects and ﬁrm-
occupation ﬁxed eﬀects. In other words, the associations of social networks use with
salary, turnover, and other outcomes do not change no matter whether the referred work-
ers are compared with the nonreferred at the same ﬁrms or at diﬀerent ﬁrms. Controlling
for ﬁrm ﬁxed eﬀects is possible only with matched employer-employee data. Second, we
use direct measures of social networks use, which are based on responses of employees.
Besides, we check the validity of the measures with employer-side information. We do
not need to rely on indirect measures such as being neighbors (e.g., Schmutte, 2015) and
having worked at the same ﬁrms previously (e.g., Hensvik and Skans, 2016). Lastly, our
data are nationally representative while most of the empirical evidence in the literature
builds on data from small geographical areas or speciﬁc ﬁrms.


2    Theories in the literature
The literature has various theoretical models of social networks in labor markets (Bea-
man, 2016; Topa, 2011; Ioannides and Datcher Loury, 2004 for reviews). Although those
models hypothesize diﬀerent roles of social networks, or diﬀerent reasons behind social
networks use, most of the hypotheses can be categorized into the following: transmission,
screening, peer eﬀects, and nepotism hypotheses. We brieﬂy explain each hypothesis and
related literature. We summarize the theoretical predictions under each hypothesis in
table 1.
    First, the transmitting information hypothesis is that social networks play the role
in transmitting more information about job vacancies. Building on this hypothesis, a
large number of theoretical papers study labor market consequences of social networks
use (e.g., Calv´o-Armengol and Jackson, 2004, 2007; Ioannides and Soetevent, 2006).
While most of these papers are dedicated to analyzing network-level outcomes such as
neighborhood and ethnicity rather than worker-level analysis, they have individual-level
predictions that referred workers experienced a shorter unemployment spell and earn
more than nonreferred ones. The intuitions behind the predictions are that since re-
ferred workers are connected to more contacts on average and therefore receive more job



                                           4
information, they ﬁnd jobs more quickly and have higher reservation wage.3 The predic-
tions are summarized in column (1) of table 1. Empirically, Munshi (2003) and Beaman
(2012) ﬁnd supporting evidence. Importantly, the predictions require the assumption
that the job information via social networks and via open channels originates from an
identical underlying distribution of job vacancies. This assumption is common among
the studies building on the transmitting information hypothesis.
    Notably, Bentolila et al. (2010) make the distinct assumption that job information
sources are diﬀerent while they still view the primary role of social networks as trans-
mitting vacancy information. To our knowledge, their paper is the only one having this
assumption. The settings are as follows: there are two types of occupations; each worker
has occupation-speciﬁc advantage in a randomly chosen occupation;4 this advantage is
observable to everyone; her social network is connected to one occupation, and she can
ﬁnd more easily a job at the connected occupation than a job at the unconnected occu-
pation. If her specialized occupation agrees with the connected occupation, she searches
for a job of her specialty. If they disagree, she may not bother searching for a job in her
specialty but rather take up a job that she can ﬁnd through the network. As a result,
those who use networks are more likely to work for mismatched jobs, and hence they
earn less on average. Column (2) in table 1 summarizes the predictions. Noteworthy is
the negative association between wages and the use of social networks, which is unique
to their models. Although their model is simpliﬁed to having two occupations, in our
understanding, the key diﬀerence from the other models is that information via social
networks is drawn from a diﬀerent distribution than the one from which information
via open channels is drawn. Thus, we call their assumptions about the role of social
networks the diﬀerent information transmission hypothesis.
    Second, the screening hypothesis is that social networks reduce uncertainty about
a worker’s productivity or match quality by bringing hard-to-observe information. In
the seminal paper of Montgomery (1991), workers are observationally equivalent, and
the productivity of workers is ex ante unknown and revealed after employment.5 Wages
cannot be contingent on output, and workers live only for one period. As a role of so-
cial networks, the model assumes inbreeding, or homophily, of social structure: workers
within a network are relatively homogeneous. Thus, ﬁrms are able to more precisely
   3
         o-Armengol (2004) and Calv´
     Calv´                            o-Armengol and Zenou (2005), however, show non-monotonicity
of unemployment probability with respect to network size.
   4
     This occupation speciﬁc advantage can be interpreted in various ways. It may represent occupation-
speciﬁc expertise, personal preference which leads to high future productivity, or any other types of
match quality.
   5
     The model holds whether workers know their productivity ex ante or not. Thus, it is possible to
consider the productivity as match quality.


                                                  5
infer the productivity of applicants who belong to networks of incumbent workers. The
model predicts that referred workers earn more and have higher unobservable abilities
than nonreferred workers conditional on observable abilities.6 Hensvik and Skans (2016)
provide empirical evidence supporting the predictions. Although the model of Mont-
gomery (1991) does not have a prediction about wage growth since a worker lives for
one period, we straightforwardly expect that wage growth is higher for referred workers
since they have better abilities on average.
    Another seminal paper is Simon and Warner (1992). Although their framework, ap-
plying Jovanovic’s (1979) matching model, is diﬀerent from Montgomery (1991), they
essentially assume the same role of social networks: social networks reduce the ex ante
uncertainty about match quality. Since their model is dynamic, they have predictions
about turnover and wage growth, which Montgomery (1991) does not have. The set-
tings are the following: Inﬁnitely-lived workers meet employers through either social
networks or open markets; workers are homogeneous in the sense that their ﬁrm-speciﬁc
productivity, or job-match quality, is independently and identically distributed; the pro-
ductivity is ex post observable but is ex ante only partially observable with noise to both
workers and employers; wages can be renegotiated, and workers can quit jobs; lastly,
the role of social networks is modeled as that the noise is smaller when workers and
employers meet through social networks than when they meet in open markets. In an
equilibrium, entry wage is set equal to the expected productivity, and subsequent wage is
equal to the actual productivity. The predictions are the following: (i) Entry wages are
higher for those who ﬁnd jobs through social networks than those who ﬁnd them through
open channels. (ii) Wage growth of nonreferred workers is higher. (iii) Referred workers
have lower turnover than nonreferred ones.7 , 8 Brown et al. (2016) and Dustmann et al.
(2016) obtain empirical results aligning with these predictions. The predictions under
   6
     The original paper does not explicitly state the prediction about unobservable abilities, however.
   7
     The reason for prediction (i) is that the nonreferred, whose productivity is less revealed at hire,
have the option to quit jobs if their ﬁrm-speciﬁc productivity turns out low while they can enjoy high
wage if the productivity turns out high. The reason for prediction (ii) is the following: wages from the
subsequent period are set exactly equal to the true productivity, and only those whose productivity is
higher than an identical threshold irrespective of being referred or not continue to work. The reason
for prediction (iii) is that the probability that actual productivity turns out higher than the threshold
conditional on an initial oﬀer being accepted is higher for the referred than the nonreferred.
   8
     These predictions hold in extended versions such as Dustmann et al. (2016) and Galenianos (2013).
Dustmann et al. (2016) slightly formalize the original model and conﬁrm that the same predictions are
derived. Galenianos (2013) adds heterogeneity in ﬁrm’s productivity and allows ﬁrm’s investment in
reducing the ex ante uncertainty particularly when hiring through an open labor market. Even in this
case, the same predictions about entry wages, wage growth, and turnover are obtained conditional on
ﬁrm’s productivity. However, unconditional association between social networks use and wage can be
negative.



                                                   6
the screening hypothesis are shown in column (3) of table 1.
    Third, the peer eﬀects hypothesis is that social networks are exploited to increase
worker’s performance by peer eﬀects. Kugler (2003) puts forth the model where moral
hazard occurs. She models the role of social networks as that those who are referred by
high-eﬀort workers have disutility from shirking due to peer monitoring by their referrals.
Put intuitively, peer monitoring lowers employer’s costs for monitoring.9 Predictions are
that referred workers earn more and have longer job tenure than nonreferred ones.10
Diﬀerent aspects of peer interactions, other than peer monitoring, are studied in other
papers empirically. For example, Bandiera et al. (2013) examine how team productivity
diﬀers depending on incentive structures; Bandiera et al. (2005) examine how individuals
respond to potential externalities to their peers; Pallais and Sands (2016) experimentally
test whether referred workers are more productive when working with referrers and
whether referred workers exert more eﬀort when they know that their performance known
to referrers aﬀects referrers’ promotion. They do not have theoretical predictions relevant
to our empirical analysis, however.11 The predictions are summarized in column (4) of
table 1.
    Lastly, the nepotism hypothesis is that nepotism by incumbent workers and employ-
ers is the reason behind social networks use. Nepotism plausibly takes place in job
markets if private returns of incumbent workers and employers to referral diﬀers from
ﬁrm’s returns to it. A few papers empirically ﬁnd the existence of nepotism (Wang,
2013; Fafchamps and Moradi, 2015), but, to our knowledge, no theoretical models con-
ceptualize the use of social networks as nepotism.12 Nonetheless, we expect that under
   9
      Another assumption on social networks in her model is that social networks are less eﬃcient than
the open market in terms of the encounter rates. While this assumption may not be plausible in some
contexts, it is mainly for the convenience in having the two matching channels exist in an equilibrium.
It does not drive main implications.
   10
      The reason for the wage diﬀerence is that ﬁrms pay eﬃciency wages to referred workers while ﬁrms
pay lower wages to nonreferred workers and incur shirking. The reason for the tenure diﬀerence is that
non-referred workers end up being dismissed due to their shirking.
   11
      Heath (2016) develops a model which incorporates moral hazard problems and produces predictions
about observable abilities and wage growth. Her model is quite speciﬁc to the empirical context where a
minimum wage regulation is binding. A ﬁrm may be reluctant to hire a low-ability worker if willingness-
to-pay wage is below the minimum wage. In this case, if a low-ability worker has a high-ability worker
in his network, he and the ﬁrm can get around the minimum wage restriction by bundling up the wages
of him and the high-ability companion. This bundling of wages is the role of social networks in her
model, and there are no peer eﬀects. Thus, we do not categorize the model under the peer eﬀects
hypothesis although it is sometimes categorized so (e.g. Beaman, 2016). The model is also called as
a moral hazard model and viewed as the same category as Kugler (2003) (e.g., Brown et al., 2016).
However, we diﬀerentiate it from Kugler (2003) since the bundling to get around the minimum wage,
which is the key role of social networks in the model, does not require moral hazard and applies to the
case where worker’s output is perfectly observable.
   12
      Goldberg (1982) puts forth a theory modeling nepotism. However, it focuses on ﬁrm-side implica-



                                                  7
the nepotism hypothesis, referred workers experienced a shorter job search spell, have
lower abilities and productivity.13 We consider that implications on turnover and wages
are theoretically unclear and depend on contexts. Column (5) in table 1 summarizes the
predictions.


3     Data
We use Bangladeshi matched employer–employee survey data collected in 2012 by the
World Bank. The data are nationally representative of formal-sector employers and
employees in manufacturing, commerce, ﬁnance, education, and public administration.14
The survey randomly sampled establishments, and then sampled employees within the
establishments. The sampling of establishments was stratiﬁed by industries and size.15
Interviews were administered separately for employers and employees. Note that while
the data represent the formal sector employees, they do not represent the whole labor
force since the data do not include informal-sector employees or the unemployed labor
force.
    We restrict the sample as follows. We include only three industries: manufactur-
ing, commerce, and ﬁnance, because the other industries: education and public admin-
istration, consist mostly of government or government-aided organizations for public
services.16 The three industries account for 48% and 71% of the establishments and
employees, respectively, in the Bangladesh formal sector (Nomura et al., 2013). We ex-
clude seasonal and day laborers and part-time and contract workers, and focus only on
full-time permanent employees,17 who constitute about 90% of the original sample. We
also restrict the sample to males, who account for nearly 90% of the original sample.
Lastly, we restrict the sample to those aged 40 and below, who constitute about 90% of
the original sample. The reason for excluding older employees is that information at the
timing of recruitment, such as initial salary, is crucial for our analysis and may be less
accurate for older employees since they tend to have been recruited a longer time ago.
After the above restrictions are applied, our sample has 339 establishments and 3,396
tions of nepotism and does not have predictions relevant to our study.
   13
      In a Bangladeshi context, Mahmood and Absar (2015) suggests that there exists nepotism favoring
relatives and friends in a labor market.
   14
      See Nomura et al. (2013) for details about the data.
   15
      The size is deﬁned by the number of employees and consists of small (10–20), medium (21–70) and
large (71+).
   16
      Most schools in Bangladesh are government-aided privately-managed schools. The recruitment of
full-time teachers is regulated by the government.
   17
      Permanent workers are those who have an indeﬁnite period of employment.



                                                 8
employees.
    The data includes information about cognitive and non-cognitive skills that were
assessed during the survey based on short tests and questions about language and math
skills and personality traits. These skills are likely to be unobservable, or not easily
observable, to employers at the timing of hiring. The non-cognitive skills include Big 5
personality traits, which we convert into a single index for our analysis.18
    Summary statistics of establishments are shown in table 2. Approximately, half the
sample is manufacturing (N = 191), and the other half is evenly split into commerce and
ﬁnance (N = 74 each). The proportions of small, medium and large establishments are
respectively 48%, 29%, and 22%. 61% are single establishment ﬁrms. 69% use personal
networks as a common mode of job advertisement.
    The ways employees found their current jobs are presented in table 3. Social networks
are the most prevalent channel to ﬁnd jobs. 63% of employees found jobs through social
networks. As for social network type, families and relatives, friends, and neighbors
were dominant, used by 23%, 27%, and 12%, respectively. Political aﬃliations and
school alumni were almost negligible, used by only 1 % each. Among formal and open
channels, the most important is media advertisements, through which 33% of employees
found jobs. The other formal methods such as public and private employment services
and internet postings were used only by 4%. These statistics demonstrate that social
networks of families/relatives, friends, and neighbors are the most common job search
method in the formal sector and that media advertisements are dominant among the
formal open methods.
    Our measure of social networks use is based on employees’ responses as to whether
they found a job through social networks or not. This measure, however, does not say
whether an employee was referred or not. The data do not include information about
referral. Thus, the use of social networks in this paper is not restricted to referrals but
includes various forms such as passing on information.
    Table 4 shows summary statistics of employees. An average employee is 24 years
old and has 9.0 years of schooling and 4.3 years of tenure. The composition of entry
occupations is that 6%, 20%, 61% and 14% of employees were recruited as managers,
professionals, semi-skilled workers, and elementary workers, respectively. Only 4% have
been promoted in current ﬁrms. Compared to those who did not use social networks
to ﬁnd jobs, those who did are younger and less educated, have slightly shorter tenure
  18
    For Big 5, we ﬁrstly calculate the z-score for each of the ﬁve personality traits, i.e., openness, consci-
entiousness, extroversion, agreeableness, and emotional stability, using the sample mean and standard
deviation. Then we construct Big 5 index as an equally weighted average of them, as Burks et al. (2015)
do.


                                                      9
and less earnings, are more likely to be at elementary occupations and less to be at
professional occupations, and less often experienced promotions.


4      Estimation strategy
Our overall strategy to uncover the role of social networks is to estimate diﬀerences in
job search experience, abilities, and employment outcomes between referred and nonre-
ferred workers and then compare empirical results to theoretical predictions. We run the
following regression equation:

                            yijk = θN etworkijk + β Xijk + γjk +         ijk ,                        (1)

where i, j , and k denote employees, establishments, and entry occupation types, respec-
tively; N etworkijk is a dummy indicating that employee i found his job through social
networks; Xijk are controls. The coeﬃcient θ represents a diﬀerence associated with the
use of a social network.
    It is important to note that our estimate of θ, a diﬀerence associated with the use of
social networks, is essentially descriptive, not causal. Therefore, if there is an unobserv-
able factor that is associated with the use of social networks and a dependent variable
and that is not endogenized in theoretical models, our estimate is unable to test theo-
retical predictions. To address this endogeneity problem, we have diﬀerent speciﬁcations
of the ﬁxed eﬀect, γjk , and the controls, Xijk , and draw conclusions that are consistent
across the diﬀerent speciﬁcations.19
    The three diﬀerent speciﬁcations of the ﬁxed eﬀect, γjk control for no ﬁxed eﬀects, ﬁrm
ﬁxed eﬀects, and ﬁrm-occupation ﬁxed eﬀects, respectively. Therefore, the ﬁrst speciﬁ-
cation estimates an association of social networks usage in the whole sample across ﬁrms,
whereas the second and third speciﬁcations estimate an association, respectively, within
ﬁrms and within ﬁrm-occupation cells. The third speciﬁcation is not necessarily more
preferable than the others. For example, if the use of social networks causes sorting of
employees into diﬀerent ﬁrms, estimates from the ﬁrst speciﬁcation are meaningful. But,
if employee’s selection into ﬁrms is driven by an unobservable factor, the second and third
speciﬁcations are more informative.20 Hence, we consider that the three speciﬁcations
  19
     It is worth noting that most of the previous studies rely on descriptive analyses. Exceptional papers
exploiting exogenous variation in social networks use are Beaman (2012) and Pallais and Sands (2016).
Besides, among the descriptive studies, only a handful of papers, such as Dustmann et al. (2016), provide
estimates with and without controls for ﬁrm ﬁxed eﬀects.
  20
     Since the theoretical predictions, except for those under the information transmission hypothesis,
apply to within-ﬁrm diﬀerences in outcome variables, within-ﬁrm comparison based on the second and


                                                   10
are all informative and complement each other.
    A concern in our estimations is that they may suﬀer from attrition bias since our data
do not include those who had been employed in the formal sectors but quit already. For
example, if the use of social contacts is associated with turnover patterns, our estimates
may have selection bias. We examine this attrition bias issue later.


5     Results
5.1     Job search spell
Table 5 presents diﬀerences in terms of last job search experience between employees
who used social networks and those who did not. Those who used social networks found
jobs in a signiﬁcantly shorter spell. The diﬀerence not controlling for ﬁrm ﬁxed eﬀects is
−24% (column (2)), and the within-ﬁrm and the within-ﬁrm-occupation diﬀerence are
−20% and −22%, respectively (columns (3) and (4)). Besides, those who used social
networks applied for fewer vacancies by 16–23% (columns (6)–(8)), which implies that a
shorter search spell was not a result of more intensive search. These results show that
those who used social networks found jobs more quickly and easily.


5.2     Observable abilities
Table 6 presents diﬀerences in the observable abilities: years of schooling, age at hire, and
parent’s education. The estimation results across the diﬀerent speciﬁcations clearly show
that those who used social networks have lower observable abilities compared with those
who used formal channels. According to the estimates controlling for ﬁrm-occupation
ﬁxed eﬀects, those who used social networks have signiﬁcantly less schooling by 1.39
years (column (3)) and were younger by 0.61 year at hire (column (6)). Their fathers
and mothers are less likely to have completed primary school education by 7% and 9%
points, respectively (columns (9) and (12)).21
third speciﬁcations is informative. The predictions under the same information transmission hypothesis
may or may not be valid for within-ﬁrm diﬀerences, though.
  21
     The result that those using social networks have less schooling could have been driven by the
possibility that job seekers with poor family backgrounds tend to rely on networks. A regression of
years of schooling with parents’ education being included as a control for family backgrounds, however,
gives a very similar coeﬃcient of the social network dummy in terms of magnitude and signiﬁcance,
which implies that the use of social networks is negatively associated with schooling conditional on
similar family backgrounds.




                                                  11
5.3     Unobservable abilities
Table 7 presents estimates of diﬀerences in seemingly unobservable cognitive and non-
cognitive abilities: the math, language, and personality scores. While these abilities
were made observable to econometricians by conducting an assessment in the survey,
they are somewhat unobservable, or hard-to-observe, to employers during a recruitment
process. The associations between social networks and the math and language scores are
statistically insigniﬁcant conditional on the observable abilities, except for the regression
of Big 5 without ﬁxed eﬀects (column (10)). The associations may also be economically
insigniﬁcant. According to the estimations in columns (4) and (8), those who used social
networks have higher math and language scores at most by 0.19σ and 0.24σ , respectively,
based on the upper bound of the 95% conﬁdence interval.22 As for the Big 5 index, the
within-ﬁrm-occupation diﬀerence is precisely estimated to be zero (column (12)) while
the diﬀerence not controlling for ﬁrm-ﬁxed eﬀects may be economically signiﬁcant. We
interpret the above results as indicating that the workers who used networks and those
who did not are precisely similar in terms of the unobserved abilities, especially within
colleagues at the same occupations in the same ﬁrms.


5.4     Tenure
The average job tenure of those who found jobs through social networks is shorter by 12–
20% (columns (2)–(4) in table 8). These estimates are signiﬁcant at the 10% level, except
for that controlling for ﬁrm ﬁxed eﬀects (column (3)). It is important to understand that
this estimation compares the average tenure of current employees who had survived, not
the expected tenure conditional on being hired. Thus, the estimation results do not mean
that the expected tenure conditional on being hired is 19% shorter for the employees who
used social networks than for those who did not use them. Nonetheless, the results are
likely to suggest that the use of social networks is negatively associated with job tenure.


5.5     Entry salary and salary growth
The regressions of entry salary, including bonuses, overtime, and other compensations,
reported in table 9 show that those who used social networks received signiﬁcantly lower
entry salary by 7–9% conditional on the observable and unobservable abilities whether
  22
    In the literature on impact evaluation of certain interventions, an eﬀect size of about 0.2 on edu-
cational outcomes such as cognitive scores is considerable. However, in our context where descriptive
associations, not impacts of a treatment, are examined, a 0.2σ diﬀerence in cognitive skills is not so
considerable to the whole distribution of the skills.



                                                  12
ﬁrm and ﬁrm-occupation ﬁxed eﬀects are included or not (columns (2)–(4)).23
   To examine salary growth, we run the following equation:

              log(CurrentW age)ijk = θN etworkijk +ρN etworkijk × tenureijk
                                                            + β Xijk + γjk +     ijk .             (2)

Job tenure as well as its interactions with individual characteristics such as abilities are
included in Xijk . The coeﬃcient of the interaction between the network dummy and
tenure, ρ, represents a salary growth diﬀerence between those who used social networks
and who did not. The coeﬃcient of the network dummy, θ, represents a diﬀerence in
entry salary.
    The estimation results are reported in table 10. First, the coeﬃcient of the network
dummy conﬁrms that those who used social networks received signiﬁcantly lower entry
salary. The entry salary discount is 9–13% (columns (2)–(4)), which are similar to the
estimates, 7–9%, reported in table 9. This similarity indicates robustness of the esti-
mated entry salary discount. Second, the diﬀerence in annual salary growth is precisely
estimated to be very small, if any, which implies that the salary discount does not dissi-
pate with job tenure. According to the estimation controlling for ﬁrm-occupation ﬁxed
eﬀects (column (4) in table 10), the salary discount initially starts at 11.8% and narrows
only by 0.5% annually according to the point estimates. The salary gap persists at 9.3%
after ﬁve years and at 6.8% after ten years.24 In addition, this annual catch-up is much
smaller than the annual growth, 6.7%, which is common to the both types of employees.
    We conduct a diﬀerent investigation on salary growth. Speciﬁcally, we run equation
(1) with the dependent variable being a current salary separately for a subsample of
each tenure, and examine how the salary gap changes with tenure. The motivation for
this analysis is to address the possibility that a salary trajectory may not be linear. The
result is illustrated in ﬁgure 1. It shows that the salary gap is persistent at about 10%
until 7 years of tenure. This persistent gap corroborates the ﬁnding that the earnings of
those who used social networks do not catch up.
  23
     The coeﬃcient of the language score is negative. This is opposite our expectation, and we do not
have a good explanation for it.
  24
     According to a formal statistical test that takes into account the variances and covariance of the
two coeﬃcients, the hypothesis that the salary gap is zero after 10 years is rejected with the p-value
being 0.0473. The corresponding p-value for 11 years is 0.0996.




                                                  13
5.6     Productivity: Promotion
Our data do not have a direct measure of employee’s productivity. We use promotion
history as a proxy of employee’s productivity, following Brown et al. (2016).25 Regres-
sion results where the dependent variable is the dummy for having ever been promoted
is reported in table 11. The promotion likelihood for those who used social networks is
about 1–2% points lower in all the speciﬁcations although the estimates are not signiﬁ-
cant.26 This result may suggest that those who used social networks are less productive
although the result lacks statistical precision and also may suﬀer from measurement
errors of productivity.


5.7     Robustness checks
5.7.1    Attrition bias

A concern in our results is that the estimates may have attrition bias. This is because
our data do not include former employees who had already quit before the data collection
and because our estimation on tenure suggests that turnover is correlated with the use
of social networks. To examine if the attrition bias exists, we run the same estimations
using the subsample of those who were hired in the last three years. Although the
attrition may have occurred among those new workers, the subsample may suﬀer less
from the potential attrition bias.
    Appendix A presents all the estimation results using the subsample. Although those
who used social networks still have shorter tenure by 9% than those who did not (column
(4), table A1), we obtain basically the same results.
    We examine the attrition bias issue in a diﬀerent way. We estimate a diﬀerence
between those who used networks and who did not, separately using a subsample of
each tenure. If the attrition bias is in play, the estimate may diﬀer with tenure. Since
estimates for shorter tenure are less aﬀected by the attrition, we particularly look into
if estimates for shorter tenure are similar to the main results explained in the preceding
subsections. Figure A1 demonstrates the estimation results. Although they lack pre-
cision, the estimates, particularly the ones for short tenure, look similar to the main
results.
  25
     Although promotion plausibly correlates with productivity, the obvious limitation is that promotion
reﬂects only a subset of productivity and also correlates with diﬀerent factors than productivity.
  26
     Since the sample mean of the likelihood is 4% (table 4), this 1–2% points diﬀerence is substantial.




                                                  14
5.7.2    Other robustness checks

We additionally conduct two robustness checks. First, since we restrict the sample to the
employees aged 40 and below, we examine if our results are sensitive to the cutoﬀ age
by running the same estimations for the sample aged 60 and below. We obtain similar
estimation results (appendix B).
    Second, our main estimations use the single aggregated index of Big 5 rather than
the ﬁve indexes of personality traits. As a robustness check, we run the same estimations
using the ﬁve indexes individually and ﬁnd similar results (Appendix C).27


6       Discussions
The summary of the results, reported in column (6) of table 1, is that employees who
used social networks found jobs more quickly and easily, have lower observable abili-
ties and similar unobservable ones, have a higher turnover, earn less salary persistently
through job tenure, and are seemingly less productive, compared to those who found
jobs through formal channels. These results are robust whether ﬁrm ﬁxed eﬀects and
ﬁrm-occupation ﬁxed eﬀects are controlled for or not. This robustness somewhat implies
that our estimation results are not driven by unknown factors that are not incorporated
in the hypothesized theories.
    In the following subsections, we ﬁrst compare these results with the theoretical pre-
dictions under the diﬀerent hypotheses. Then, we discuss the role of social networks in
the Bangladeshi labor market.


6.1     How the empirical ﬁndings agree with the theoretical pre-
        dictions
The same information transmission hypothesis disagrees with our results. Under the
hypothesis, social networks increase job arrival rate and thereby reservation wage. Hence,
wages of referred workers are predicted to be higher on average. This prediction is robust
across diﬀerent models.28 Contrary to the prediction, however, our estimations strongly
show that the use of social networks is negatively associated with wages.
  27
      From a diﬀerent perspective other than the robustness check, these estimations are interesting in
that the estimations may inform us how each trait is associated with labor market outcomes.
   28
      In the case that members in social networks increase, social networks can be negatively associated
with wages in a short run after the increase. However, this temporary negative association with wage
is not relevant to our results since there is no reason to believe that such increase in network members
occurred across Bangladesh. Long-run implications correspond to our empirical context.


                                                  15
    The screening hypothesis also contradicts our results. Under the hypothesis, since
social networks bring hard-to-observe information and reduce uncertainty about pro-
ductivity, referred workers are strongly predicted to be more productive, earn more, and
have lower turnover, compared to nonreferred workers particularly within the same ﬁrms.
However, our results controlling for ﬁrm-ﬁxed eﬀects reject the predictions on wage and
turnover.
    The peer eﬀects hypothesis does not match the results either. Since social networks
are exploited to increase workers’ productivity or extract workers’ eﬀort, referred workers
are more productive and earn more. They also have lower turnover since they do not shirk
and therefore are not dismissed.29 The estimation results imply the opposite, however.
    As for the nepotism hypothesis, although the discrepancy between the predictions
and the results is not strong, we interpret that the empirical results do not support it
for two reasons. First, the empirical ﬁnding that referred workers earned about 10%
less signiﬁcantly than nonreferred ones conditional on abilities seems not to support that
nepotism is in play although nepotism does not necessarily lead to patronees earning
more than they would earn in the absence of nepotism. We consider that the 10% salary
discount is too economically signiﬁcant for nepotism to exist behind the use of social
networks.30 Second, if nepotism is in play, referred workers may have higher likelihood
of promotion than nonreferred ones since nepotism may help promotion. However, the
empirical analysis suggests referred workers faced lower likelihood of promotion than
nonreferred ones conditional on abilities although this diﬀerence is not signiﬁcant.
    Lastly, the diﬀerent information transmission hypothesis agrees with the empirical
results well. Under the hypothesis, job search through social networks causes mismatch
because “workers may sacriﬁce their productive advantage so as to ﬁnd a job more easily”
(Bentolila et al., 2010). Hence, referred workers are less productive, earn less, and have
higher turnover. All of these predictions are supported by the empirical ﬁndings although
the empirical result on productivity is not signiﬁcant.
    The employer-side information also supports the diﬀerent information transmission
hypothesis. According to table 12, the employers who use social networks as a common
mode of job advertisements ﬁll vacancies in a shorter period than those who do not
(2.6 weeks vs 4.8 weeks). Also, the employers using social networks feel less diﬃculty
in ﬁlling job vacancies. These ﬁndings suggest that social networks help employers ﬁnd
  29
    These predictions may be more relevant for within-ﬁrm estimates.
  30
    A literature on patronage in Bangladesh suggests that favoritism for relatives and friends is salient
at workplaces (e.g., Mahmood and Absar (2015)). Such favoritism may help patronees get not only jobs
but also high salary and promotion. However, this is not supported by our empirical ﬁndings, especially
the economically signiﬁcant wage discount conditional on abilities.



                                                   16
employees quickly and easily. The ﬁndings seem to agree with the information trans-
mission hypothesis. On the other hand, the ﬁndings do not necessarily agree with the
screening and the peer eﬀect hypotheses since under these two hypotheses the employers
using social networks may spend longer time on recruitment in order to carefully select
applicants.31


6.2     The role of social networks
Given the correspondence between the empirical results and the theoretical predictions,
we conclude that the role of social networks in the Bangladeshi labor market is fast and
easy but narrow-spectrum matching. That is, social networks help job seekers quickly
and easily ﬁnd jobs, but the types of jobs available from social networks are narrower
than those available from open channels. By using open channels, they can ﬁnd good-
match jobs although the search costs are higher since they have to go through longer
search spells and apply for more vacancies. By using social networks, they can reduce
search costs while they may ﬁnd only mismatched jobs. Given this trade-oﬀ, those for
whom the extensive but expensive job search through open channels is not worthwhile
choose to use social networks and end up having mismatched jobs. As a consequence,
the jobs ﬁlled by social networks are more likely to be mismatched than those ﬁlled by
open channels.
   Table 13 provides additional evidence consistent with the above interpretation. The
table shows main reasons why employees chose the jobs. Compared to those who did
not use social networks, those who did are more likely to have chosen the jobs because of
“no other oﬀers” and “others’ recommendation” and less likely to have chosen because of
“good prospect for career progression” and “good prestige of ﬁrm.” This result indicates
that those who used social networks sacriﬁce better match (less “good prospect for career
progression”) and have lower abilities like motivation and forthcoming labor market
performance (less “good prospect for career progression,” less “good prestige of ﬁrm,”
and more “no other oﬀers”).32
   While Bentolila et al.’s (2010) model does not have predictions about observable abil-
  31
     Table 12 provides another important implication. Since the social networks dummy we use is
based on information from employees, our main results do not directly inform why employers use social
networks. It is even possible that employers do not know whom of their employees used social networks.
However, the employers who commonly use social networks have a signiﬁcantly larger proportion of
employees who found jobs through social networks: the proportion of such employees is 82.9% for the
employers using social networks but 37.0% for the employers not using them. This result implies that
employers actually use social networks and know whom of employees use social networks.
  32
     These abilities seem not to be well captured by years of schooling, or the cognitive or non-cognitive
skills.


                                                   17
ities, the negative association between social networks and observable abilities identiﬁed
in our data stands with the above interpretation. It is plausible that the wage diﬀerence
between a good-match job and a mismatch job increases with abilities. If so, the returns
to searching jobs through open channels are higher for high-ability workers, and hence
the use of social networks negatively correlates with observable abilities. Another pos-
sibility is that if wealth and abilities are positively correlated, lower-ability workers are
more likely to be poor, lack credits, and be unable to aﬀord an open-channel search.
    Importantly, in the context of developing countries where a considerable number of
people live on the margin of subsistence, a small diﬀerence in search costs may matter a
lot, and more job seekers may use social networks to reduce search costs than in developed
countries. Besides, if poor job seekers lack access to credits, they simply cannot use open
channels but social networks even if the returns to ﬁnding good-match jobs through open
channels is suﬃciently high.
    Table 14 somewhat suggests that poorer workers are more likely to use social networks
to ﬁnd jobs. The table shows correlations of social networks with worker’s characteristics
in a slightly diﬀerent way than tables 6 and 7. The negative correlations with parents’
education in table 14 may imply that poorer workers tend to use social networks since
parents’ education somewhat represents worker’s wealth while it also correlates with
worker’s ability.


7     Conclusions
Social networks are widely used in job markets across the world. Yet the reason for the
widespread use remains unclear. Using the novel data in Bangladesh, this paper provides
new evidence about the role of social networks in labor markets.
    The empirical results ﬁnd that the employees who used social networks found jobs
more quickly and easily, have lower observable abilities and similar unobservable ones,
have a higher turnover, earn less salary persistently across job tenure, and are seemingly
less productive, compared to the employees, at either the same or diﬀerent ﬁrms, who
found jobs through formal channels. Building on these ﬁndings, we draw the conclusion
that social networks play the role as fast and easy but narrow-spectrum matching. That
is, social networks help job seekers easily and quickly ﬁnd jobs, but the types of jobs
oﬀered through social networks are narrower.
    Social networks, as fast and easy but narrow-spectrum job matching, cause mis-
matches. If contacts of job seekers are unluckily at diﬀerent occupations than their
specialties, they face a trade-oﬀ between job match quality and search costs, and some

                                             18
of them opt to use social networks and accept mismatched jobs. In the context of de-
veloping countries, a reduction in job search costs, primarily in the form of a reduction
in search spells, may matter more than in developed countries. Besides, there may be
a substantial number of job seekers who cannot help but using social networks because
of limited access to credits even if an increase in earnings by ﬁnding a good-match job
through open channels exceeds the reduction in search costs by using social networks.




                                           19
References
Bandiera, Oriana, Iwan Barankay, and Imran Rasul (2005) ‘Social preferences and the
  response to incentives: Evidence from personnel data.’ Quarterly Journal of Economics
  120(3), 917–962

  (2013) ‘Team incentives: Evidence from a ﬁrm level experiment.’ Journal of the Eu-
  ropean Economic Association 11(5), 1079–1114

Beaman, Lori (2016) ‘Social networks and the labor market.’ In ‘The Oxford Handbook
  of the Economics of Networks’

Beaman, Lori A. (2012) ‘Social networks and the dynamics of labour market outcomes:
  Evidence from refugees resettled in the U.S.’ Review of Economic Studies 79(1), 128–
  161

Beaman, Lori, and Jeremy Magruder (2012) ‘Who gets the job referral? Evidence from
  a social networks experiment.’ American Economic Review 102(7), 3574–3593

Bentolila, Samuel, Claudio Michelacci, and Javier Suarez (2010) ‘Social contacts and
  occupational choice.’ Economica 77, 20–45

Brown, Meta, Elizabeth Setren, and Giorgio Topa (2016) ‘Do informal referrals lead to
  better matches? Evidence from a ﬁrm’s employee referral system.’ Journal of Labor
  Economics 34(1), 161–209

Burks, Stephen V, Bo Cowgill, Mitchell Hoﬀman, and Michael Housman (2015) ‘The
  value of hiring through employee referrals.’ Quarterly Journal of Economics pp. 1–36

    o-Armengol, Antoni (2004) ‘Job contact networks.’ Journal of Economic Theory
Calv´
  115(1), 191–206

    o-Armengol, Antoni, and Matthew O. Jackson (2004) ‘The eﬀects of social networks
Calv´
  on employment and inequality.’ American Economic Review 94(3), 426–454

    o-Armengol, Antoni, and Matthew O Jackson (2007) ‘Networks in labor mar-
Calv´
  kets: Wage and employment dynamics and inequality.’ Journal of Economic Theory
  132(1), 27–46

    o-Armengol, Antoni, and Yves Zenou (2005) ‘Job matching, social network and
Calv´
  word-of-mouth communication.’ Journal of Urban Economics 57(3), 500–522

Dustmann, Christian, Albrecht Glitz, Uta Sch¨   onberg, and Herbert Br¨ ucker (2016)
 ‘Referral-based job search networks.’ Review of Economic Studies 83(2), 514–546

Fafchamps, Marcel, and Alexander Moradi (2015) ‘Referral and job performance: Ev-
  idence from the Ghana colonial army.’ Economic Development & Cultural Change
  63(4), 715–751


                                          20
Galenianos, Manolis (2013) ‘Learning about match quality and the use of referrals.’
 Review of Economic Dynamics 16(4), 668–690

Goldberg, Matthew S. (1982) ‘Discrimination, nepotism, and long-run wage diﬀerentials.’
 Quarterly Journal of Economics 97(2), 307–319

Heath, Rachel (2016) ‘Why do ﬁrms hire using referrals ? Evidence from Bangladeshi
  garment factories.’ Unpublished manuscript

                                om Skans (2016) ‘Social networks, employee selection,
Hensvik, Lena, and Oskar Nordstr¨
  and labor market outcomes.’ Journal of Labor Economics 34(4), 825–867

Ioannides, Yannis M., and Adriaan R. Soetevent (2006) ‘Wages and employment in a
  random social network with arbitrary degree distribution.’ American Economic Review
  96(2), 270–274

Ioannides, Yannis M, and Linda Datcher Loury (2004) ‘Job information networks, neigh-
  borhood eﬀects, and inequality.’ Journal of Economic Literature 42(4), 1056–1093

Jovanovic, Boyan (1979) ‘Job matching and the theory of turnover.’ Journal of Political
  Economy 87(5), 972–990

Kugler, Adriana D (2003) ‘Employee referrals and eﬃciency wages.’ Labour Economics
 10(5), 531–556

Larsen, Anna Folke, John Rand, and Nina Torm (2011) ‘Do recruitment ties aﬀect
  wages? An analysis using matched employer-employee data from Vietnam.’ Review of
  Development Economics 15(3), 541–555

Mahmood, Monowar, and Mir Mohammed Nurul Absar (2015) ‘Human resource in
 Bangladesh : Current scenario and future.’ South Asian Journal of Human Resources
 Management 2(2), 171–188

Mano, Yukichi, Takashi Yamano, and A Y A Suzuki (2011) ‘Local and personal networks
 in employment and the development of labor markets : Evidence from the cut ﬂower
 industry in Ethiopia.’ World Development 39(10), 1760–1770

Montgomery, James D (1991) ‘Social networks and labor-market outcomes: Toward an
 economic analysis.’ American Economic Review 81(5), 1408–1418

Munshi, Kaivan (2003) ‘Networks in the modern economy: Mexican migrants in the U.
 S. labor market.’ Quarterly Journal of Economics (May), 549–599

Nomura, S, S Y Hong, Christophe J. Nordman, L R Sarr, and A Y Vawda (2013) An
  assessment of skills in the formal sector labor market in Bangladesh: A technical report
  on the enterprise-based skills survey 2012 (South Asia Development Sector Report No.
  64) (Washington, DC: The World Bank)

Pallais, Amanda, and Emily Glassberg Sands (2016) ‘Why the referential treatment? Ev-

                                           21
  idence from ﬁeld experiments on referrals.’ Journal of Political Economy 124(6), 1793–
  1828

Pellizzari, Michele (2010) ‘Do friends and relatives really help in getting a good job?’
  Industrial and Labor Relations Review 63(3), 494–510

Schmutte, Ian M (2015) ‘Job referral networks and the determination of earnings in local
  labor markets.’ Journal of Labor Economics 33(1), 1–32

Simon, Curtis J., and John T. Warner (1992) ‘Matchmaker, matchmaker: The eﬀect
  of old boy networks on job match quality, earnings, and tenure.’ Journal of Labor
  Economics 10(3), 306–330

Topa, Giorgio (2011) ‘Labor markets and referrals.’ Handbook of Social Economics
  1, 1193–1221

Wang, Shing-Yi (2013) ‘Marriage networks, nepotism, and labor market outcomes in
 China.’ American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 5(3), 91–112




                                          22
                                                .6
        Coefficient of the social network dummy
          -.4     -.2       0
                            -.6    .2      .4




                                                     1   2   3   4         5         6   7   8   9
                                                                     Tenure in years


Figure 1: Diﬀerences in current wages between those who used social networks and those
who did not
Note. Plotted are estimates of θ, the coeﬃcient of the social network dummy, in the equation of
log(CurrentW age)ijk = θN etworkijk + β Xijk + γjk + ijk , where Xijk are years of schooling, age at
hire, math and language z-scores, Big 5 index, and father’s and mother’s years of schooling, and γjk is an
establishment-entry occupation ﬁxed eﬀect. Occupations are grouped into manager, professional, semi-
skilled, and elementary. The regressions are run separately for a subsample of each year of tenure, except
for 1-year and 9-year tenure. The subsamples of 0- and 1-year tenure are jointly used because their size
is small. Due to the same reason, the subsamples of 9- and 10-year tenure are jointly used. The dash
lines correspond to 95% conﬁdence intervals. Standard errors are clustered within an establishment.




                                                                        23
                             Table 1: Predictions and estimation results

                                                             Hypotheses                               Data
                                Information transmission
                                  Same          Different       Screening   Peer effects   Nepotism
 Outcome variables             distribution   distribution
                                    (1)            (2)             (3)          (4)          (5)      (6)
 a. Job search spell               −               −                                          −        −
 b. Observable abilities                                                                      −        −
 c. Unobservable abilities                                         +                          −        0

 d. Tenure                                                         +             +                     −
 e. Entry wage                     +               −               +             +                     −
 f. Wage growth                                                   +/−                                  0

 g. Productivity                                   −               +             +            −       (−)
Note. Column “Data” indicates our estimation results. + and − mean that use of social networks is,
respectively, positively and negatively correlated. 0 means ﬂat or no correlation. (−) is negative but
statistically insigniﬁcant. A blank cell means no or ambiguous prediction.




                           Table 2: Summary statistics: Establishments

                                                                                N     %
 Industry
     Manufacturing                                      191                           56
     Commerce                                            74                           22
     Finance                                             74                           22
 Size
     Small (no. employees is 20 and less)               164                           48
     Medium (no. employees is 21-70)                     99                           29
     Large (no. employees is 71 and above)               76                           22
 Single establishment ﬁrm                               207                           61
 Social networks are a common mode of job advertisement 233                           69
Note. N = 339. “Personal networks are a common mode of job advertisement ” indicates that an
establishment answered that personal networks are a primary or secondary mode of advertising job
vacancies.




                                                       24
                                 Table 3: How jobs were found

                                                                   N      %
 Social networks, including reference from somebody 2148                  63
          Family and relatives                       773                  23
          Friends                                    931                  27
          Political aﬃliation                         19                   1
          School alumni                               30                   1
          Same village or town                       395                  12
 Media advertisement and posting                    1107                  33
 Through school                                        3                   0
 Public employment services                           17                   1
 Private employment services                          79                   2
 Job fairs                                            13                   0
 Internet posting                                     29                   1
 Observations                                                  3396
Note. This table is based on the question in the survey, ”How did you ﬁnd this job?” If a response is
“social networks,” the survey further asked the type of networks used.




                                                 25
                           Table 4: Summary statistics: Employees

                                                                  All        Social networks are
                                                                                    used?
                                                                              Yes          No
 Age at hire                                                    24.21         23.56         25.33
                                                                (4.89)        (5.05)        (4.40)
 Schooing in years                                               9.01          7.19         12.15
                                                                (4.64)        (3.84)        (4.19)
 Tenure in years                                                 4.32          4.23          4.47
                                                                (3.35)        (3.36)        (3.34)
 Earnings at hire (monthly, in Taka)                           5745.66       4758.19       7445.25
                                                              (4213.63)     (2865.85)     (5443.01)
 Earnings (monthly, in Taka)                                   9146.08       7448.94      12067.13
                                                              (7108.49)     (4418.45)     (9510.92)
 Occupation at hire
    Manager                                                      0.06          0.05           0.06
                                                                (0.23)        (0.22)         (0.23)
     Professional                                                0.20          0.16           0.28
                                                                (0.40)        (0.37)         (0.45)
     Semi-skilled worker                                         0.61          0.62           0.58
                                                                (0.49)        (0.49)         (0.49)
     Elementary job                                              0.14          0.16           0.08
                                                                (0.34)        (0.37)         (0.28)
 Search spell till ﬁnding the current job (in weeks)             8.60          5.56          13.85
                                                               (12.94)        (5.91)        (18.76)
 No. of vacancies applied for                                    3.60          2.28           5.87
                                                                (5.36)        (2.79)         (7.53)
 Promoted ever in the current ﬁrm (1=yes)                        0.04          0.02           0.06
                                                                (0.18)        (0.15)         (0.23)
 Observations                                                    3396          2148          1248

Note. Shown are means and standard deviations for permanent male employees aged 40 and below.
Standard deviations are in parentheses. The second column is the statistics of those who found jobs
through social networks, and the third is of those who did not. Earnings include bonuses, overtime, and
other compensations.




                                                  26
Table 5: Job search spell and the no. of vacancies applied for: Comparing the employees
who used social networks and those who did not

                                       Log(search spell)                                     Log(no. applications)
                           (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)           (5)            (6)          (7)           (8)
                                 ∗∗∗           ∗∗           ∗∗           ∗∗            ∗∗∗            ∗∗           ∗∗
 Social networks        -0.437         -0.243       -0.202       -0.223       -0.428          -0.225       -0.203         -0.163
                         (0.086)        (0.104)      (0.096)      (0.094)      (0.099)         (0.097)      (0.092)      (0.111)
 Schooing in years                     0.069∗∗∗     0.045∗∗∗        0.022                     0.043∗∗∗     0.023∗∗∗      0.023∗
                                        (0.011)      (0.010)      (0.015)                      (0.012)      (0.008)      (0.012)
 Age at hire                             -0.013       -0.008       -0.010                     0.013∗∗      0.015∗∗∗      0.013∗∗
                                        (0.008)      (0.009)      (0.009)                      (0.006)      (0.005)      (0.006)
 Father’s pri.school                     0.016         0.103      0.138∗                        0.034        0.091        0.076
                                        (0.078)      (0.079)      (0.076)                      (0.068)      (0.067)      (0.076)
 Mother’s pri.school                     0.045       0.126∗         0.061                       0.021       0.125∗∗      0.137∗∗
                                        (0.072)      (0.066)      (0.056)                      (0.061)      (0.055)      (0.067)
 Math z-score                            0.004         0.011       -0.012                       0.046         0.029       0.021
                                        (0.034)      (0.033)      (0.044)                      (0.042)      (0.035)      (0.041)
 Language z-score                      -0.101∗∗     -0.100∗∗       -0.060                       0.015        -0.014       -0.031
                                        (0.042)      (0.050)      (0.054)                      (0.057)      (0.058)      (0.061)
 Big 5 index z-score                     -0.005        0.134        0.079                       -0.072     -0.113∗∗     -0.133∗∗∗
                                        (0.083)      (0.100)      (0.118)                      (0.051)      (0.045)      (0.047)
 Firm ﬁxed eﬀect                                       X                                                      X
 Firm-occ ﬁxed eﬀect                                                X                                                      X
 R-squared               0.150          0.213        0.159        0.116        0.100           0.166        0.119        0.078
 N                       3396           3390         3390         3390         3396            3390         3390         3390


Note. The variable, Social networks, is the dummy indicating that social networks were used to ﬁnd
jobs. The other controls included are entry year ﬁxed eﬀects and geographical division ﬁxed eﬀects.
Occupations are grouped into manager, professional, semi-skilled, and elementary. Standard errors
clustered within an establishment are in parentheses. Signiﬁcance levels: ∗∗∗ = 1%, ∗∗ = 5%, ∗ = 10%.




                                                      27
                                    Table 6: Observable abilities

                                     Schooling (years)                          Age at hire
                               (1)          (2)           (3)            (4)          (5)          (6)
 Social networks           -3.401∗∗∗     -2.788∗∗∗      -1.394∗∗∗     -1.511∗∗∗     -1.673∗∗      -0.610
                            (0.315)       (0.350)        (0.270)       (0.575)      (0.680)      (0.913)
 Firm ﬁxed eﬀect                            X                                            X
 Firm-occ ﬁxed eﬀect                                       X                                        X
 R-squared                   0.215         0.135         0.072          0.066        0.062        0.047
 N                           3396          3396          3396           3396         3396         3396
                                 Pri. school: father                    Pri. school: mother
                              (7)          (8)           (9)          (10)         (11)         (12)
 Social networks           -0.092∗∗     -0.059∗      -0.071∗∗       -0.160∗∗∗     -0.087∗∗     -0.089∗∗
                           (0.043)      (0.034)      (0.035)         (0.041)      (0.034)      (0.039)
 Schooing in years         0.031∗∗∗     0.026∗∗∗     0.022∗∗∗       0.032∗∗∗      0.030∗∗∗     0.018∗∗
                           (0.005)      (0.004)      (0.006)         (0.006)      (0.005)      (0.007)
 Age at hire                -0.002       -0.004       -0.005         0.006∗       0.006∗∗       0.007
                           (0.003)      (0.003)      (0.004)         (0.003)      (0.003)      (0.004)
 Firm ﬁxed eﬀect                           X                                         X
 Firm-occ ﬁxed eﬀect                                      X                                       X
 R-squared                   0.160       0.078          0.044        0.190         0.112        0.050
 N                           3396        3396           3396         3396          3396         3396

Note. The dependent variables in columns (7)–(9) are the dummy indicating that the father completed
primary education while those in columns (10)–(12) are the dummy for mother’s primary education.
The other controls included are entry year ﬁxed eﬀects and geographical division ﬁxed eﬀects. Standard
errors clustered within an establishment are in parentheses. Signiﬁcance levels: ∗∗∗ = 1%, ∗∗ = 5%,
∗
  = 10%.




                                                   28
                                    Table 7: Unobservable abilities

                                        Math (z-score)                                  Language (z-score)
                           (1)          (2)            (3)            (4)      (5)        (6)        (7)        (8)
 Social networks        -0.328∗∗∗       0.057         0.042        0.049    -0.416∗∗∗     0.107       0.120     0.066
                         (0.085)       (0.077)      (0.063)       (0.073)    (0.088)     (0.087)    (0.076)    (0.089)
 Schooing in years                    0.107∗∗∗     0.101∗∗∗      0.109∗∗∗               0.129∗∗∗   0.117∗∗∗   0.148∗∗∗
                                       (0.010)      (0.012)       (0.020)                (0.011)    (0.013)    (0.016)
 Age at hire                            -0.006       -0.002        -0.003                 -0.006     -0.003     0.000
                                       (0.007)      (0.007)       (0.009)                (0.006)    (0.006)    (0.006)
 Father’s pri.school                    0.071         0.056         0.069               0.269∗∗∗   0.164∗∗∗    0.114∗
                                       (0.083)      (0.056)       (0.058)                (0.071)    (0.058)    (0.061)
 Mother’s pri.school                    0.061         0.042         0.015                 0.149      0.120      0.168
                                       (0.090)      (0.115)       (0.123)                (0.093)    (0.100)    (0.121)
 Firm ﬁxed eﬀect                                         X                                            X
 Firm-occ ﬁxed eﬀect                                                 X                                           X
 R-squared                0.141        0.299         0.214         0.149     0.123       0.428      0.306      0.283
 N                        3396         3396          3396          3396      3396        3396       3396       3396

                                     Big 5 (z-score)
                          (9)         (10)        (11)         (12)
                                ∗        ∗∗
 Social networks        0.069       0.132          0.034        0.002
                        (0.039)     (0.052)      (0.038)      (0.040)
 Schooing in years                   0.012         0.008       0.004
                                    (0.009)      (0.006)      (0.006)
 Age at hire                         0.004        -0.002       -0.003
                                    (0.005)      (0.005)      (0.005)
 Father’s pri.school                 0.075       -0.060∗       -0.051
                                    (0.058)      (0.032)      (0.035)
 Mother’s pri.school                 0.008         0.015        0.002
                                    (0.066)      (0.038)      (0.035)
 Firm ﬁxed eﬀect                                   X
 Firm-occ ﬁxed eﬀect                                            X
 R-squared               0.109       0.124       0.053        0.058
 N                       3390        3390        3390         3390

Note. All the dependent variables are normalized to have the zero means and the one standard deviations.
The other controls included are entry year ﬁxed eﬀects and geographical division ﬁxed eﬀects. Standard
errors clustered within an establishment are in parentheses. Signiﬁcance levels: ∗∗∗ = 1%, ∗∗ = 5%,
∗
  = 10%.




                                                         29
                                         Table 8: Job tenure

                                                      Log (tenure in years)
                                  (1)                 (2)               (3)                (4)
 Social networks                -0.152∗            -0.166∗             -0.122            -0.197∗
                                (0.090)            (0.099)            (0.100)            (0.109)
 Schooing in years                                  -0.008             -0.004             -0.009
                                                   (0.008)            (0.009)            (0.010)
 Age at hire                                        -0.010            -0.012∗             -0.005
                                                   (0.006)            (0.007)            (0.006)
 Father’s pri.school                                -0.019             -0.042             -0.072
                                                   (0.060)            (0.063)            (0.062)
 Mother’s pri.school                                 0.040              0.018              0.049
                                                   (0.052)            (0.059)            (0.072)
 Math z-score                                       -0.020              0.034              0.035
                                                   (0.043)            (0.056)            (0.058)
 Language z-score                                    0.071              0.060             0.040
                                                   (0.053)            (0.052)            (0.057)
 Big 5 index z-score                                 0.066              0.085            0.158∗
                                                   (0.055)            (0.082)            (0.085)
 Firm ﬁxed eﬀect                                                         X
 Firm-occ ﬁxed eﬀect                                                                        X
 R-squared                       0.013              0.024              0.018              0.026
 N                               3396               3390               3390               3390

Note. The dependent variable log(tenure) is constructed by treating 0 year of tenure as 0.5 year, 1
year as 1.5 year, and so forth. The other controls included are establishment-entry occupation ﬁxed
eﬀects and geographical division ﬁxed eﬀects. Standard errors clustered within an establishment are in
parentheses. Signiﬁcance levels: ∗∗∗ = 1%, ∗∗ = 5%, ∗ = 10%.




                                                 30
                                       Table 9: Entry salary

                                                     Log (entry salary)
                                 (1)                 (2)              (3)                (4)
 Social networks              -0.298∗∗∗          -0.070∗            -0.065∗           -0.089∗∗
                               (0.048)           (0.042)           (0.038)            (0.043)
 Schooing in years                              0.057∗∗∗           0.061∗∗∗           0.034∗∗∗
                                                 (0.006)           (0.009)            (0.008)
 Age at hire                                     0.022∗∗∗          0.020∗∗∗           0.013∗∗∗
                                                 (0.004)           (0.003)            (0.003)
 Father’s pri.school                              0.052            0.058∗∗              0.020
                                                 (0.033)           (0.029)            (0.027)
 Mother’s pri.school                              0.043              0.056∗             0.016
                                                 (0.035)           (0.033)            (0.037)
 Math z-score                                     0.069∗            0.087∗             0.089∗
                                                 (0.039)           (0.046)            (0.049)
 Language z-score                               -0.101∗∗∗          -0.098∗∗            -0.081∗
                                                 (0.036)           (0.046)            (0.049)
 Big 5 index z-score                              0.021              -0.012           -0.082∗∗
                                                 (0.045)           (0.032)            (0.036)
 Firm ﬁxed eﬀect                                                       X
 Firm-occ ﬁxed eﬀect                                                                     X
 R-squared                      0.174             0.391              0.387             0.220
 N                              3396              3390               3390              3390

Note. The other controls included are entry year ﬁxed eﬀects and geographical division ﬁxed eﬀects.
Standard errors clustered within an establishment are in parentheses. Signiﬁcance levels: ∗∗∗ = 1%,
∗∗
   = 5%, ∗ = 10%.




                                                31
                                       Table 10: Current salary

                                                             Log (current salary)
                                       (1)                    (2)                    (3)                 (4)
 Social networks                     -0.358∗∗∗           -0.129∗∗∗             -0.086∗∗∗             -0.118∗∗∗
                                      (0.050)             (0.036)               (0.030)               (0.032)
 Social networks*tenure                0.011               0.011                 0.004                 0.005
                                      (0.007)             (0.007)               (0.005)               (0.005)
 Tenure in years                     0.032∗∗∗            0.070∗∗∗              0.077∗∗∗               0.067∗∗∗
                                      (0.006)             (0.017)               (0.016)               (0.023)
 Abilities                                                    X                      X                     X
 Firm ﬁxed eﬀect                                                                     X
 Firm-occ ﬁxed eﬀect                                                                                     X
 R-squared                            0.222                 0.493                0.520                 0.377
 N                                    3396                  3390                 3390                  3390
Note. Abilities indicates that the observable and unobservable abilities (years of schooling, age at hire,
and father’s and mother’s completion of primary education, math and language z-scores and Big 5 index)
and their interactions with tenure are included or not. The other controls included are geographical
division ﬁxed eﬀects. Signiﬁcance levels: ∗∗∗ = 1%, ∗∗ = 5%, ∗ = 10%.




                               Table 11: Productivity: Promotion

                                                    Dummy for having been promoted
                              (1)         (2)        (3)             (4)       (5)           (6)       (7)       (8)
 Social networks           -0.043∗∗      -0.023     -0.017         -0.025      -0.001       -0.026    -0.003    -0.015
                            (0.019)     (0.024)    (0.024)        (0.022)     (0.032)      (0.033)   (0.031)   (0.031)
 Social networks*tenure                                                        -0.009       0.002     -0.001     0.000
                                                                              (0.007)      (0.007)   (0.007)   (0.007)
 Tenure in years           0.016∗∗∗     0.016∗∗∗   0.015∗∗∗       0.014∗∗∗   0.021∗∗∗       0.001      0.003    -0.001
                            (0.003)      (0.003)    (0.003)        (0.003)    (0.006)      (0.018)   (0.018)   (0.021)
 Abilities                                   X        X              X                       X         X         X
 Abilities*tenure                                                                            X         X         X
 Firm ﬁxed eﬀect                                      X                                                X
 Firm-occ ﬁxed eﬀect                                                  X                                          X
 R-squared                   0.077       0.088      0.091           0.110     0.081        0.122     0.137     0.167
 N                           3396        3390       3390            3390      3396         3390      3390      3390

Note. Abilities indicates that the observable and unobservable abilities (years of schooling, age at hire,
and father’s and mother’s completion of primary education, math and language z-scores and Big 5 index)
and their interactions with tenure are included or not. The other controls included are geographical
division ﬁxed eﬀects. Signiﬁcance levels: ∗∗∗ = 1%, ∗∗ = 5%, ∗ = 10%.



                                                    32
Table 12: Recruitment: Comparing the employers who use social networks and those
who do not

                                                       Employers use social
                                                      networks as a common
                                                           mode of job                 Diﬀ. in
                                                         advertisement?                 mean
                                                         Yes             No
 % employees who used social networks                  82.859          36.962           45.897
                                                                                      (3.978)∗∗∗
 N                                                       233             106


 Weeks to ﬁll vacancies                                 2.611           4.813           -2.201
                                                                                      (0.492)∗∗∗
 N                                                       232             105

 Diﬃculty in ﬁlling vacancies (normalized)             -0.225           0.297           -0.522
                                                                                      (0.136)∗∗∗
 N                                                       227              98

 No. vacancies posted in the last 12 months            10.443           9.718           0.725
                                                                                       (4.046)
 N                                                       233             106


 % vacancies ﬁlled in the last 12 months               96.523          97.340           -0.817
                                                                                       (1.827)
 N                                                       130              51

Note. Means are shown above. The ﬁgures in parentheses are robust standard errors for the diﬀerences
in means. The variable, Diﬃculty in ﬁlling vacancies, is based on responses to the question, “How
diﬃcult is it to ﬁll vacancy?” asked for each occupation categories. The original answers are on the
scale of 1–10 with 10 being the most diﬃcult. We normalize them to have the zero means and the one
standard deviations.




                                                33
                       Table 13: Main reason for having chosen the job

                                 Good salary                Good location                 Good work
                                                                                          conditions
                              (1)           (2)            (3)          (4)           (5)         (6)
 Social networks             2.194         -0.075         1.967        0.298         -3.493        1.681
                            (2.210)       (2.848)        (3.953)      (6.851)       (3.129)       (6.271)
 Abilities                                    X                          X                           X
 Firm-occ ﬁxed eﬀect                          X                          X                           X
 R-squared                  0.058           0.073         0.015        0.036        0.049          0.059
 N                           3394           3388          3394         3388          3394          3388
 Control mean               19.359        19.359         11.718       11.718        32.621        32.621
                              Good prospect for             Relevant to my            Good prestige of
                              career progression              education                    ﬁrm
                                (7)           (8)          (9)         (10)           (11)          (12)
 Social networks            -13.431∗∗∗      -8.901∗       -0.465       -0.251       -2.470∗∗       -2.770
                              (3.193)       (4.791)      (0.368)      (0.253)       (1.174)       (1.761)
 Abilities                                     X                          X                           X
 Firm-occ ﬁxed eﬀect                           X                          X                           X
 R-squared                    0.076          0.066       0.023          0.022        0.047         0.084
 N                             3394          3388        3394           3388         3394           3388
 Control mean                 21.619        21.619       0.516          0.516        4.914          4.914
                              Recommended by                No other oﬀers
                                   others
                              (13)       (14)             (15)          (16)
 Social networks            6.645∗∗∗      7.690∗∗∗       9.053∗∗∗      2.329
                            (1.475)       (2.716)        (2.841)      (2.604)
 Abilities                                   X                           X
 Firm-occ ﬁxed eﬀect                         X                           X
 R-squared                    0.046        0.049          0.049        0.046
 N                            3394          3388          3394         3388
 Control mean                 0.721        0.721          8.533        8.533

Note. This table presents linear probability models analyzing main reasons why employees chose the
jobs. The dependent variable is the binary dummy for the main reason being the one indicated in a
corresponding column header. The survey asked employees which of listed reasons was the main reason.
The row Control mean shows the sample means of the dependent variables among the employees who
did not use social networks. The row Abilities indicates whether the observable and unobservable
characteristics (years of schooling, age at hire, and father’s and mother’s years of schooling, math and
language z-scores, and Big 5 index) are included or not. All speciﬁcations include entry year ﬁxed
eﬀects and geographical division ﬁxed eﬀects. Standard errors clustered within an establishment are
in parentheses. Coeﬃcients, standard errors, and control means are multiplied by 100 and should be
interpreted as percentage points. Signiﬁcance levels: ∗∗∗ = 1%, ∗∗ = 5%, ∗ = 10%.


                                                    34
                             Table 14: Who used social networks?

                                                        Social network dummy
                                           (1)             (2)             (3)            (4)
 Schooing in years                     -0.045∗∗∗        -0.050∗∗∗      -0.029∗∗∗       -0.025∗∗∗
                                        (0.003)          (0.003)        (0.003)         (0.004)
 Age at hire                            -0.004∗∗        -0.006∗∗∗      -0.005∗∗∗       -0.005∗∗∗
                                        (0.002)          (0.002)        (0.002)         (0.002)
 Father’s pri.school                     -0.014           -0.011         -0.039∗         -0.034
                                        (0.025)          (0.025)        (0.021)         (0.023)
 Mother’s pri.school                   -0.081∗∗∗        -0.081∗∗∗       -0.041∗∗         -0.037
                                        (0.022)          (0.022)        (0.021)         (0.023)
 Math z-score                            -0.011           -0.012          0.003           0.001
                                        (0.014)          (0.014)        (0.014)         (0.016)
 Language z-score                        -0.007           -0.004          0.002          -0.019
                                        (0.015)          (0.015)        (0.014)         (0.016)
 Big 5 index z-score                   0.066∗∗∗          0.061∗∗          0.030           0.027
                                        (0.024)          (0.024)        (0.020)         (0.021)
 Entry occupation ﬁxed eﬀect                               X
 Firm ﬁxed eﬀect                                                           X
 Firm-occ ﬁxed eﬀect                                                                       X
 R-squared                               0.288           0.299           0.098           0.056
 N                                       3390            3390            3390            3390
Note. All speciﬁcations control for geographical division ﬁxed eﬀects. Standard errors clustered within
an establishment are in parentheses. Signiﬁcance levels: ∗∗∗ = 1%, ∗∗ = 5%, ∗ = 10%.




                                                   35
A   Appendix: Robustness check on attrition bias




                        36
                                                                           Log of search spell                                                                                           Log of no. of applications




                                                                                                                                             2
                                               1
       Coefficient of the social network dummy




                                                                                                                        Coefficient of the social network dummy
                                                                                                                                                           1
                                       0




                                                                                                                                                  0
                            -1




                                                                                                                                        -1
                 -2




                                                                                                                            -2
      -3




                                                                                                                                             -3
                                                   1    2      3       4            5            6   7   8   9                                                        1      2      3     4            5           6   7   8   9
                                                                              Tenure in years                                                                                                    Tenure in years




                                                             (a) Job search spell                                                                                         (b) No. of vacancies applied for

                                                                           Years of schooling                                                                                           Father completed pri.school




                                                                                                                                             .5
                                              6
      Coefficient of the social network dummy




                                                                                                                        Coefficient of the social network dummy
                                       4




                                                                                                                                                        0
                               2




                                                                                                                                            -.5
                      0




                                                                                                                               -1
          -2




                                                                                                                                             -1.5
                          -4




                                                   1    2      3       4            5            6   7   8   9                                                        1      2      3     4            5           6   7   8   9
                                                                              Tenure in years                                                                                                    Tenure in years




                                                            (c) Years of schooling                                    (d) Father’s completion of pri. education

                                                                    Mother completed pri.school                                                                                               Log of entry wage
                                                                                                                                                                1.5
                          1
      Coefficient of the social network dummy




                                                                                                                        Coefficient of the social network dummy
                                      .5




                                                                                                                                            .5          1
             -.5           0




                                                                                                                                0
                          -1




                                                                                                                                             -.5




                                                   1    2      3       4            5            6   7   8   9                                                        1      2      3     4            5           6   7   8   9
                                                                              Tenure in years                                                                                                    Tenure in years




   (e) Mother’s completion of pri. education                                                                                                                                     (f) Log of entry salary

                                                                   Dummy for being ever promoted
                         1
     Coefficient of the social network dummy
            -.5           0
                         -1          .5




                                                   1    2      3       4            5            6   7   8   9
                                                                              Tenure in years




                                                                           (g) Promotion

                                                       Figure A1: Robustness check—Comparison at each year of job tenure
Note. Plotted are estimates of θ in the equation of yijk = θN etworkijk + β Xijk + γjk + ijk . In ﬁgures
(a), (b), (f), and (g), Xijk are years of schooling, age at hire, math and language z-scores, Big 5 index,
and the dummies for father’s and mother’s completion of primary education. In ﬁgures (d) and (e),
Xijk are years of schooling and age at hire. In ﬁgure (c), Xijk are not included for. The regressions
are run separately for a subsample of each year of tenure, except for 1-year and 9-year tenure. The
subsamples of 0- and 1-year tenure are jointly used because their size is small. Due to the same reason,
the subsamples of 9- and 10-year tenure are jointly used. The dash lines are 95% conﬁdence intervals.
Standard errors are clustered within an establishment.




                                                                                                                 37
Table A1: Robustness check using the subsample with tenure being 3 years and less—Job
tenure

                                                      Log (tenure in years)
                                  (1)                 (2)               (3)                (4)
 Social networks                 -0.083             -0.039             -0.040           -0.091∗∗
                                (0.065)            (0.054)            (0.041)           (0.040)
 Schooing in years                                  -0.009             -0.010            -0.003
                                                   (0.007)            (0.008)           (0.009)
 Age at hire                                         0.001             -0.004            -0.001
                                                   (0.006)            (0.006)           (0.006)
 Father’s pri.school                                 0.080             -0.036            -0.065
                                                   (0.082)            (0.072)           (0.075)
 Mother’s pri.school                                 0.087            0.128∗∗           0.172∗∗∗
                                                   (0.054)            (0.055)           (0.056)
 Math z-score                                      -0.068∗             -0.015             0.022
                                                   (0.038)            (0.027)           (0.020)
 Language z-score                                  0.113∗∗            0.103∗∗             0.048
                                                   (0.054)            (0.048)           (0.047)
 Big 5 index z-score                                 0.014             -0.043            -0.085
                                                   (0.051)            (0.068)           (0.066)
 Firm ﬁxed eﬀect                                                         X
 Firm-occ ﬁxed eﬀect                                                                        X
 R-squared                       0.015              0.063              0.041              0.048
 N                               1745               1744               1744               1744

Note. The dependent variable log(tenure) is constructed by treating 0 year of tenure as 0.5 year, 1
year as 1.5 year, and so forth. The other controls included are establishment-entry occupation ﬁxed
eﬀects and geographical division ﬁxed eﬀects. Standard errors clustered within an establishment are in
parentheses. Signiﬁcance levels: ∗∗∗ = 1%, ∗∗ = 5%, ∗ = 10%.




                                                 38
Table A2: Robustness check using the subsample with tenure being 3 years and less—Job
search spell and the no. of vacancies applied for

                                      Log(search spell)                                     Log(no. applications)
                          (1)            (2)           (3)         (4)          (5)            (6)            (7)            (8)
                                ∗∗∗            ∗∗∗           ∗           ∗            ∗∗∗            ∗∗∗            ∗∗∗
 Social networks       -0.464         -0.322         -0.236      -0.318      -0.434         -0.257         -0.232          -0.241∗∗
                        (0.084)         (0.106)       (0.122)    (0.165)      (0.101)         (0.088)        (0.088)        (0.099)
 Schooing in years                    0.059∗∗∗       0.047∗∗∗    0.041∗∗                     0.038∗∗∗          0.020        0.035∗∗
                                        (0.012)       (0.010)    (0.019)                      (0.014)        (0.015)        (0.018)
 Age at hire                             -0.012        -0.010     -0.010                     0.018∗∗∗       0.025∗∗∗      0.029∗∗∗
                                        (0.010)       (0.012)    (0.011)                      (0.006)        (0.005)        (0.008)
 Father’s pri.school                      0.091      0.188∗∗     0.182∗∗                       0.055          0.129           0.100
                                        (0.080)       (0.084)    (0.085)                      (0.108)        (0.125)        (0.153)
 Mother’s pri.school                     -0.007         0.049      0.014                       -0.004         0.053           0.107
                                        (0.062)       (0.066)    (0.069)                      (0.062)        (0.062)        (0.075)
 Math z-score                            -0.001        -0.043     -0.059                       0.052           0.025         0.051
                                        (0.051)       (0.063)    (0.093)                      (0.046)        (0.048)        (0.061)
 Language z-score                      -0.112∗∗        -0.105     -0.124                       -0.021         -0.046         -0.139
                                        (0.045)       (0.068)    (0.095)                      (0.065)        (0.078)        (0.098)
 Big 5 index z-score                      0.039       0.182∗      0.095                        -0.064       -0.140∗∗      -0.203∗∗∗
                                        (0.090)       (0.110)    (0.132)                      (0.058)        (0.061)        (0.070)
 Firm ﬁxed eﬀect                                        X                                                     X
 Firm-occ ﬁxed eﬀect                                               X                                                         X
 R-squared               0.129         0.176          0.103      0.095        0.093           0.153         0.115          0.108
 N                       1745          1744           1744       1744         1745            1744          1744           1744


Note. The variable, Social networks, is the dummy indicating that social networks were used to ﬁnd
jobs. The other controls included are entry year ﬁxed eﬀects and geographical division ﬁxed eﬀects.
Standard errors clustered within an establishment are in parentheses. Signiﬁcance levels: ∗∗∗ = 1%,
∗∗
   = 5%, ∗ = 10%.




                                                       39
Table A3: Robustness check using the subsample with tenure being 3 years and less—
Observable abilities

                                       Schooling (years)                          Age at hire
                                 (1)          (2)               (3)         (4)        (5)         (6)
   Social networks           -3.444∗∗∗     -2.846∗∗∗      -1.521∗∗∗      -1.553∗∗    -1.695∗     -0.339
                              (0.349)       (0.416)        (0.406)       (0.738)     (0.928)    (1.491)
   Firm ﬁxed eﬀect                              X                                        X
   Firm-occ ﬁxed eﬀect                                       X                                     X
   R-squared                   0.237        0.151          0.079          0.034       0.029      0.004
   N                           1745         1745           1745           1745        1745       1745
                                  Pri. school: father                     Pri. school: mother
                               (7)         (8)            (9)           (10)        (11)        (12)
  Social networks            -0.047       -0.030      -0.041          -0.184∗∗∗   -0.124∗∗     -0.096∗∗
                            (0.039)      (0.037)     (0.041)           (0.047)    (0.050)      (0.044)
  Schooing in years         0.035∗∗∗     0.027∗∗∗    0.025∗∗∗          0.032∗∗∗   0.023∗∗       0.017
                            (0.005)      (0.006)     (0.007)           (0.007)    (0.009)      (0.011)
  Age at hire                -0.006       -0.006      -0.005            -0.001     0.003        -0.001
                            (0.005)      (0.006)     (0.008)           (0.004)    (0.005)      (0.006)
  Firm ﬁxed eﬀect                           X                                        X
  Firm-occ ﬁxed eﬀect                                      X                                      X
  R-squared                   0.163       0.058          0.033         0.184        0.089       0.053
  N                           1745        1745           1745          1745         1745        1745

Note. The dependent variables in columns (7)–(9) are the dummy indicating that the father completed
primary education while those in columns (10)–(12) are the dummy for mother’s primary education.
The other controls included are entry year ﬁxed eﬀects and geographical division ﬁxed eﬀects. Standard
errors clustered within an establishment are in parentheses. Signiﬁcance levels: ∗∗∗ = 1%, ∗∗ = 5%,
∗
  = 10%.




                                                    40
Table A4: Robustness check using the subsample with tenure being 3 years and less—
Unobservable abilities

                                       Math (z-score)                                    Language (z-score)
                           (1)          (2)            (3)            (4)       (5)        (6)        (7)        (8)
 Social networks        -0.293∗∗∗      0.090       0.171∗         0.235∗     -0.463∗∗∗     0.060      0.061      -0.001
                         (0.103)      (0.105)      (0.092)        (0.122)     (0.079)     (0.076)    (0.066)    (0.071)
 Schooing in years                   0.115∗∗∗     0.113∗∗∗       0.133∗∗∗                0.134∗∗∗   0.116∗∗∗   0.146∗∗∗
                                      (0.014)      (0.015)        (0.027)                 (0.014)    (0.017)    (0.021)
 Age at hire                           -0.006       0.002          -0.003                -0.011∗      -0.005     -0.002
                                      (0.011)      (0.012)        (0.013)                 (0.007)    (0.009)    (0.007)
 Father’s pri.school                   -0.015       0.140        0.171∗∗                 0.210∗∗    0.183∗∗      0.136
                                      (0.111)      (0.094)        (0.082)                 (0.087)    (0.088)    (0.089)
 Mother’s pri.school                   -0.005       -0.089         -0.180                  0.158       0.047      0.072
                                      (0.138)      (0.170)        (0.174)                 (0.123)    (0.117)    (0.149)
 Firm ﬁxed eﬀect                                        X                                              X
 Firm-occ ﬁxed eﬀect                                                   X                                          X
 R-squared                0.125        0.270         0.213           0.169    0.149       0.440      0.293      0.276
 N                        1745         1745          1745            1745     1745        1745       1745       1745

                                     Big 5 (z-score)
                          (9)        (10)       (11)          (12)
                                ∗
 Social networks        0.063         0.098      0.043        -0.032
                        (0.038)     (0.063)    (0.057)       (0.065)
 Schooing in years                    0.007      0.001        -0.008
                                    (0.009)    (0.008)       (0.007)
 Age at hire                          0.002     -0.005        -0.006
                                    (0.007)    (0.007)       (0.006)
 Father’s pri.school                  0.053     -0.056        -0.061
                                    (0.084)    (0.062)       (0.063)
 Mother’s pri.school                 -0.003     -0.003        -0.001
                                    (0.084)    (0.056)       (0.047)
 Firm ﬁxed eﬀect                                 X
 Firm-occ ﬁxed eﬀect                                           X
 R-squared               0.122      0.128       0.028        0.029
 N                       1744       1744        1744         1744

Note. All the dependent variables are normalized to have the zero means and the one standard deviations.
The other controls included are entry year ﬁxed eﬀects and geographical division ﬁxed eﬀects. Standard
errors clustered within an establishment are in parentheses. Signiﬁcance levels: ∗∗∗ = 1%, ∗∗ = 5%,
∗
  = 10%.




                                                       41
Table A5: Robustness check using the subsample with tenure being 3 years and less—
Entry salary

                                                     Log (entry salary)
                                 (1)                 (2)              (3)                (4)
 Social networks              -0.355∗∗∗         -0.103∗∗∗          -0.083∗            -0.079∗∗
                               (0.046)           (0.038)           (0.045)            (0.036)
 Schooing in years                              0.065∗∗∗           0.076∗∗∗           0.053∗∗∗
                                                 (0.006)           (0.008)            (0.009)
 Age at hire                                     0.029∗∗∗          0.025∗∗∗           0.015∗∗∗
                                                 (0.004)           (0.004)            (0.004)
 Father’s pri.school                              0.034             0.022              0.027
                                                 (0.042)           (0.039)            (0.036)
 Mother’s pri.school                              0.029            0.092∗∗             0.011
                                                 (0.037)           (0.041)            (0.042)
 Math z-score                                     0.068∗           0.071∗∗             0.049∗
                                                 (0.035)           (0.036)            (0.028)
 Language z-score                                -0.105∗∗          -0.090∗             -0.036
                                                 (0.042)           (0.046)            (0.042)
 Big 5 index z-score                              0.028             0.006              -0.020
                                                 (0.040)           (0.039)            (0.036)
 Firm ﬁxed eﬀect                                                       X
 Firm-occ ﬁxed eﬀect                                                                     X
 R-squared                      0.174             0.489              0.521             0.289
 N                              1745              1744               1744              1744

Note. The other controls included are entry year ﬁxed eﬀects and geographical division ﬁxed eﬀects.
Standard errors clustered within an establishment are in parentheses. Signiﬁcance levels: ∗∗∗ = 1%,
∗∗
   = 5%, ∗ = 10%.




                                                42
Table A6: Robustness check using the subsample with tenure being 3 years and less—
Current salary

                                                           Log (current salary)
                                       (1)                  (2)                 (3)                  (4)
 Social networks                     -0.477∗∗∗           -0.312∗∗∗           -0.328∗∗∗             -0.257∗
                                      (0.169)             (0.119)             (0.113)              (0.143)
 Social networks*tenure                0.055              0.085∗              0.100∗∗               0.063
                                      (0.062)             (0.045)             (0.044)              (0.048)
 Tenure in years                       0.026               0.047               -0.001               0.004
                                      (0.068)             (0.130)             (0.115)              (0.112)
 Abilities                                                  X                   X                    X
 Firm ﬁxed eﬀect                                                                X
 Firm-occ ﬁxed eﬀect                                                                                 X
 R-squared                            0.179                0.511               0.555               0.312
 N                                    1745                 1744                1744                1744
Note. Abilities indicates that the observable and unobservable abilities (years of schooling, age at hire,
and father’s and mother’s completion of primary education, math and language z-scores and Big 5 index)
and their interactions with tenure are included or not. The other controls included are geographical
division ﬁxed eﬀects. Signiﬁcance levels: ∗∗∗ = 1%, ∗∗ = 5%, ∗ = 10%.



Table A7: Robustness check using the subsample with tenure being 3 years and less—
Promotion

                                                 Dummy for having been promoted
                             (1)         (2)       (3)       (4)       (5)       (6)       (7)         (8)
 Social networks            -0.028      -0.021    -0.016    -0.015    -0.053    -0.075    -0.061      -0.069
                           (0.022)     (0.025)   (0.021)   (0.023)   (0.052)   (0.059)   (0.040)     (0.054)
 Social networks*tenure                                                0.010    0.022    0.019∗        0.023
                                                                     (0.014)   (0.016)   (0.011)     (0.016)
 Tenure in years            0.002       0.001    0.015∗∗   0.016∗     -0.005    -0.022    -0.018      -0.035
                           (0.005)     (0.006)   (0.007)   (0.008)   (0.014)   (0.016)   (0.014)     (0.024)
 Abilities                               X         X          X                   X        X           X
 Abilities*tenure                                                                 X        X           X
 Firm ﬁxed eﬀect                                   X                                       X
 Firm-occ ﬁxed eﬀect                                          X                                        X
 R-squared                  0.016       0.034    0.045      0.072    0.017      0.050    0.054       0.087
 N                          1745        1744     1744       1744     1745       1744     1744        1744

Note. Abilities indicates that the observable and unobservable abilities (years of schooling, age at hire,
and father’s and mother’s completion of primary education, math and language z-scores and Big 5 index)
and their interactions with tenure are included or not. The other controls included are geographical
division ﬁxed eﬀects. Signiﬁcance levels: ∗∗∗ = 1%, ∗∗ = 5%, ∗ = 10%.



                                                    43
Table A8: Robustness check using the subsample with tenure being 3 years and less—
Main reason for choosing the job

                                 Good salary                Good location                 Good work
                                                                                          conditions
                              (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)           (5)         (6)
 Social networks             3.901         -0.870        -3.737        -5.390        -5.892        1.052
                            (2.742)       (3.543)       (6.337)       (8.460)       (5.814)       (8.817)
 Abilities                                    X                          X                           X
 Firm-occ ﬁxed eﬀect                          X                          X                           X
 R-squared                  0.063           0.034        0.016         0.077        0.016          0.073
 N                           1744           1743         1744           1743         1744          1743
 Control mean               21.558        21.558        14.974        14.974        32.320        32.320
                              Good prospect for            Relevant to my             Good prestige of
                              career progression             education                     ﬁrm
                               (7)           (8)          (9)          (10)          (11)          (12)
 Social networks            -9.517∗∗∗       -5.888       -0.027        -0.062        -0.343        -0.186
                             (3.329)       (5.701)      (0.083)       (0.053)       (1.167)       (1.574)
 Abilities                                     X                          X                           X
 Firm-occ ﬁxed eﬀect                           X                          X                           X
 R-squared                   0.049           0.055       0.003         0.001         0.084         0.028
 N                            1744           1743        1744           1743         1744           1743
 Control mean                16.472        16.472        0.102          0.102        4.819          4.819
                              Recommended by                No other oﬀers
                                   others
                              (13)       (14)             (15)          (16)
 Social networks            7.388∗∗∗      8.589∗∗       8.227∗∗∗       2.756
                            (1.990)       (3.850)       (2.681)       (3.078)
 Abilities                                   X                           X
 Firm-occ ﬁxed eﬀect                         X                           X
 R-squared                    0.039        0.059         0.038         0.055
 N                            1744         1743          1744          1743
 Control mean                 1.178        1.178         8.578         8.578

Note. This table presents linear probability models analyzing main reasons why employees chose the
jobs. The dependent variable is the binary dummy for the main reason being the one indicated in a
corresponding column header. The survey asked employees which of listed reasons was the main reason.
The row Control mean shows the sample means of the dependent variables among the employees who
did not use social networks. The row Abilities indicates whether the observable and unobservable
characteristics (years of schooling, age at hire, and father’s and mother’s years of schooling, math
and language z-scores, and Big 5 index) are included or not. All speciﬁcations include geographical
division ﬁxed eﬀects. Standard errors clustered within an establishment are in parentheses. Coeﬃcients,
standard errors, and control means are multiplied by 100 and should be interpreted as percentage points.
Signiﬁcance levels: ∗∗∗ = 1%, ∗∗ = 5%, ∗ = 10%.

                                                   44
B      Appendix: Robustness check on cutoﬀ age to re-
       strict the sample

 Table B1: Robustness check using the sample of the aged 60 and below—Job search

                                       Log(search spell)                                      Log(no. applications)
                          (1)            (2)           (3)          (4)           (5)            (6)          (7)           (8)
                                ∗∗∗            ∗∗∗           ∗∗           ∗∗            ∗∗∗            ∗∗           ∗∗
 Social networks       -0.465         -0.274         -0.229       -0.225       -0.452          -0.242       -0.226        -0.187∗
                        (0.087)         (0.105)       (0.099)      (0.093)      (0.098)         (0.093)      (0.089)      (0.105)
 Schooing in years                    0.065∗∗∗       0.038∗∗∗        0.018                     0.048∗∗∗     0.026∗∗∗      0.027∗∗
                                        (0.011)       (0.010)      (0.013)                      (0.012)      (0.008)      (0.011)
 Age at hire                             -0.009        -0.003       -0.004                     0.007∗∗      0.010∗∗∗      0.008∗∗
                                        (0.006)       (0.006)      (0.006)                      (0.004)      (0.003)      (0.004)
 Father’s pri.school                      0.034        0.130∗     0.150∗∗                         0.039       0.089        0.062
                                        (0.079)       (0.078)      (0.073)                      (0.064)      (0.060)      (0.067)
 Mother’s pri.school                      0.026       0.103∗         0.029                       0.023       0.129∗∗      0.141∗∗
                                        (0.066)       (0.060)      (0.049)                      (0.056)      (0.054)      (0.062)
 Math z-score                             0.005         0.012       -0.014                        0.036        0.021       0.014
                                        (0.034)       (0.033)      (0.042)                      (0.040)      (0.032)      (0.038)
 Language z-score                      -0.101∗∗       -0.086∗       -0.058                        0.007       -0.006       -0.029
                                        (0.041)       (0.048)      (0.050)                      (0.054)      (0.053)      (0.059)
 Big 5 index z-score                      0.001         0.144        0.081                       -0.064     -0.113∗∗     -0.135∗∗∗
                                        (0.087)       (0.107)      (0.121)                      (0.049)      (0.046)      (0.050)
 Firm ﬁxed eﬀect                                        X                                                      X
 Firm-occ ﬁxed eﬀect                                                 X                                                      X
 R-squared               0.166         0.223          0.147        0.108        0.115           0.182        0.131        0.094
 N                       3763          3757           3757         3757         3763            3757         3757         3757


Note. The variable, Social networks, is the dummy indicating that social networks were used to ﬁnd
jobs. The other controls included are entry year ﬁxed eﬀects and geographical division ﬁxed eﬀects.
Standard errors clustered within an establishment are in parentheses. Signiﬁcance levels: ∗∗∗ = 1%,
∗∗
   = 5%, ∗ = 10%.




                                                       45
Table B2: Robustness check using the sample of the aged 60 and below—Observable
abilities

                                     Schooling (years)                          Age at hire
                               (1)          (2)           (3)           (4)         (5)         (6)
 Social networks           -3.515∗∗∗     -2.851∗∗∗      -1.382∗∗∗     -1.146∗     -1.304∗      -0.070
                            (0.311)       (0.338)        (0.263)      (0.667)     (0.782)     (0.891)
 Firm ﬁxed eﬀect                            X                                       X
 Firm-occ ﬁxed eﬀect                                       X                                    X
 R-squared                   0.222        0.146          0.095         0.059      0.067       0.071
 N                           3763         3763           3763          3763       3763        3763
                                 Pri. school: father                     Pri. school: mother
                              (7)         (8)            (9)          (10)         (11)         (12)
 Social networks           -0.092∗∗     -0.054∗      -0.062∗        -0.157∗∗∗    -0.085∗∗∗    -0.081∗∗
                           (0.042)      (0.033)      (0.034)         (0.040)      (0.033)     (0.040)
 Schooing in years         0.031∗∗∗     0.028∗∗∗     0.024∗∗∗       0.033∗∗∗     0.034∗∗∗     0.024∗∗∗
                           (0.004)      (0.004)      (0.006)         (0.005)      (0.005)     (0.007)
 Age at hire                -0.002      -0.004∗      -0.004∗          0.002        0.001       0.000
                           (0.003)      (0.002)      (0.002)         (0.002)      (0.002)     (0.003)
 Firm ﬁxed eﬀect                           X                                        X
 Firm-occ ﬁxed eﬀect                                      X                                       X
 R-squared                   0.167       0.099          0.065        0.189        0.118         0.062
 N                           3763        3763           3763         3763         3763          3763

Note. The dependent variables in columns (7)–(9) are the dummy indicating that the father completed
primary education while those in columns (10)–(12) are the dummy for mother’s primary education.
The other controls included are entry year ﬁxed eﬀects and geographical division ﬁxed eﬀects. Standard
errors clustered within an establishment are in parentheses. Signiﬁcance levels: ∗∗∗ = 1%, ∗∗ = 5%,
∗
  = 10%.




                                                   46
Table B3: Robustness check using the sample of the aged 60 and below—Unobservable
abilities

                                       Math (z-score)                                  Language (z-score)
                           (1)          (2)           (3)            (4)      (5)        (6)        (7)        (8)
 Social networks        -0.328∗∗∗      0.069        0.057         0.060    -0.433∗∗∗      0.102      0.109     0.044
                         (0.084)      (0.070)      (0.062)       (0.070)    (0.088)     (0.078)    (0.067)    (0.079)
 Schooing in years                   0.103∗∗∗     0.101∗∗∗      0.111∗∗∗               0.127∗∗∗   0.116∗∗∗   0.143∗∗∗
                                      (0.010)      (0.010)       (0.016)                (0.010)    (0.012)    (0.014)
 Age at hire                           0.004        0.002         0.002                  -0.002     -0.002     0.001
                                      (0.005)      (0.005)       (0.006)                (0.003)    (0.004)    (0.004)
 Father’s pri.school                   0.096        0.075         0.081                0.266∗∗∗   0.161∗∗∗    0.103∗
                                      (0.078)      (0.055)       (0.058)                (0.070)    (0.059)    (0.059)
 Mother’s pri.school                   0.043        0.022         0.005                   0.133     0.109      0.145
                                      (0.085)      (0.110)       (0.122)                (0.084)    (0.090)    (0.110)
 Firm ﬁxed eﬀect                                        X                                            X
 Firm-occ ﬁxed eﬀect                                                X                                           X
 R-squared                0.138        0.298        0.226         0.166     0.127       0.431      0.318      0.288
 N                        3763         3763         3763          3763      3763        3763       3763       3763

                                     Big 5 (z-score)
                          (9)        (10)        (11)         (12)
                                ∗        ∗∗
 Social networks        0.063       0.123         0.030       -0.005
                        (0.038)     (0.051)     (0.042)      (0.043)
 Schooing in years                   0.011        0.007       0.002
                                    (0.008)     (0.006)      (0.004)
 Age at hire                         0.003       -0.001       -0.000
                                    (0.004)     (0.004)      (0.004)
 Father’s pri.school                 0.077      -0.054∗       -0.044
                                    (0.057)     (0.030)      (0.032)
 Mother’s pri.school                 0.006        0.021       -0.002
                                    (0.068)     (0.037)      (0.038)
 Firm ﬁxed eﬀect                                  X
 Firm-occ ﬁxed eﬀect                                           X
 R-squared               0.107      0.121       0.046        0.054
 N                       3757       3757        3757         3757

Note. All the dependent variables are normalized to have the zero means and the one standard deviations.
The other controls included are entry year ﬁxed eﬀects and geographical division ﬁxed eﬀects. Standard
errors clustered within an establishment are in parentheses. Signiﬁcance levels: ∗∗∗ = 1%, ∗∗ = 5%,
∗
  = 10%.




                                                        47
 Table B4: Robustness check using the sample of the aged 60 and below—Job tenure

                                                      Log (tenure in years)
                                  (1)                 (2)               (3)                (4)
 Social networks                -0.134∗             -0.120             -0.068             -0.135
                                (0.080)            (0.093)            (0.098)            (0.115)
 Schooing in years                                  -0.004             -0.004             -0.009
                                                   (0.008)            (0.009)            (0.010)
 Age at hire                                         0.001              0.003              0.007
                                                   (0.005)            (0.006)            (0.006)
 Father’s pri.school                                -0.061             -0.092            -0.115∗
                                                   (0.064)            (0.068)            (0.064)
 Mother’s pri.school                                 0.046             -0.007              0.036
                                                   (0.053)            (0.056)            (0.070)
 Math z-score                                       -0.011             0.033               0.036
                                                   (0.045)            (0.058)            (0.062)
 Language z-score                                    0.076              0.065              0.061
                                                   (0.058)            (0.059)            (0.073)
 Big 5 index z-score                                 0.053              0.060              0.114
                                                   (0.060)            (0.082)            (0.085)
 Firm ﬁxed eﬀect                                                         X
 Firm-occ ﬁxed eﬀect                                                                        X
 R-squared                       0.014              0.022              0.011              0.020
 N                               3763               3757               3757               3757

Note. The dependent variable log(tenure) is constructed by treating 0 year of tenure as 0.5 year, 1
year as 1.5 year, and so forth. The other controls included are establishment-entry occupation ﬁxed
eﬀects and geographical division ﬁxed eﬀects. Standard errors clustered within an establishment are in
parentheses. Signiﬁcance levels: ∗∗∗ = 1%, ∗∗ = 5%, ∗ = 10%.




                                                 48
Table B5: Robustness check using the sample of the aged 60 and below—Entry salary

                                                     Log (entry salary)
                                 (1)                 (2)              (3)                (4)
 Social networks              -0.304∗∗∗          -0.071∗           -0.067∗∗           -0.081∗∗
                               (0.049)           (0.038)           (0.033)            (0.036)
 Schooing in years                              0.059∗∗∗           0.062∗∗∗           0.038∗∗∗
                                                 (0.005)           (0.008)            (0.006)
 Age at hire                                     0.018∗∗∗          0.016∗∗∗           0.011∗∗∗
                                                 (0.003)           (0.003)            (0.003)
 Father’s pri.school                              0.062∗           0.062∗∗              0.020
                                                 (0.033)           (0.029)            (0.030)
 Mother’s pri.school                              0.064∗           0.069∗∗              0.041
                                                 (0.033)           (0.032)            (0.038)
 Math z-score                                     0.065             0.086∗             0.094∗
                                                 (0.040)           (0.048)            (0.051)
 Language z-score                               -0.105∗∗∗          -0.093∗∗            -0.086∗
                                                 (0.036)           (0.046)            (0.050)
 Big 5 index z-score                              0.005             -0.030            -0.093∗∗
                                                 (0.045)           (0.036)            (0.042)
 Firm ﬁxed eﬀect                                                       X
 Firm-occ ﬁxed eﬀect                                                                     X
 R-squared                      0.207             0.410              0.417             0.299
 N                              3763              3757               3757              3757

Note. The other controls included are entry year ﬁxed eﬀects and geographical division ﬁxed eﬀects.
Standard errors clustered within an establishment are in parentheses. Signiﬁcance levels: ∗∗∗ = 1%,
∗∗
   = 5%, ∗ = 10%.




                                                49
Table B6: Robustness check using the sample of the aged 60 and below—Current salary

                                                           Log (current salary)
                                       (1)                  (2)                  (3)                  (4)
 Social networks                     -0.351∗∗∗           -0.112∗∗∗             -0.072∗∗            -0.083∗∗∗
                                      (0.049)             (0.034)              (0.030)              (0.025)
 Social networks*tenure                0.008               0.005                -0.001               -0.000
                                      (0.006)             (0.006)              (0.005)              (0.006)
 Tenure in years                     0.030∗∗∗            0.073∗∗∗              0.082∗∗∗             0.076∗∗∗
                                      (0.003)             (0.016)              (0.014)              (0.016)
 Abilities                                                  X                     X                   X
 Firm ﬁxed eﬀect                                                                  X
 Firm-occ ﬁxed eﬀect                                                                                   X
 R-squared                            0.223                0.493                0.523                0.407
 N                                    3763                 3757                 3757                 3757

Note. Abilities indicates that the observable and unobservable abilities (years of schooling, age at hire,
and father’s and mother’s completion of primary education, math and language z-scores and Big 5 index)
and their interactions with tenure are included or not. The other controls included are geographical
division ﬁxed eﬀects. Signiﬁcance levels: ∗∗∗ = 1%, ∗∗ = 5%, ∗ = 10%.




 Table B7: Robustness check using the sample of the aged 60 and below—Promotion

                                                 Dummy for having been promoted
                             (1)         (2)       (3)       (4)       (5)         (6)       (7)        (8)
 Social networks            -0.028      -0.021    -0.016    -0.015    -0.053      -0.075    -0.061     -0.069
                           (0.022)     (0.025)   (0.021)   (0.023)   (0.052)     (0.059)   (0.040)    (0.054)
 Social networks*tenure                                                0.010      0.022    0.019∗       0.023
                                                                     (0.014)     (0.016)   (0.011)    (0.016)
 Tenure in years            0.002       0.001    0.015∗∗   0.016∗     -0.005      -0.022    -0.018     -0.035
                           (0.005)     (0.006)   (0.007)   (0.008)   (0.014)     (0.016)   (0.014)    (0.024)
 Abilities                               X         X          X                    X         X          X
 Abilities*tenure                                                                  X         X          X
 Firm ﬁxed eﬀect                                   X                                         X
 Firm-occ ﬁxed eﬀect                                          X                                         X
 R-squared                  0.016       0.034    0.045      0.072    0.017        0.050    0.054      0.087
 N                          1745        1744     1744       1744     1745         1744     1744       1744

Note. Abilities indicates that the observable and unobservable abilities (years of schooling, age at hire,
and father’s and mother’s completion of primary education, math and language z-scores and Big 5 index)
and their interactions with tenure are included or not. The other controls included are geographical
division ﬁxed eﬀects. Signiﬁcance levels: ∗∗∗ = 1%, ∗∗ = 5%, ∗ = 10%.



                                                    50
Table B8: Robustness check using the sample of the aged 60 and below—Main reason
for having chosen the job

                                 Good salary                Good location                 Good work
                                                                                          conditions
                              (1)           (2)            (3)          (4)           (5)         (6)
 Social networks             1.393         -0.351         1.940        -0.501        -2.753        2.062
                            (2.190)       (2.830)        (3.708)      (6.318)       (2.818)       (5.623)
 Abilities                                    X                           X                          X
 Firm-occ ﬁxed eﬀect                          X                           X                          X
 R-squared                  0.064           0.082         0.030         0.052       0.045          0.054
 N                           3761           3755          3761          3755         3761          3755
 Control mean               20.157        20.157         12.380       12.380        31.604        31.604
                              Good prospect for             Relevant to my            Good prestige of
                              career progression              education                    ﬁrm
                                (7)           (8)          (9)         (10)           (11)          (12)
 Social networks            -12.834∗∗∗       -7.790       -0.378       -0.228       -2.467∗∗       -2.702
                              (3.440)       (5.175)      (0.347)      (0.225)       (1.103)       (1.776)
 Abilities                                     X                          X                           X
 Firm-occ ﬁxed eﬀect                           X                          X                           X
 R-squared                    0.072          0.070       0.036         0.044         0.041         0.076
 N                             3761           3755       3761           3755         3761           3755
 Control mean                 21.456        21.456       0.512          0.512        4.791          4.791
                              Recommended by                No other oﬀers
                                   others
                              (13)       (14)             (15)          (16)
 Social networks            6.510∗∗∗      7.642∗∗∗       8.588∗∗∗      1.870
                            (1.413)       (2.432)        (2.647)      (2.400)
 Abilities                                   X                           X
 Firm-occ ﬁxed eﬀect                         X                           X
 R-squared                    0.053        0.060          0.048        0.048
 N                            3761          3755          3761         3755
 Control mean                 0.760        0.760          8.340        8.340

Note. This table presents linear probability models analyzing main reasons why employees chose the
jobs. The dependent variable is the binary dummy for the main reason being the one indicated in a
corresponding column header. The survey asked employees which of listed reasons was the main reason.
The row Control mean shows the sample means of the dependent variables among the employees who
did not use social networks. The row Abilities indicates whether the observable and unobservable
characteristics (years of schooling, age at hire, and father’s and mother’s years of schooling, math
and language z-scores, and Big 5 index) are included or not. All speciﬁcations include geographical
division ﬁxed eﬀects. Standard errors clustered within an establishment are in parentheses. Coeﬃcients,
standard errors, and control means are multiplied by 100 and should be interpreted as percentage points.
Signiﬁcance levels: ∗∗∗ = 1%, ∗∗ = 5%, ∗ = 10%.

                                                    51
C          Appendix: Big 5 and social networks
.

Table C1: Comparing individual Big 5 personality between the employees who used
social networks and who did not

                          Conscientiousness   Emotional stability    Agreeableness
                            (1)       (2)       (3)         (4)       (5)       (6)
    Social networks        0.138     0.047     0.042      -0.009     -0.009    -0.072
                          (0.130)   (0.097)   (0.061)    (0.048)    (0.063)   (0.078)
    Schooing in years               0.024∗∗                0.015                0.006
                                    (0.011)              (0.015)              (0.020)
    Age at hire                      0.002                 0.008               -0.014
                                    (0.005)              (0.007)              (0.010)
    Father’s pri.school              -0.083               -0.029                0.022
                                    (0.098)              (0.065)              (0.060)
    Mother’s pri.school              0.009                0.024                -0.028
                                    (0.054)              (0.062)              (0.083)
    Firm-occ ﬁxed eﬀect                X                    X                   X
    R-squared             0.038      0.040     0.022      0.043     0.031     0.057
    N                     3386       3386      3346       3346      3340      3340

                            Extraversion         Openness
                            (7)       (8)       (9)      (10)
    Social networks        0.086     -0.055    0.017      0.091
                          (0.063)   (0.109)   (0.077)   (0.064)
    Schooing in years                -0.013              -0.014
                                    (0.020)             (0.013)
    Age at hire                      -0.002              -0.006
                                    (0.009)             (0.010)
    Father’s pri.school             -0.156∗              -0.004
                                    (0.090)             (0.051)
    Mother’s pri.school              -0.091             0.097∗
                                    (0.101)             (0.050)
    Firm-occ ﬁxed eﬀect               X                   X
    R-squared             0.042     0.060     0.028     0.039
    N                     3377      3377      3383      3383

Note. All the dependent variables are normalized to have the zero means and the one standard deviations.
The other controls included are entry year ﬁxed eﬀects and geographical division ﬁxed eﬀects. Standard
errors clustered within an establishment are in parentheses. Signiﬁcance levels: ∗∗∗ = 1%, ∗∗ = 5%,
∗
  = 10%.




                                                          52
Table C2: Individual Big 5 personality: Job search spells, no. of applications, tenure,
entry salary

                                Log(search              Log(no.              Log(tenure in          Log(entry
                                  spell)              applications)             years)               salary)
                              (1)         (2)        (3)          (4)        (5)       (6)        (7)         (8)
 Social networks            -0.242∗∗   -0.223∗∗∗   -0.232∗∗      -0.168     -0.161   -0.184∗     -0.069    -0.085∗∗
                             (0.098)    (0.083)     (0.101)     (0.118)    (0.098)   (0.106)    (0.042)     (0.040)
 Schooing in years          0.066∗∗∗      0.021    0.041∗∗∗     0.022∗      -0.007    -0.007   0.056∗∗∗    0.033∗∗∗
                             (0.011)    (0.014)     (0.012)     (0.012)    (0.008)   (0.011)    (0.006)     (0.008)
 Age at hire                 -0.012∗     -0.009    0.014∗∗      0.014∗∗     -0.010    -0.007   0.023∗∗∗    0.013∗∗∗
                             (0.007)    (0.008)     (0.006)     (0.006)    (0.007)   (0.007)    (0.004)     (0.003)
 Father’s pri.school          0.029     0.135∗       0.040       0.077      -0.017    -0.064     0.057∗      0.022
                             (0.082)    (0.077)     (0.069)     (0.073)    (0.060)   (0.059)    (0.033)     (0.027)
 Mother’s pri.school          0.030       0.053      0.030      0.132∗       0.052     0.055      0.046      0.021
                             (0.067)    (0.058)     (0.058)     (0.071)    (0.054)   (0.069)    (0.035)     (0.040)
 Math z-score                 0.017      -0.008      0.062       0.031      -0.022    0.030      0.075∗     0.096∗
                             (0.034)    (0.041)     (0.041)     (0.042)    (0.043)   (0.050)    (0.042)     (0.049)
 Language z-score           -0.091∗∗     -0.049      0.014       -0.020      0.072     0.029   -0.096∗∗∗   -0.082∗∗
                             (0.037)    (0.046)     (0.051)     (0.057)    (0.052)   (0.054)    (0.035)     (0.040)
 Big 5 personality traits
 Conscientiousness          -0.074∗∗     -0.020     -0.024      -0.072∗∗    0.020      0.058    -0.029      -0.044∗
                             (0.036)    (0.035)    (0.028)       (0.029)   (0.023)   (0.038)   (0.018)      (0.026)
 Emotional stability          -0.020     -0.037    -0.055∗       -0.057∗   0.042∗    0.082∗∗   0.026∗∗      0.034∗∗
                             (0.031)    (0.031)    (0.030)       (0.033)   (0.023)   (0.032)   (0.013)      (0.015)
 Agreeableness                 0.026    0.098∗      -0.028        -0.024    -0.029    -0.035    0.007        -0.021
                             (0.036)    (0.055)    (0.036)       (0.036)   (0.020)   (0.032)   (0.015)      (0.013)
 Extraversion                  0.021     0.006     0.060∗         -0.008     0.045   0.061∗     0.031         0.009
                             (0.032)    (0.038)    (0.033)       (0.022)   (0.033)   (0.037)   (0.021)      (0.018)
 Openness                    0.063∗∗      0.039     -0.027        0.023     0.000     -0.006    0.005      -0.057∗∗∗
                             (0.026)    (0.036)    (0.042)       (0.051)   (0.035)   (0.046)   (0.020)      (0.017)
 Firm-occ ﬁxed eﬀect                      X                        X                    X                     X
 R-squared                   0.225      0.137       0.176        0.085     0.032      0.040     0.398       0.252
 N                           3315       3315        3315         3315      3315       3315      3315        3315


Note. The dependent variable log(tenure) is constructed by treating 0 year of tenure as 0.5 year, 1
year as 1.5 year, and so forth. The other controls included are entry year ﬁxed eﬀects and geographical
division ﬁxed eﬀects. Standard errors clustered within an establishment are in parentheses. Signiﬁcance
levels: ∗∗∗ = 1%, ∗∗ = 5%, ∗ = 10%.




                                                           53
