                                                         WPS8235


Policy Research Working Paper                           8235




Charting the Diffusion of Power Sector Reforms
         across the Developing World
                                    Vivien Foster
                                  Samantha Witte
                              Sudeshna Ghosh Banerjee
                                 Alejandro Moreno




Energy and Extractives Global Practice Group
November 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 8235


  Abstract
  Some 25 years have elapsed since international financial                           rapid diffusion during 1995–2005, the spread of power
  institutions espoused a package of power sector reform                             sector reforms slowed significantly in 2005–15. Only a
  measures that became known as the Washington Con-                                  small minority of developing countries fully implemented
  sensus. This package encompassed the establishment of                              the reform model as originally conceived. For the majority,
  autonomous regulatory entities, the vertical and horizon-                          reforms were only selectively adopted according to ease
  tal unbundling of integrated national monopoly utilities,                          of implementation, often stagnated at an intermediate
  private sector participation in generation and distribution,                       stage, and were sometimes packaged and sequenced in
  and eventually the introduction of competition into power                          ways unrelated to the original logic. Country characteris-
  generation and even retail services. Exploiting a unique new                       tics such as geography, income group, power system size,
  data set on the timing and scope of power sector reforms                           and political economy all had a significant influence on
  adopted by 88 countries across the developing world                                the uptake of reform. Moreover, a significant number of
  over 25 years, this paper seeks to improve understanding                           countries experienced reversals of private sector participa-
  of the uptake, diffusion, packaging, and sequencing of                             tion, or were unable to follow through with reform plans
  power sector reforms, and the extent to which they were                            that were officially announced. Overall, power sector
  affected by the economic and political characteristics of the                      reform in the developing world lags far behind what was
  countries concerned. The analysis focuses on describing                            achieved in the developed world during the same time
  the patterns of reform without judging their desirability                          period. Yet, even in the developed world, the full package
  or evaluating their impact. The paper finds that following                         of reforms does not seem to have been universally adopted.




  This paper is a product of the Energy and Extractives Global Practice Group. It is part of a larger effort by the World
  Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions around the world.
  Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The authors may be contacted
  at vfoster@worldbank.org.




          The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
          issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
          names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
          of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
          its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                        Produced by the Research Support Team
              Charting the Diffusion of Power Sector Reforms across the Developing World

           Vivien Foster, Samantha Witte, Sudeshna Ghosh Banerjee, and Alejandro Moreno




Acknowledgements

This paper is primarily based on data collected as part of the World Bank/ESMAP project “Regulatory
Indicators for Sustainable Energy (RISE), 2017” co-led by Sudeshna Ghosh Banerjee, Alejandro Moreno,
and Tanya Primiani, and implemented by Mallory LeeWong, Joonkyung Seong, Taylor Sloane, and
Samantha Witte. A full list of acknowledgements for this project can be found at http://rise.esmap.org.
The study also draws on the World Bank’s Private Participation in Infrastructure database:
https://ppi.worldbank.org. These data were supplemented by targeted desk-based research and
crowdsourcing of information from numerous colleagues in the World Bank’s Energy & Extractives Global
Practice. Helpful guidance on the fragility index came from Monty Marshall (Center for Systemic Peace).

The authors are particularly grateful to the following colleagues for peer review throughout the
development of the paper: Robert Bacon (Consultant); Anton Eberhard (University of Cape Town);
Marianne Fay (Chief Economist, SDNVP); Catrina Godinho (University of Cape Town); Stephane Straub
(University of Toulouse); and Jonathan Walters (Castalia). Financial support from Energy Sector
Management Assistance Program (ESMAP) and the Public Private Infrastructure Facility (PPIAF) is
gratefully acknowledged.

Keywords: Power Sector Reform, Power Sector Market Design and Regulation, Power Sector
Restructuring, Power Sector Regulation, Power Utility Reform

JEL Classification: L94 Electric Utilities
1. Context

During the 1990s, the World Bank, and other international financial Institutions, became prominent
advocates of power sector reform in the developing world; in what became known as the “Washington
Consensus”. According to this view, the main objectives of power sector reform were to improve
economic efficiency and attract private sector investment. Although founded largely on economic
principles, the reform model also drew heavily on the experience of two pioneering countries that
reformed their power sectors during the 1980s: Chile and the United Kingdom.

According to the 1990s view, the power sector reform process should encompass four distinct reform
actions. The first is “regulation”, which involves the creation of an autonomous regulatory entity to
provide some degree of political independence for the sector and hold utilities accountable for their
operational and financial performance. The second is “restructuring”, which involves steps towards the
eventual full vertical and horizontal unbundling of the incumbent state-owned monopoly. The third is
“private sector participation”, which brings in private management and capital into the sector as a means
to boost operational efficiency and investment. The fourth is “competition”, which initially allows
generators to compete to supply a monopoly utility and eventually allows customers to negotiate their
supply contracts directly with power producers and traders supported by a power exchange.

Some 25 years have passed since the earliest power sector reforms, and accumulated developing country
experience has shown that the model is much harder to adopt than originally believed. Even advanced
reformers, a quarter of all developing countries, have taken many years to fully implement the process.
Many others, roughly 35 percent of the sample, have encountered obstacles and even reversals – due to
the complex political economy dynamics of the sector – and as a result have only partially adopted sector
reforms. A significant number constituting 40 percent of developing countries remain largely unreformed.

It therefore seems timely to update the World Bank’s last major global stock-taking of power sector
reform uptake in the developing world (Besant-Jones, 2006), by examining recent global trends in power
sector reform. While the future of the power sector may look significantly different to the past, due to
technological shifts, it remains important to distill the lessons of the standard approach to power sector
reform experience to date, so as to better understand the limitations to further uptake.

To that end, this paper aims to answer a number of questions. To what extent have developing countries
pursued the 1990s power sector reform model and how far did they get with it? What patterns of power
sector reform can we now observe around the world? Is there continuing power sector reform
momentum? How have country characteristics influenced the uptake of the different elements of power
sector reform, and which types of countries have been able to go furthest with the model? Emerging
answers to these questions can be previewed as follows.

Overall, power sector reform in the developing world lags far behind what was implemented in the
developed world during the same time period. Closer inspection shows that the most significant
differences lie in the area of vertical and horizontal unbundling, which is twice as common in OECD as in
developing countries, as well as implementation of wholesale power markets, which is ten times more
likely in OECD than developing countries. Nonetheless, full power sector reform has not been universal
even in developed countries. The percentage of countries that have implemented some degree of private
sector participation in either generation or distribution hovers around 70 percent for both developed and
developing countries, although the depth of private sector participation tends to be significantly greater


                                                    2
in the OECD countries. However, 17 percent of the OECD countries that introduced a wholesale power
market did so without fully vertically unbundling their power sectors.

Following rapid diffusion during the decade 1995-2005 the spread of power sector reforms slowed
significantly in the subsequent decade 2005-2015, on almost every dimension of reform. The slowdown
is particularly evident in terms of the number of countries establishing regulatory entities or conducting
private sector participation in generation or distribution in the later decade. For the majority of countries,
reforms were only selectively adopted often according to ease of implementation, and reform programs
often stagnated midway. A third to a half of developing countries are at such an intermediate stage, having
implemented reforms in some areas but not in others; and in many cases reforms have been halted for
over a decade.

Reforms have sometimes been packaged and sequenced in ways unrelated to the original logic. For
example, 25 percent of developing countries have allowed for private sector participation without
following through on competition, while another 15 percent have gone further on competition then their
sector restructuring efforts would prepare them for. Some 13 percent of developing countries have
created regulatory entities without having introduced private sector participation to their utilities, while
a similar share find themselves in the opposite situation. While the principles of reform suggest that
distribution private sector participation should precede private sector participation in generation, the
percentage of countries doing so was about the same as those that began by privatizing generation.

Country characteristics such as geography, income group, power system size, and attributes of the
political system seem to have had a statistically significant influence on the uptake of reform. One of the
largest influences has been system size: countries with installed capacity above 10 GW scored more than
twice as high on the reform index as those with systems below 1 GW. Similarly, countries in the middle-
income bracket, and those with relatively competitive political dynamics scored much higher than others.
Geographic region was also an important driver, with Latin America and the Caribbean standing out as
the pioneering region for power sector reform, and the Middle East and North Africa as well as Sub-
Saharan Africa starting later and introducing reforms more slowly over the entire period.

Moreover, of the 34 countries still at an early stage of reform, the vast majority fall into one of the
categories that have historically found power sector reform challenging to implement: fragile states (14
cases); small systems (31 cases); low income bracket (16 cases); or weak rule of law (32 cases). About 16
of these countries are in Sub-Saharan Africa. In fact, there is not a single large stable middle-income
country in this group. This raises questions about the applicability of the classic power sector reform
agenda in those countries that currently face some of the greatest power sector challenges.

These patterns of uptake of power sector reform already tell an illuminating story. They illustrate that the
full package of Washington consensus reforms has proved challenging to implement in their entirety in a
developing country environment, and – though undoubtedly much more widespread – still remain far
from universal even in OECD countries.

Finally, it is important to note that the aim of this paper is entirely descriptive as opposed to normative.
That is to say that the diffusion of power sector reforms is documented without making any value
judgment as to whether or not this was the right policy choice, or attempting to evaluate the associated
impacts. A significant cross-country econometric literature on the impacts of reform already exists. See




                                                      3
for example: Gassner et al., 20081; Nagayama, 20102; Erdogdu, 20143; Jamasb et al., 20144; Urpelainen
and Yang, 2017.5 Moreover, an evaluation of the impact of reform would not have been feasible to
implement in any meaningful depth given the scope of the data set covering 88 countries over a 25-year
period. Rather, the primary contribution of this paper is to provide a much more detailed characterization
of the content, timing and sequencing of power sector reform measures than has previously been
possible.

The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Chapter 2 presents the methodology, while Chapters
3 through 6 report the findings on the regulation, restructuring, competition and private sector
participation measures of reform, respectively. In Chapter 7 the four dimensions of reform are drawn
together to distill the overall findings of the analysis, before concluding in Chapter 8.


2. Methodology

This paper draws on a number of data sources to create an unprecedented time series data set comprising
information on which countries adopted which types of power sector reforms at which dates. The
database covers 88 developing countries for the period 1995 to 2015. Complementary information for 22
OECD countries is available for a subset of variables and time periods. An important source of data is the
RISE (Regulatory Indicators for Sustainable Energy) project,6 which provides an up to date snapshot of
power sector reform globally based on numerous indicators on the power sector structure and
institutional arrangements in 2015. A second important source of data is the World Bank’s Private
Participation in Infrastructure database,7 which records all developing country transactions involving the
private sector going back into the 1990s, and makes it possible to understand how private sector
participation has evolved over the same period. Important historic reference points are provided by
comparable earlier surveys conducted by Besant-Jones (2006) and ESMAP (1999).

The paper will first individually examine the diffusion of each of the four dimensions of power sector
reform: regulation, restructuring, competition and private sector participation. Along each of these four
dimensions, a number of stages of reform are identified, which make it possible to examine diffusion
trends over time as well as the geographic patterns of uptake. The prevalence of power sector reform in
developing countries is compared to that in developed countries over the same time frame.

The final section of the paper turns to drawing out the main conclusions and insights from looking across
experiences on all four dimensions of reform. The ways in which different types of reforms are packaged


1
  Gassner, K., A. Popov, and N. Pushak. 2008a. “Does the private sector deliver on its promises? Evidence from a
global study in water and electricity”. Gridlines 44512. PPIAF, The World Bank, Washington D.C.
2
  Nagayama, H. 2010. “Impacts on investments, and transmission/distribution loss through power sector reforms”.
Energy Policy, 38(7), 3453-3467.
3
  Erdogdu, E. 2014. “Investment, security of supply and sustainability in the aftermath of three decades of power
sector reform”. Renewable and Sustainable Energy Reviews, 31, 1-8.
4
  Jamasb, T., R. Nepal, G Timilsina, and M. Toman. 2014. Energy Sector Reform, Economic Efficiency and Poverty
Reduction, Discussion Papers Series 529, School of Economics, University of Queensland, Australia.
5
  Urpelainen, J., & Yang, J. 2017. Policy Reform and the Problem of Private Investment: Evidence from the Power
Sector. Journal of Policy Analysis and Management, 36(1), 38-64.
6
  http://rise.esmap.org/
7
  https://ppi.worldbank.org/


                                                        4
and sequenced and their relative prevalence and momentum are carefully considered. Finally, a simple
Power Sector Reform Index is introduced as a convenient device for summarizing the extent of power
sector reform in each country. The index takes an unweighted average of a country’s score on an interval
of 0 to 100 for each of the four dimensions of power sector reform.8 Once again, the index is descriptive
rather than normative in nature. A higher score simply denotes that more reform measures were taken,
but is not necessarily intended to convey a superior power sector architecture or performance.

Throughout the paper, the sensitivity of reform experiences to initial country characteristics – as of 1995
– is systematically examined. Statistical tests of differences in values between the chosen country
groupings outlined below are based on N-1 two-proportion tests for binary variables and ANOVA tests for
continuous variables. In the case of more than 2 groups pair-wise tests were carried out, and all pairwise
significant variables received the marker. The country characteristics include country income group9,
power system size10, fragility status11, and oil exporting status12, as well as the political economy
characteristics13 of the country.

Income group is known to affect many aspects of a country’s economy. In this case, income group is
relevant for a number of reasons. It will affect the purchasing power of the population and the prospects
for recovering the costs of power supply, which is often an objective of regulation as well as a prerequisite
for other reforms such as private sector participation and competition.

Oil exporting countries, due to their abundance of domestic hydrocarbon wealth, are often inclined to
subsidize the power sector, sometimes quite substantially. This, in turn, makes it difficult to introduce
reforms related to cost recovery, and hence regulation, private sector participation and ultimately
competition.

Power system size is expected to be an important factor in restructuring and competition reforms.
Effective power market competition is only possible when there are a significant number of generators in
the market that are able to act as alternative suppliers of power. The sector has traditionally been
characterized by large scale economies in power generation, implying that only larger power systems are
able to support the requisite number of generators operating beyond minimum efficient scale; although
this reality is shifting with the advent of smaller scale and more modular renewable energy technologies.
Furthermore, even when an adequate number of generators can be supported by the market, there may
be technological characteristics (e.g. nuclear power) or transmission constraints that prevent generation
plants from really competing with each other. Thus, the larger the system becomes, the less likely that
such constraints can present an effective limit on competition.

Fragile and conflict-affected states face particular challenges in adopting the ambitious institutional
reforms entailed by power sector reform; in particular, their weak governance and institutional capacity
combined with their risky policy environments make it challenging to attract private sector participation.



8
  Details on the construction of the Index can be found in Box 3, Chapter 7.
9
  World Development Indicators, World Bank
10
   Electricity Data, U.S. Energy Information Administration
11
   Polity IV Indicator, Center for Systemic Peace
12
   Global Energy Statistic Yearbook 2017, Enerdata
13
   Center for Systemic Peace and World Governance Indicators, World Bank


                                                         5
Political economy has an important influence on the feasibility of different types of reforms. There is a
wide array of variables that can be used to convey the political characteristics of a country. Two in
particular are considered here.

One relevant dimension of political economy is the rule of law, which captures the extent to which the
legal framework in a country is followed and effectively enforced. It is evidently an important prerequisite
for the success of measures such as regulation, private sector participation and competition. In particular,
it measures the perceived extent to which citizens abide by government laws, the quality of property
rights, the level of confidence in the judicial system, and the perceived likelihood of crime. Countries with
better scores on the rule of law should find it easier to adopt the power sector reform agenda.

Another relevant dimension of political economy is the degree of competition among the country’s
political elite. At one end of the spectrum, some countries are described as dominant in that their power
structure is concentrated around a single dominant individual or group that exercises power in a top down
hierarchical manner. Such countries may be able to implement reforms very decisively when they are in
the interest of the dominant power group, or conversely may be able to block it completely when interests
do not align. At the other end of the spectrum, some countries are described as having a competitive
power structure, indicating that there are multiple poles of power or competing groups of elites. Such
countries may be more open to electricity sector reforms that essentially distribute political power more
widely across the sector, for example by restructuring companies, opening to international private
investors or establishing competitive markets. On the other hand, the competitive nature of their political
processes may make it more difficult to reach consensus regarding the implementation of reform. The
expected impact of political competition on the ease of power sector reform is therefore much more
ambiguous than for the rule of law.



3. Regulatory Reform

Regulatory reform is defined as the establishment of an autonomous entity with responsibility for
regulatory oversight and with some role in decision-making (Figure 3.1). In any power sector, there are
policy-making, regulatory and service provision functions to be fulfilled. In simple terms, policy-making
involves charting the strategic direction for the sector, regulation involves overseeing the sector to ensure
that the strategic direction is followed and enforced, while service provision involves the actual
implementation of that strategic direction. Traditionally, all three functions have often been combined,
and mutually confounded, within the line ministry. However, with widespread corporatization of the
service provider to form an enterprise distinct from the line ministry, as well as the growing delegation of
these activities to the private sector, the need for a clearer regulatory function has been felt. A widely
adopted model, drawing heavily on Anglo-Saxon experience, has been to create a regulatory entity
dedicated to this purpose. Independence is considered important to isolate the regulator and ultimately
the service-provider from short term opportunistic political interference that may jeopardize the
achievement of the long-run strategic direction for the sector. Independence, though always relative, has
been defined in terms of an institutional existence, governance structure, and budget line that are
separate from the line ministry itself. However, in practice, genuine independence has proved difficult to
achieve in many political systems and cultures, because governments often find it difficult to relinquish
their discretionary powers to control important sources of political patronage such as electricity tariffs,
power sector investment plans, and utility employment. The roles of the regulator include setting tariffs


                                                     6
to recover efficient costs, monitoring and enforcing quality of service standards, and overseeing market
entry.

                               Figure 3.1: Definition of regulatory reform

Model                 Defining characteristics
classification
1. No regulator       There is no entity separate from the line ministry responsible for
                      regulatory oversight of the power utility (-ies)
2. Regulatory entity A regulatory entity has been created that exists outside of the line
                     ministry and has clearly defined regulatory responsibilities and some
                     degree of decision-making autonomy
Regulatory entities have diffused rapidly across the developing world, yet are still not as prevalent as in
the developed world. Regulatory entities existed only in a handful of countries up until the year 1995
(Figure 3.2). During the decade 1995-2005, there was remarkably rapid diffusion of regulatory entities
with about 40 percent of developing countries adopting the reform during this period. Uptake continued
during the subsequent decade 2005-2015 though at a much slower pace, with an additional 20 percent of
developing countries establishing a regulatory entity. As of 2015, 72 percent of developing countries have
a regulatory entity, making this by far the most popular and widely adopted of the four major policy
recommendations of the Washington consensus. Nevertheless, this still falls considerably short of the 91
percent prevalence of regulatory entities in the developed world (Figure 3.3).

           Figure 3.2: Percentage of developing countries establishing regulatory entities over time

    100%

     80%

     60%

     40%

     20%

      0%
        1978 1980 1982 1984 1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014


Source: Own elaboration based on RISE 2015 database and independent research



 Figure 3.3: Comparison of developed and developing countries on extent of regulatory reform, 2015

 Percentage of countries                         Developed countries   Developing countries
 With regulatory entity                                             91                       72
 Without regulatory entity                                           9                       28
                                                                  100                       100




                                                     7
Source: Own elaboration based on RISE 2015 database
** Differences are statistically significant at the 5% level
* Differences are statistically significant at the 10% level

While the Latin America & Caribbean region pioneered regulatory entities, Sub-Saharan Arica and East
Asia Pacific have subsequently caught-up with the adoption of this reform. Looking across developing
regions, Latin America & Caribbean was clearly the pioneer in the adoption of regulatory entities (Figure
3.4). As early as 1998, 77 percent of Latin America & Caribbean countries had established a regulator, and
in fact there have been no further regulators established within the region since that date. The uptake of
regulation started a little later in all other developing regions and regulatory entities were introduced at
a much slower pace. By 2015, Sub-Saharan Africa and East Asia Pacific had “caught-up” with Latin America
& Caribbean, with penetration of regulators climbing to the 70 to 80 percent range. However, in the three
other developing regions – South Asia, Middle East and North Africa, and Europe and Central Asia – the
momentum around regulatory reform stalled noticeably in the early 2000s, and there has been no further
diffusion since that date, leaving regulation confined to a minority of 30 to 40 percent of countries in each
of these regions.

           Figure 3.4: Percentage of developing countries establishing regulatory entities over time
                                            by geographic region




                  Source: Own elaboration based on RISE 2015 database and independent research




                                                               8
  Figure 3.5: Establishment of regulatory entities by country across the developing world as of 2015




                                Source: Own elaboration based on RISE 2015 database

              Figure 3.6: Prevalence of regulatory reform measures across country groupings

 Percentage of countries               Regulatory     Percentage of countries adopted as   Regulatory
 adopted as of 2015                    Agency         of 2015                              Agency
 By income group                                      By system size
 LIC                                           71     <1GW                                        68
 LMIC                                        57**     1-5GW                                      60*
 UMIC                                       100**     5-10GW                                    100*
 By fragility status                                  10-20GW                                    56*
 FCS                                             64   >20GW                                       77
 Non-FCS                                         72   By rule of law
 By oil exporting status                              High rule of law                            62
 Importer                                        78   Low rule of law                             69
 Exporter                                        69   By political economy
 Total                                           72   Dominant                                    63
                                                      Intermediate                                82
                                                      Competitive                                 78
Source: Own elaboration based on RISE 2015 database
** Differences are statistically significant at the 5% level
* Differences are statistically significant at the 10% level




                                                               9
There are some notable examples of countries that have eschewed regulatory entities. The map identifies
those countries that stand out as non-adopters in each of the regions (Figure 3.5). Within Latin America,
Bolivia and the República Bolivariana de Venezuela stand out as countries that do not have regulatory
entities; although in Bolivia’s case this represents a policy reversal. Other notable standouts are the
countries of Central Africa and Central Asia, as well as Afghanistan, the Islamic Republic of Iran and
Indonesia.

The penetration of regulatory reforms is particularly high in upper-middle-income countries, as well as in
larger systems and certain regions (Figure 3.6). Regulatory entities are universal in upper-middle-income
countries, and significantly higher than in the low-income group. By far the largest variation in the
prevalence of regulatory entities is across geographic regions, ranging from around 40 percent to 80
percent in different regions. In particular, differences are statistically significant between the Middle East
& North Africa and Latin America & Caribbean (at the 10% level), South Asia region and Sub-Saharan Africa
(at the 5% level).



4. Restructuring Reforms

Restructuring reform is defined as movement along a spectrum towards full vertical and horizontal
unbundling of the sector. The starting point for restructuring reform is typically a vertically integrated
national monopoly utility, and the theoretical endpoint a fully restructured sector entailing vertical
unbundling of generation, transmission and distribution, as well as horizontal unbundling of the
generation and distribution tiers to create multiple companies operating in parallel.

The theoretical rationale for such restructuring is that it paves the way for competition. First, vertical
unbundling aims at removing any conflict of interest that may arise when a single utility has more than
one function along the electricity supply chain. For example, a transmission company that also engages in
generation may have the incentive to prioritize grid access for its own generation capacity as opposed to
that of competitors. Second, horizontal unbundling aims at reducing the concentration of market power,
particularly relevant for generation. For example, a country that has five or six generation companies of
even size is likely to experience stronger competitive pressure in generation than a country that has one
large and one small generation company only. However, in countries where the scope for genuine
competition may be severely constrained by the scale or technical characteristics of the power sector, the
case for unbundling as an enabler of competition may not be compelling. In addition, there may be other
reasons to pursue vertical unbundling, related to promoting efficiency gains through greater specialization
or improved transparency and accountability of management along the electricity supply chain. It is also
sometimes argued that horizontal unbundling can help regulators to compare efficiency across
companies. Nevertheless, unbundling is quite a complex process whose costs need to be carefully weighed
against the expected benefits, particularly in countries where systems are small and there is a serious risk
of losing scale economies, and/or managerial capacity to lead multiple enterprises may be limited.




                                                     10
                         Figure 4.1: Definition of stages of restructuring reform

Model                  Defining characteristics
classification
1. Vertically          Generation, transmission and distribution are undertaken by a single
Integrated             vertically integrated entity
2. Partial vertical    Either generation has been separated while transmission and
unbundling             distribution remain combined, or distribution has been separated
                       while generation and transmission remain combined
3. Full vertical       Generation, transmission and distribution have each been separated
unbundling             from each other.
4. Full vertical and   Generation, transmission and distribution have each been separated
horizontal             from each other, and furthermore generation and/or distribution
unbundling             tiers have been restructured into multiple entities.


In practice, restructuring may happen in a number of phases and take a variety of forms. Hence the survey
distinguishes between partial vertical unbundling that entails splitting the vertical supply chain into just
two independent entities – which may leave transmission either with generation or with distribution – full
vertical unbundling that entails splitting the vertical supply chain into three independent entities – for
generation, transmission and distribution – and horizontal unbundling to create multiple entities in the
generation and distribution segments. It is also important to clarify that there are degrees of unbundling,
usually starting with accounting separation, and going on to encompass functional separation into distinct
management areas, legal separation into distinct companies, and ownership separation so that the
different companies also have distinct owners. In some countries, for example, utilities are legally
unbundled only to be retained under the ownership of a single state-owned holding company, which
tends to undermine the impact of the restructuring exercise. For the purposes of the taxonomy used in
this paper, unbundling must go as far as legal unbundling in order to be counted at all.




                                                    11
    Figure 4.2: Percentage of developing countries adopting some degree of unbundling over time




                 Source: Own elaboration based on RISE 2015 database and Besant-Jones 2006

While a sizeable minority of developing countries have unbundled their power sectors to some degree,
restructuring has not gone anywhere near as far as in the developed world (Figures 4.2 and 4.3). As of
1995, only 10 percent of developing countries had engaged in some degree of unbundling. A further 23
percent of countries unbundled during the decade 1995-2005, but only 10 percent of countries in the
subsequent decade 2005-2015, indicating a slowing pace of diffusion. Nevertheless, the prevalence of
unbundling is much greater in the developed world (where it affects 74 percent of countries to some
degree) than in the developing world (where it affects only 43 percent of countries). And whereas 43
percent of developed countries have attained full vertical and horizontal unbundling of the sector, the
same is true for just 18 percent of developing countries. Most of the developed countries that have
unbundled their sectors have undertaken full vertical unbundling. Of course, some notable examples of
vertically integrated power systems do persist in the developed world, including countries like Japan,
Austria and the Republic of Korea. Among the developing countries with full vertical and horizontal
unbundling are Argentina, Brazil, India, Nigeria, Peru, and Turkey. One factor that may explain the greater
prevalence of unbundling in developed countries is simply the larger scale of their power systems on
average.




                                                    12
     Figure 4.3: Comparison of developed and developing countries regarding vertical unbundling, 2015

 Percentage of countries                                                         Developed    Developing
                                                                                 countries    countries
  Vertically integrated**                                                                 26          57
 Some degree of vertical unbundling of which:**                                            74          43
  Partial vertical unbundling                                                              4          11
  Full vertical unbundling**                                                              26          14
  Full vertical unbundling plus horizontal unbundling in G or D**                         43          18
                                                                                          100         100
Source: Own elaboration based on RISE 2015 database
** Differences are statistically significant at the 5% level
* Differences are statistically significant at the 10% level

The timing and extent of sector restructuring differs significantly across regions14 (Figure 4.4). Two regions
– Latin America & Caribbean and Europe & Central Asia – were early adopters with some 60 percent of
their countries having unbundled to some degree as early as the year 2000, and no further action since
that date. Countries that have pursued unbundling have at least introduced full vertical unbundling, and
a significant minority of 20-30 percent of countries in these regions have full vertical and horizontal
unbundling. While the process of unbundling started later and moved more slowly in the East Asia Pacific
region, by 2015 as many as 80 percent of countries had undertaken some degree of unbundling, and as
many as 40 percent had full vertical and horizontal unbundling. However, a substantial share of countries
has remained at the stage of partial vertical unbundling. By contrast, in South Asia, fewer than half of the
countries have embarked on sector unbundling and there has been no further uptake of restructuring
reforms since the early 2000s. A similar pattern is evident in the Middle East and North Africa, where
barely a third of the countries have undertaken unbundling. In Sub-Saharan Africa, vertically integrated
monopolies remain the norm in over 80 percent of the countries. Interestingly, the East Asia and Pacific
region (and to a much lesser extent Sub-Saharan Africa) is the only one where momentum on restructuring
reforms has actually increased over the last decade 2005-2015. In all other regions, there has been barely
any action on restructuring reforms since the early 2000s.

The detailed geographic patterns are somewhat different for restructuring than for regulation (Figure 4.5).
As before, Afghanistan, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Indonesia, and the República Bolivariana de
Venezuela stand out as countries that have eschewed reform. However, in addition, so have the majority
of countries in Africa, whose systems are likely in many cases too small to make unbundling a relevant
option.




14
  Specifically, with respect to vertical integration/some degree of vertical unbundling the differences are statistically
significant between Sub-Saharan Africa and Europe & Central Asia, East Asia & Pacific and Latin America & Caribbean
respectively. The percentage of countries that have fully vertically unbundled varies significantly between Europe &
Central Asia and Sub-Saharan Africa. The differences are statistically significant for Sub-Saharan Africa and East Asia
& Pacific, Latin America & Caribbean and Middle East & North Africa, as well as for East Asia & Pacific and Middle
East & North Africa with respect to full vertical unbundling. Partial vertical unbundling does not vary to statistically
significant degrees across regions.


                                                               13
Figure 4.4: Percentage of developing countries adopting some degree of vertical unbundling over time
                                            and by region

    (a) Europe and Central Asia                         (b) Latin America and Caribbean




    (c) East Asia Pacific                               (d) South Asia




    (e) Middle East and North Africa                    (f) Sub-Saharan Africa




                Source: Own elaboration based on RISE 2015 database and Besant-Jones 2006




                                                   14
            Figure 4.5: Unbundling index by country across the developing world as of 2015




                              Source: Own elaboration based on RISE 2015 database

The extent of restructuring reform is closely related to a number of country characteristics (Figure 4.6). In
addition to the regional patterns noted above, sector restructuring is closely linked to a number of country
characteristics. There is a direct correlation with country income group, such that upper-middle-income
countries are much more likely to have implemented at least partial vertical unbundling than low-income
countries. A similar effect can be observed against system size: countries with installed generation
capacity above five gigawatts are more than twice as likely to have unbundled as small power systems.
Similarly, oil exporting countries had a higher likelihood of embarking on restructuring reform than
importers. None of the other variables proves to be statistically significant with respect to their influence
on unbundling.




                                                     15
            Figure 4.6: Prevalence of restructuring reform measures across country groupings

 Percentage of              Vertically     Some degree of                         Of which:
 countries adopted as       integrated     vertical                 Partial      Full vertical   Full vertical
 of 2015                                   unbundling               vertical     unbundling      and
                                                                    unbundling                   horizontal
                                                                                                 unbundling
 By income group
 LIC                              60**                 40**                 13               4            23*    100
 LMIC                               50                   50                 11               7             32    100
 UMIC                             33**                 67**                 17               0            50*    100
 By system size
 <1GW                             69**                 31**                 10               3           18*     100
 1-5GW                              50                   50                 10               5           35*     100
 5-10GW                           20**                 80**                 20               0           60*     100
 10-20GW                          67**                 33**                 11              11          11**     100
 >20GW                            23**                 77**                 23               8           46*     100
 By political economy
 Dominant                            55                   45               18*               3          24**     100
 Intermediate                        52                   48               18*               6            24     100
 Competitive                         44                   56                4*               4          48**     100
 By rule of law
 High rule of law                    61                   39                0*               8              31   100
 Low rule of law                     54                   46               15*               4              27   100
 By fragility status
 FCS                                 50                   50                17               2              31   100
 Non-FCS                             58                   42                 9               7              26   100
 By oil-exporting status
 Importer                         36**                 64**                 15               7              42   100
 Exporter                         50**                 50**                 19               6              25   100
 Total                              57                   43                 11              14              18   100
Source: Own elaboration based on RISE 2015 database
** Differences are statistically significant at the 5% level
* Differences are statistically significant at the 10% level



Once embarked on a restructuring reform, only about half the countries seem likely to pursue it to the
fullest extent of vertical and horizontal unbundling. Figure 4.7 illustrates the evolution of countries
adopting different degrees of restructuring in 2005 and looking at the extent of their further progress on
restructuring reform ten years later, by 2015. Just over half the countries simply retained a vertically
integrated structure over this period with no movement on reform. Among those embarking on
restructuring reform since 2005, about half went all the way to full vertical and horizontal unbundling,
while the other half remained in an intermediate stage. None of the countries that had undertaken partial
vertical unbundling by 2005 took this any further during the following decade. By contrast, the majority
of countries that had reached full vertical unbundling in 2005 went on to introduce horizontal unbundling
during the following decade. The evidence suggests that taking preliminary steps towards unbundling is
no guarantee that the process will be completed. However, countries are unlikely to undo restructuring


                                                               16
reforms once these have been undertaken: only 2 percent of countries indicate a policy reversal in the
lower triangular portion of the table. In particular, Kazakhstan went from being fully vertically and
horizontally unbundled in 2005 to just fully vertically unbundled in 2015, while the República Bolivariana
de Venezuela’s level of unbundling changed from fully vertically unbundled to vertically integrated in that
time period.

                                              Figure 4.7: Evolution of restructuring reforms from 2005 to 201515
                                                   2015 State of Restructuring


                                   Percentage      Vertically   Partial vertical        Full vertical         Full vertical and
                                   of countries    integrated   unbundling              unbundling            horizontal unbundling


                                   Vertically
                                   integrated         54.5**                   4.5                      2.3                     6.8    68.2
     2005 State of Restructuring




                                   Partial
                                   vertical
                                   unbundling           0.0*                   8.0                      0.0                     0.0     8.0

                                   Full vertical
                                   unbundling          1.1**                   0.0                      3.4                     9.1    13.6

                                   Full vertical
                                   and
                                   horizontal
                                   unbundling          0.0**                   0.0                      1.1                     9.1    10.2

                                                        55.7                 12.5                       6.8                    25.0   100.0

                                                      Source: Own elaboration based on RISE 2015 database
                                                     ** Differences are statistically significant at the 5% level
                                                     * Differences are statistically significant at the 10% level



Countries that have proceeded to the final stages of restructuring reform did so rapidly (Figure 4.8). A
large majority (78 percent) of the 14 countries that were fully vertically and horizontally unbundled as of
2015 completed the process within five years of embarking on restructuring reforms. In almost three-
quarters of these cases, countries skipped partial vertical unbundling and proceeded directly to full
vertical and horizontal unbundling. At the other extreme, 14 percent took over 10 years to reach full
vertical and horizontal unbundling.




15
  For each row, the 2015 share of countries in each of the column categories is compared. A single significance
marker in a row shows that the particular share was statistically significantly different from all other values in the
row. More than one marker highlights all the values that were statistically significantly different from one another.


                                                                                   17
     Figure 4.8: Time elapsed between partial vertical unbundling and full vertical and horizontal
                                        unbundling (years)




5. Competition Reforms

The purpose of competition is to promote efficiency and innovation by creating competitive pressures
among service providers. When multiple companies compete simultaneously among themselves for
consumers, a market discipline is created resulting in the pressure to keep costs down to efficient levels
and to improve and innovate with regard to service quality. Due to large economies of scale, many power
sector activities have traditionally been considered natural monopolies, meaning that it would be
inefficient to have more than one supplier, although this perception is beginning to shift with the arrival
of smaller scale renewable technologies. Even there, it is still possible to get different companies to
compete for the right to supply the market on a monopoly basis for a certain period of time. In larger
power systems that support a considerable number of generation plants, it is feasible to have direct head-
to-head competition through the adoption of a wholesale power market.




                                                    18
                          Figure 5.1: Definition of stages of competition reform

Model                 Sector structure characteristics
classification
1. Monopoly           A single company has responsibility for generation, transmission,
                      distribution and retail sales
2. Independent        As above, but in addition private independent power producers (IPPs)
Power Producers       are allowed to compete for the right to generate power
3. Single Buyer       A single wholesale power trader, which may be: (i) a transmission
Model                 entity, (ii) a distribution entity or (iii) a combined transmission and
                      distribution/retail entity, as long as it has no direct interest in
                      generation. The single wholesale power trader purchases power from
                      all generators, and sells to all distributors as well as any large
                      wholesale customers.
4. Bilateral          A transmission operator or some other entity acts as a single buyer of
contracting with      power for the majority of retail customers, while allowing large
Third Party Access    customers to purchase power directly from various generators, by
                      wheeling power through the grid on a non-discriminatory basis
5. Wholesale          Power market of multiple generation companies selling directly to
market                multiple distribution companies and other large customers,
competition           supported by an independent system operator and market operator.
                      Small customers can buy only from their local distributor.
6. Retail market      As above, but allowing all customers – large and small – to purchase
competition           power directly from retail companies, entailing prior vertical
                      unbundling of distribution and retail companies, with distribution
                      companies providing open access wheeling services to numerous
                      power retailers


Competition reform is defined as movement along a spectrum from complete monopoly to full retail
competition and takes place in a number of distinct stages (Figure 5.1). The first reform step involves
opening competition for the right to build and operate new generation plants supported by long term
power purchase agreements with the monopoly utility. The second stage involves the creation of a single
buyer entity that has a monopoly on the sale of power to end users, but which a number of generation
companies compete to supply. The only real difference between this and the earlier stage is that the single
buyer model typically involves a prior restructuring exercise to separate generation from transmission and
distribution, so that the single buyer avoids the conflict of interest entailed by holding its own generation
assets. The third stage, which should be preceded by full vertical unbundling of the power sector, allows
direct bilateral contracting of power between generators and large customers (such as distribution
companies or major industries), and is made possible by the principle of non-discriminatory Third Party
Access to the national grid. The fourth stage moves beyond bilateral contracting by creating a wholesale
power market or exchange that typically allows both spot purchases and longer term contracts, and may



                                                     19
include markets for ancillary services, such as spinning reserves. The demand-side of the wholesale market
is initially confined only to distribution companies and large customers, but in the fifth and final stage may
be opened to all customers in the form of retail competition. The latter entails further vertical unbundling
of distribution and retail functions, so that distribution utilities act rather like transmission utilities,
primarily as providers of wheeling services, and all commercial activities are conducted by retail
companies that do not own network infrastructure. The distinction between wholesale and retail
competition is a little blurred, since a number of countries have legislated retail competition without
vertical unbundling of distribution and retail activities, and the actual thresholds for retail competition
vary across countries. The description of competition measures in this chapter is exclusively based on the
existence of a legal provision to support a particular stage of competition; no judgement is made about
the actual functioning of competition in each market.

  Figure 5.2: Percentage of developing countries adopting varying degrees of competition over time




                 Source: Own elaboration based on RISE 2015 database and Besant-Jones 2006

As of 1995, just over 30 percent of developing countries had pursued some degree of competition reform,
and this doubled to around 70 percent in the 20 years to 2015 (Figure 5.2). The proportion of countries
applying a Single Buyer Model remained fairly constant at about 20-25 percent throughout this period.
However, the share of countries allowing Independent Power Producers grew steeply, as did the
prevalence of various forms of competition in the market. By 2015, countries introducing competition



                                                     20
were quite evenly divided between Independent Power Producers, the Single Buyer Model and various
forms of competition in the market. Of these, wholesale power markets are the most prevalent and can
be found in more than 10 percent of countries.

Nonetheless, power sector competition has spread far wider and gone much deeper in the developed
world than in the developing world (Figure 5.3). Whereas about 70 percent of developing countries have
implemented some degree of competition, this falls well short of the developed world where competition
is almost universal, affecting 96 percent of countries (Figure 5.3). Not only is competition more
widespread in the developed world, but it has also been introduced in more advanced forms. The
percentage of developed countries with some form of power market, at almost 80 percent, is around four
times as high as the percentage of developing countries, which stands at just 20 percent. While the
proportion of developed countries practicing more modest forms of competition, such as Independent
Power Producers and the Single Buyer Model, is only 17 percent, the share is more than twice as high
among developing countries at 41 percent. One possible interpretation is that developing countries are
simply moving more slowly in implementing power sector reforms. An alternative view is that they have
settled into an intermediate stage of reform, without any interest in going further.

The vast majority of developed countries that have introduced full retail competition are EU members
and their evolution towards power markets is driven by EU Directives. Indeed, the only developed
countries outside of the EU membership that have established full retail competition for electricity have
been Australia, Canada, the Russian Federation, Switzerland and the United States. In the developing
world, there are just a dozen countries that have introduced retail competition for electricity; although
this may not always be fully operative. They are concentrated in Latin America (Argentina, Brazil, Chile,
Guatemala, Peru) and Eastern Europe (Kazakhstan, Romania, Russia, Turkey, Ukraine), as well as Asia
(India, Philippines).

    Figure 5.3: Comparison of developed and developing countries regarding extent of competition
                                             as of 2015

 Percentage of countries                                            Developed countries Developing countries
 Monopoly**                                                                            4                  30
 Some degree of competition of which:                                                 96                  70
  Independent Power Producers                                                        13                  22
  Single Buyer Model*                                                                 4                  19
  Bilateral contracting with Third Party Access                                       0                   6
  Wholesale market competition                                                       13                   8
  Retail market competition**                                                        66                  15
                                                                                    100                  100
Source: Own elaboration based on RISE 2015 database
** Differences are statistically significant at the 5% level
* Differences are statistically significant at the 10% level

By far the earliest and deepest efforts to introduce competition occurred in Latin America & Caribbean as
well as Europe, where a majority of countries currently have power markets (Figure 5.4). In these regions,
the vast majority of countries had already begun the journey towards competition as of 2005, with close
to half of the countries in both regions already having established a power market. During the decade



                                                               21
2005 to 2015, the share of countries with power markets in both regions rose slightly towards 60 percent;
and in the case of Europe & Central Asia the form of competition shifted in many countries from wholesale
to retail, reflecting adoption of European Union policy frameworks. Despite the predominance of power
markets in these regions, there still remain a solid core of around 30 percent of countries that have
remained at the earlier stages of competition with a Single Buyer Model or simply allowing Independent
Power Producers. While a significant minority, 22 percent, of countries in Europe & Central Asia retained
a monopolistic sector in 2015, there are no remaining monopolies in Latin America & Caribbean.

Across Asia, the decade 2005 to 2015 was one of deepening competition in the electricity sector, but with
a marked preference for intermediate models rather than full power markets (Figure 5.4). While a
majority of countries in South Asia and East Asia Pacific had already begun the competition process by
2005, in almost all cases this had only involved the first stage of Independent Power Producers. During
the following decade, there was strong uptake of the Single Buyer Model in about 30 to 50 percent of
Asian countries. Overall, as of 2015, about 70 percent of Asian countries are practicing some intermediate
form of competition including Independent Power Producers, Single Buyer Model and Third Party Access.
Only a minority of countries, less than 30 percent, have gone as far as introducing power markets.
Monopolies remain rare in East Asia Pacific, but are still quite prevalent in South Asia.

The story is very different for Africa and the Middle East (Figure 5.4). Neither of these regions has any
wholesale power markets. In the Middle East, about 75 percent of countries had undertaken early stages
of competition as of 2005, with a preference for Independent Power Producers and the Single Buyer
Model. The only further movement on competition that has taken place in any Middle Eastern country
during the subsequent decade 2005 to 2015 has been the adoption of bilateral contracting in several
countries. Sub-Saharan Africa began in 2005 with a monopolistic power sector in around 75 percent of
countries. In the following ten years, the prevalence of monopolistic sectors has dropped markedly
towards 50 percent. Among African countries adopting competition, the vast majority have only moved
as far as introducing Independent Power Producers, with much more limited adoption of the Single Buyer
Model.




                                                   22
Figure 5.4: Percentage of developing countries adopting varying degrees of competition over time and
                                              by region

    (a) Europe and Central Asia                       (b) Latin America and Caribbean




    (c) East Asia Pacific                            (d) South Asia




    (e) Middle East and North Africa                 (f) Sub-Saharan Africa




                                                23
Overall, it is striking that relatively few of the world’s largest emerging economies have introduced full
power markets (Figure 5.5). A map of power sector competition for 2015 confirms the prevalence of
power markets across Europe & Central Asia as well as in South America, with the notable exceptions of
Bolivia and the República Bolivariana de Venezuela. Within southern and eastern Asia, India and the
Philippines stand out as two of the few countries that have established power market competition. In
addition, in 2015 power markets were conspicuous by their absence in a number of the world’s largest
emerging economies, including Mexico in Latin America, Indonesia in Asia, as well as the Arab Republic of
Egypt and South Africa in Africa.

The extent of power sector competition is strongly correlated with country characteristics (Figure 5.6).
Both the willingness to embark on power sector competition, as well as the extent to which competition
progresses, are strongly and significantly influenced by a country’s income group and power system size,
as well as fragility status and rule of law. Whereas around 25 percent of middle-income countries have
introduced wholesale power markets, prevalence among low-income countries is only 4 percent.
Similarly, while 43 percent of countries with power systems under 1 GW still retain monopolies, the
fraction is only 15 percent in countries with 1-5 GW. Non-fragile states are about twice as likely to embark
on IPP competition as fragile states. In addition, another factor markedly affects the prevalence of IPPs
and Single Buyer Models, even if they do not seem to influence the uptake of stronger forms of
competition, namely political economy dynamics. Countries with competitive political systems entailing
multiple centers of power are eight times less likely to establish a competitive market as countries whose
politics are dominated by a single interest group with strong centralized power.


               Figure 5.5: Competition Index by country across the developing world as of 2015




                                Source: Own elaboration based on RISE 2015



                                                    24
Almost half of developing countries halted power sector competition during the decade 2005 to 2015. In
order to understand the extent to which there continues to be momentum around competition in the
power sector, Figure 5.7 plots the extent of competition in 2005 against the extent of competition in 2015.
A first group of countries – located along the diagonal of the matrix – and comprising nearly half of all
countries in the sample adopted no additional reform on competition between 2005 and 2015. It is
striking that almost all these countries stopped at the very early stages: either with a monopoly or with
Independent Power Producers.


             Figure 5.6: Prevalence of competition reform measures across country groupings

 Percentage of         Monopoly      Independent      Single        Bilateral      Wholesale     Retail
 countries                           Power            Buyer         contracting    market        market
 adopted as of                       Producers        Model         with Third     competition   competition
 2015                                                               Party Access
 By income group
 LIC                          33*              29*             23             9           4**              2   100
 LMIC                         25*              11*             14             4          24**             22   100
 UMIC                          0*               17             17             0          27**             39   100
 By system size
 <1GW                         43*              30*         15*               5*             5              2   100
 1-5GW                        15*               25         30*              15*            10              5   100
 5-10GW                        20               0*         40*               0*             0             40   100
 10-20GW                      33*               11          22               11            11             12   100
 >20GW                         8*               8*          8*               0*            25             51   100
 By political economy
 Dominant                       24              29       32**                 8            3*              4   100
 Intermediate                   24              18       24**                 6            12             16   100
 Competitive                    22              17        4**                 4           17*             36   100
 By rule of law
 High rule of law               31            0**              31             8             0             30   100
 Low rule of law                28           26**              18             7             9             12   100
 By fragility status
 Non-FCS                        29             28*             16             4             9             14   100
 FCS                            28             14*             23            10             7              6   100
 By oil exporting status
 Exporter                       20              25             13             6            19             17   100
 Importer                       12              22             22            12            17             15   100
 Total                          30              22             19             6             8             15   100
Source: Own elaboration based on RISE 2015 database
** Differences are statistically significant at the 5% level
* Differences are statistically significant at the 10% level




                                                               25
Some 40 percent of developing countries continued to pursue competition measures during the last
decade. A second group of countries – placed in the upper triangle of the matrix – and representing 43
percent of all countries in the sample continued to pursue competition taking one or more reform steps
between 2005 and 2015. About half of these countries took only one reform step at the early stages of
the process, moving either from Monopoly to Independent Power Producers or from Independent Power
Producers to the Single Buyer Model. However, countries that had already launched significant reforms
on competition by 2005 had generally completed the process and gone all the way to retail competition
by 2015.

Only a handful of countries reversed competition measures. A third group of countries – located in the
lower triangle of the matrix – and consisting in less than 8 percent of all countries in the sample had
reversed competition reforms between 1995 and 2005. There are in fact only three countries in this
category: Albania, Bolivia and Burkina Faso.

                                     Figure 5.7: Evolution of competition reforms from 2005 to 2015
                                          2015 Sector Structure

                                                                                   Bilateral
                                                       Independe      Single       contracting      Wholesale
                          Percentage                   nt Power       Buyer        with Third       market         Retail market
                          of countries    Monopoly     Producers      Model        Party Access     competition    competition


                          Monopoly          22.5**            12.4       4.5**            1.1**            1.1**          0.0**    41.6

                          Independent
                          Power
                          Producers             2.2          12.4*           3.4             3.4             1.1             1.1   23.6
  2005 Sector Structure




                          Single Buyer
                          Model                 0.0             1.1          4.5             0.0             0.0             2.2    7.9

                          Bilateral
                          contracting
                          with Third
                          Party Access          0.0             0.0          0.0             0.0             1.1             2.2    3.4

                          Wholesale
                          market
                          competition           0.0             0.0          0.0             0.0             2.2             9.0   11.2

                          Retail market
                          competition           0.0             0.0          0.0             0.0             4.5             7.9   12.4

                                               24.7           25.8        12.4               4.5            10.1           22.5 100.0


                                             Source: Own elaboration based on RISE 2015 database
                                            ** Differences are statistically significant at the 5% level
                                            * Differences are statistically significant at the 10% level




                                                                        26
A majority of countries that reached at least wholesale competition in 2015 took less than five years to
do so (Figure 5.8). For over half of the 19 countries that attained competition, the time elapsed between
the initial introduction of some competition (the introduction of IPPs) and the establishment of a
wholesale power market was up to 5 years. Still, over a third of countries took longer than 10 years to
reach wholesale competition after taking their first competition step.

        Figure 5.8: Time elapsed between adoption of IPPs and Wholesale Competition (years)




6.      Private Sector Participation Reforms

By introducing the profit motive, private sector participation creates incentives for efficiency and allows
businesses to be run according to commercial principles. The existence of natural monopoly in the power
sector, as well as the strategic nature of the industry, has in the past been used to make the case for public
ownership of power utilities. Nevertheless, public utilities are not always managed with sufficient
decision-making and financial autonomy to allow for efficient operation. As a result, costs may escalate
and quality decline. For this reason, private sector participation has sometimes been put forward as a way
to change managerial incentives towards profits, cost control and customer orientation. Private sector
participation is strongly linked to the other components of reform. Many of the principles of regulation
rely on the regulated company following a profit motive that will make it responsive to regulatory
incentives. Similarly, the establishment of a competitive market is typically premised on the existence of
commercial incentives to drive competition among market participants.




                                                     27
Private sector participation can be implemented to varying degrees along a number of dimensions. First,
the scope of private sector participation varies according to the extent of the electricity supply chain
affected. Private sector participation may initially be undertaken only in one segment of the electricity
supply chain, often generation, but not necessarily in another, such as distribution. Eventually, the private
sector may be brought in along the entire electricity supply chain. The analysis here will distinguish
between these three cases (Figure 6.1). Second, private sector participation may affect some companies
in a particular supply segment, but not all. For example, a country may privatize two of its generation
plants, but leave the other three under public ownership. The coverage of private sector participation
may be gauged for generation according to the percentage of generation capacity that is under private
control, and for distribution by the percentage of distribution companies that are under private control.
The index does not include transmission, because there is no clear policy prescription in favor of private
sector participation, given that the grid is the ultimate natural monopoly and provides many public good
services to the system. Box 1 proposes a way of integrating information on both dimensions of private
sector participation into an index that provides a measure for the extent of private sector participation in
a country. (The index does not, however, consider the instrument used for private sector participation,
despite the fact that contractual forms such as concessions arguably represent a lesser degree of private
sector participation than full divestiture.)

                  Figure 6.1: Definition of scope of private sector participation reform

Model classification             Sector structure characteristics
1. Public ownership              All generation and distribution companies are under public
                                 ownership and management
2A. Some degree of private       At least one generation company has been privatized, or there is
sector participation in          at least one public-private partnership for power generation,
generation only                  typically an Independent Power Producer. The precise extent of
                                 private sector participation in generation can be gauged by
                                 calculating the share of installed generation capacity that is under
                                 private control. But there is no private sector participation in
                                 distribution.
2B. Some degree of private       At least one distribution company has been privatized, or there is
sector participation in          at least one public-private partnership for power distribution,
distribution only                typically a management contract or concession. The precise
                                 extent of private sector participation in distribution can be
                                 gauged by calculating the percentage of distribution companies in
                                 the country that are under private control. But there is no private
                                 sector participation in generation.
3. Some degree of private        At least one generation company and at least one distribution
sector participation in both     company has been privatized or has some form of private sector
generation and distribution      participation.


Preferred modalities of private sector participation vary significantly across the electricity supply chain.
This varies from 14 percent in transmission to 63 percent in generation, with distribution falling in
between at 40 percent. Almost all modalities of private sector participation – including management


                                                     28
contracts, concessions, Greenfield contracts and divestitures – have been applied to all segments of the
energy supply chain; however, their relative prevalence differs significantly. For generation, Greenfield
contracts for Independent Power Projects are more than twice as likely to be adopted as divestitures or
concessions, while management contracts are barely used at all. For distribution, divestitures and
concessions are significantly more prevalent than management or Greenfield contracts. For transmission,
divestitures, concessions and Greenfield contracts have been used to a similar extent, while management
contracts are rarely adopted.

  Figure 6.2: Prevalence of different forms of private sector participation along the electricity supply
                                                  chain

 Percentage of countries             Generation        Transmission    Distribution   Any of
 with                                                                                 These
 Management contracts                2                 0*              8*             10
 Concessions                         18**              5**             16             39
 Greenfield contracts                57**              9**             3**            69
 (BOT/BOO)
 Divestiture                         29**              7**             25**           61
 Any of These                        63                14              40             70
   Source: Own elaboration based on World Bank’s Private Participation in Infrastructure 1990-2015 databases

** Differences are statistically significant at the 5% level
* Differences are statistically significant at the 10% level

         Box 1: Index for measuring the extent of private sector participation reform in a country

 Since there are multiple dimensions to private sector participation reforms, an index is needed to
 aggregate over all of these dimensions and get a comparative measure of the extent of reform effort
 in any given country. The table below explains how the scores would be created for the two dimensions
 of private sector participation reform, namely: scope or how much of the electricity supply chain is
 affected and coverage or what share of business units at each stage of the electricity supply chain are
 affected.

 Scope            50 percent weighting for private sector activity in generation (G)
                  50 percent for distribution for private sector activity in distribution (D)
 Coverage         Percentage of generation capacity with private sector participation
 (c)              Percentage of distribution utilities with private sector participation
 Based on these ratings, a summary Private Sector Participation Index can be computed for each
 country and over time, based on the following formula: where c represents the share of the segment
 that is privatized; G is the index for generation; D is the index for distribution; i indexes the country;
 and t the time period. The index ranges from 0 if no private sector participation reform has taken
 place to 100 if all generation and distribution companies have experienced private sector
 participation.

                                	        	                   	      = 0.5 ∗    + 	0.5 ∗




                                                               29
A similar share of developed and developing countries has explored private sector participation, albeit to
significantly different degrees (Figure 6.3). Overall, the percentage of countries that have implemented
some degree of private sector participation in either generation or distribution hovers around 70 percent
for both developed and developing countries, with developed countries being only a few percentage
points ahead. This is the only dimension of reform for which the uptake has been similar between
developed and developing countries. Yet the extent of private sector participation for those countries that
have explored it is markedly higher among developed countries than for developing countries, with OECD
countries receiving a score of 50 and developing countries scoring 33 in the Private Sector Participation
Index for generation.

 Figure 6.3: Comparison of developed and developing countries regarding private sector participation
                                            as of 2015

 Percentage of countries/Index                                    Developing           Developed
                                                                  Countries            Countries
 Percentage of countries with no PSP                                             31                  26
 Private Sector Participation Index for
      Generation                                                                33*                50*
      Distribution                                                               24   Lack of PPI data
      Generation and Distribution                                                29
Source: Own elaboration based on RISE 2015, Platts and PPI 1990-2015 databases
** Differences are statistically significant at the 5% level
* Differences are statistically significant at the 10% level

 Figure 6.4: Percentage of developing countries adopting some degree of private sector participation
                                              over time




                                                     30
Private sector participation reforms began relatively early in the 1990s spreading rapidly to a wide range
of countries, but their diffusion has slowed considerably since 2005 (Figure 6.4). From a tiny base in 1990,
the number of countries undertaking some form of private sector participation grew very steeply reaching
50 percent by the year 2000. During the subsequent decade, the percentage of countries undertaking
such reforms rose more slowly, but had nonetheless climbed to 70 percent by 2010. However, over the
last five-year period, 2010 to 2015, there has been no further spread of private sector participation
reforms to additional countries. Of the 70 percent of countries undertaking some form of private sector
participation, only 40 percent took private sector participation measures affecting both the generation
and distribution sectors. Overall, private sector participation in generation was considerably more
prevalent, affecting about 65 percent of countries as against only 45 percent for distribution.

Although the majority of countries have undertaken some form of private sector participation, the Private
Sector Participation Index highlights that the scope of these efforts is quite limited (recall Box 1). The index
runs on a scale from 0 (meaning no country has had any private sector participation in the power sector)
to 100 (meaning that all countries have introduced private sector participation throughout the totality of
their power sector). Within this range, the average score for private sector participation globally has
climbed from around 16 to 28 during the last 20 years. Overall, the generation segment at just under 25
scores 10 percentage points ahead of the distribution segment on the reform index at just under 35,
although the two have been evolving in parallel (Figure 6.5). These scores serve to highlight that even in
countries undertaking some private sector participation measures the scope of these measures may be
quite limited (Figure 6.4).

           Figure 6.5: Private Sector Participation Index over time, by sub-sector, 1995 - 2015




             Source: Own elaboration based on PPI and Platts 1995-2015 databases, and RISE project




                                                      31
When private sector participation occurs, the vast majority of countries privatize less than a quarter of
their generation and distribution sectors (Figure 6.6). Even when countries undertake private sector
participation in their power sectors, it is comparatively rare for them to privatize the entirety of their
generation and distribution segments, but typically only a small subset of companies. As of 2015, fewer
than 20 percent of countries had opened more than 75 percent of their generation or distribution
segments to private sector participation. The share of the sector that has welcomed private actors tends
to be even lower for distribution than for generation.

   Figure 6.6 Frequency distribution of share of PSP in generation (% of MW) and distribution (% of
                                           companies), 2015




In all regions but Africa, the vast majority of countries have had some experience with private sector
participation, mainly in generation (Figure 6.7). As of 2015, in Latin America & Caribbean, Europe & Central
Asia and South Asia the majority of countries have introduced some degree of private sector participation
in both generation and distribution. In fact, all countries of Latin America & Caribbean have had some
degree of private participation in their power sectors, and 70 percent did so in both generation and
distribution. In Europe & Central Asia, the pattern is bipolar with 70 percent of countries pursuing private
sector participation in both generation and distribution and the remaining 30 percent not pursuing it at
all. In East Asia Pacific and Middle East & North Africa, the majority of countries have engaged the private
sector only in generation. In Sub-Saharan Africa some 50 percent of countries have not engaged the
private sector at all in generation or distribution.




                                                    32
Figure 6.7: Private Sector Participation Index for developing countries over time and by region

(a) Europe and Central Asia                        (b) Latin America and Caribbean




(c) East Asia Pacific                              (d) South Asia




(e) Middle East and North Africa                   (f) Sub-Saharan Africa




                                              33
Private sector participation in transmission has been much more limited. Finally, private sector
participation in transmission was adopted early in Latin America and had reached 40 percent of countries
by 2005, where it has subsequently remained. Starting about five years later than Latin America, South
Asia, particularly India, has also seen significant experimentation with private sector participation in
transmission. In particular, majority concessions and Greenfield contracts have occurred in Argentina,
Bolivia, Brazil, Cambodia, Chile, India, Peru and the Philippines. Minority divestitures and Greenfield
contracts have taken place in Bangladesh, Brazil, Colombia, India, Romania and Zambia. In other regions,
the level of interest has been much lower and much later, and almost nonexistent in Sub-Saharan Africa
and the Middle East and North Africa.

There is a clear geographic concentration of countries that introduced private sector participation in both
generation and distribution segments. These include much of South America, Europe & Central Asia, South
Asia and East Asia Pacific. Sub-Saharan Africa is the region with the highest prevalence of countries that
either did not embark on private sector participation or did so only for distribution or (more commonly)
the generation segment. In South East Asia, also, private sector participation has been concentrated in
the generation segment in all countries except for the Philippines.

Uptake in private sector participation varies significantly with important country characteristics (Figure
6.9). Lower income groups and smaller systems are almost half as likely as their counterparts to embark
on any form of private sector participation. When looking at the nature of private sector participation,
again larger power systems and higher income countries score higher on the distribution index, while in
the generation segment countries at the ends of the political economy spectrum achieve higher scores
than more intermediate systems. Surprisingly, fragile states were associated with greater percentages of
private sector participation in the power sector than non-fragile countries, suggesting that overall fragility
has not significantly prevented the participation of the private sector in generation.

More than any other reform, private sector participation has proved to be subject to significant reversals,
particularly in the distribution segment. Private sector participation in the power sector has been
particularly affected by cancellations and reversals triggered either by government or by the private sector
itself. Cancellations have affected 40 transactions in 20 developing countries. These reversals have been
particularly prevalent in the distribution segment and in the first decade of reform. The largest absolute
number of reversals took place in Latin America, but the failure rate has been highest in Sub-Saharan
Africa (see Box 2 and Annex 2 for further details).




                                                     34
Figure 6.8: Private Sector Participation Index by country across the developing world as of
                                            2015




            Source: Own elaboration based on RISE and PPI 2015 databases




                                        35
          Figure 6.9: Average Private Sector Participation Index by country grouping as of 2015

 Percentage of countries       No PSP          Generation           Distribution PSP   Aggregate PSP
 with/Private Sector                           PSP Index            Index              Index
 Participation Index
 By income group
 LIC                                    37*                    32              16**                24*
 LMIC                                   21*                    34              35**                34*
 UMIC                                    0*                    50              43**                47*
 By power system size
 <1GW                                   45*                    29               17*                    23
 1-5GW                                  20*                    41               22*                    31
 5-10GW                                 20*                    47               33*                    40
 10-20GW                                11*                    32               19*                    26
 >20GW                                  15*                    31               49*                    40
 By political economy
 Dominant                                 26               37*                    18                   27
 Intermediate                             24               33*                    26                   30
 Competitive                              22               35*                    32                   34
 By rule of law
 High rule of law                         31                   39                 38                   38
 Low rule of law                          30                   32                 21                   27
 By fragility status
 FCS                                      30               39*                    24                   31
 Non-FCS                                  29               27*                    23                   25
 By oil exporting status
 Importer                                 25                   33                 27                   35
 Exporter                                 15                   44                 37                   35
 Total                                    31                   33                 24                   19
                 Source: Own elaboration based on RISE 2015, Platts and PPI 1990-2015 databases

** Differences are statistically significant at the 5% level
* Differences are statistically significant at the 10% level



In nearly half of all 20 countries that introduced private sector participation, at least 50 percent of their
generation and distribution segments spent less than 5 years on the process (Figure 6.10). Another 40
percent of countries took between 5-10 years while only 15 percent took longer than 10 years. The time
lapse involved in fully implementing private sector participation seems to be considerably shorter than
that found for market competition.




                                                               36
Figure 6.10: Time elapsed between first private sector participation contract and private sector
                   participation in 50% of generation and distribution (years)




                                              37
Box 2: When Private Sector Participation Fails
Private sector participation is by no means irreversible. During the last 25 years, some 20 developing countries
have undertaken premature cancellation of arrangements for private sector participation, affecting some 40
transactions in all. Details of all identified cancelled private sector participation transactions can be found in the
Annex to this paper. The trigger event for the cancellation was typically either a dispute with the private operator,
some kind of shock affecting the financial equilibrium of the private operator, or a change of government. The
majority of documented cancellations were instigated by government, often in the form of renationalization of
divested assets, although a significant number were also prompted by the departure of the private sector due to
dissatisfaction with contractual conditions. In addition, there are also many instances of countries announcing
private sector participations that were never subsequently implemented. However, these are much harder to
trace and it has not been possible to document all of them here.

              Number of private sector participation enactments and failures, 1993 - 2015




Those cancellations that took place mainly affected private sector participations that were enacted during 1995-
2000, a period during which many private sector participations took place, particularly in the distribution sector.
Only three cancellations have been reported for private sector participations conducted since 2005. Cancellations
were not immediate, but on average took place 5.8 years after the private sector participation. Hence, the spike
in cancellations can be observed during 2000-2005.

 Frequency distribution of years lapsed between private sector participation and failure of private
                                   sector participation, by region




                                                         38
About half of the cancellations that have been recorded took place in the Latin America region that was privatizing
very rapidly during this period. These included a cluster of cases in Brazil, Dominican Republic and Peru, following
a dispute between the government and the private operations in the early 2000s, Argentina following the peso
crisis in 2003, and Bolivia in the form of renationalization following an ideological shift of government in 2010. A
significant number of cancellations are also reported for Europe and Central Asia – Albania, Kazakhstan and Russia
– which were also privatizing rapidly during this period. In Sub-Saharan Africa, many of the early private sector
participations saw contracts cancelled (the Comoros, The Gambia, Guinea, Mali, Togo) and divestitures
renationalized (Cabo Verde, Senegal). In South Asia, the earliest Indian private sector participation in the state of
Orissa encountered difficulties and was renationalized. However, no cancellations are reported in East Asia Pacific
or Middle East and North Africa.
On a megawatts-affected basis, cancellations of generation private sector participations were primarily divided
between Latin American and South Asia. On a connections-affected basis, the vast majority of cancellations were
in Latin America. Overall cancellations affected over 5,800 MW in installed capacity and over 2.1 million
connections.

    Percentage of total MW and connections affected by failures of Private Sector Participation in power,
                                        1990 - 2015, by region




Closer analysis reveals that the failure rate for private sector participations involving the distribution sector is
much higher than those involving only the generation sector, and doubly so when distribution private sector
participation is attempted in Sub-Saharan Africa. Whereas the cancellation rate for IPPs is as low as 1-2 percent
of transactions, the equivalent cancellation rate for distribution transactions is an order of magnitude higher,
exceeding 30 percent in Sub-Saharan Africa though closer to 15 percent in other developing regions. Among
distribution private sector participation modalities, by far the riskiest are divestitures and concessions, which face
a 50 percent failure rate in Sub-Saharan Africa or 15-20 percent elsewhere. Lease and management contracts
show significantly lower cancellation rates in Sub-Saharan Africa, although the difference is not so significant
elsewhere.
                     Failure Rate of Private Sector Participation in Power 1990-2015




Source: Own elaboration based on World Bank’s Private Participation in Infrastructure Database


                                                         39
7. The Overall Reform Picture

The time has come to draw together the analysis of the four strands of reform to look at the overall reform
picture. The discussion so far has looked individually at the diffusion of the four main power sector reform
measures recommended by the “Washington consensus”: regulation, restructuring, competition and
private sector participation. This final section draws these four separate strands of analysis together and
distills the overall conclusions that emerge from the analysis, stated in the form of a series of concluding
messages. Please note that the full set of information on the uptake of reforms in each country covered
can be found in Annex 1.

    A. Developing country power sector reform lags substantially behind the developed world, where
       full reform is far from being universal

Since the beginning of the power sector reform process in the early 1990s, developed countries have
systematically evolved much further towards the fullest extent of reform across almost all dimensions
(Figure 7.1). The developed world is ahead both in the breadth of reform, which is to say the percentage
of countries embarking on at least some degree of reform, and the depth of reform, which is to say the
percentage of countries attaining the most complete stage of reform. In terms of the breadth of reform,
both for restructuring and competition, the share of countries embarking on these reform processes is
about 30 percentage points higher in developed countries than in the developing world. In terms of the
depth of reform, the share of developed countries establishing regulatory agencies and completing the
full vertical and horizontal unbundling process is about 20 percentage points ahead of developing
countries. The contrast is even more pronounced in the case of power markets, where developed
countries are about 70 percentage points ahead of the developing world.

The one exception to this pattern is private sector participation, where the prevalence is similar in
developing and developed countries, although the depth has gone further in the latter. About 70 percent
of countries in both the developed and developing worlds have undertaken some degree of private sector
participation in either their generation or distribution segments, while about 40 percent of countries in
both the developed and developing worlds have a private sector presence in both their generation and
distribution segments. However, as noted in Section 6, the extent of private sector participation for those
countries that have embarked upon it is markedly higher among developed countries than for developing
countries, with OECD countries receiving a score of 50 out of 100 in the Private Sector Participation Index
for generation, while the equivalent score for developing countries is only 33.

This overall pattern of results is particularly striking for a number of reasons. First, it shows that despite
the more challenging investment climate, developing countries have still been able to attract significant
levels of private sector participation. Second, it indicates that private sector operation of the power sector
is far from being the universal norm, even in the developed world. Third, it is interesting that despite the
continued strong presence of public sector operators, and the fact that only about half of the developed
countries have power sectors that are fully unbundled, the developed world has nonetheless reached a
very high degree of adoption of power markets, which are to a large extent premised on a privatized and
unbundled sector structure.




                                                     40
     Figure 7.1 Prevalence of the full extent of power sector reforms across developed and developing
                                                  countries16

 Percentage of                        Some degree of reform              Full extent of reform
 countries                      Developing       Developed       Developing          Developed
                                countries        countries       countries           countries
 Regulation                                 Na.              Na.                72               91
 Restructuring                             44**             79**             20**              44**
 Competition                               69**             96**               7**             78**
 Private sector                              70               61                39               39
 participation
Source: Own elaboration based on RISE 2015 and PPI 1990-2015 databases

** Differences are statistically significant at the 5% level
* Differences are statistically significant at the 10% level

      B. Developing country power sector reform has been running out of steam over the last decade

The pace of reform, which was particularly rapid during the decade 1995-2005, has slowed considerably
during the decade 2005-15. The time series analysis identified 1990 as the baseline year after which earlier
reforms in Chile and the United Kingdom began to spread to other parts of the developing world. During
the period 1990-95, early reformers experimented primarily with contract-based forms of private sector
participation in generation and, to a lesser extent distribution. Divestitures were relatively rare and less
than 10 percent of countries had established a regulatory entity by 1995. During the decade 1995 to 2005,
there was rapid diffusion of many of the key reform measures, including establishment of regulatory
entities, as well as private sector participation or divestiture of generation and distribution. Since 2005,
the uptake of these measures slowed down considerably, with the main action during that last decade
consisting in the creation of regulatory entities.

These patterns are clearly identifiable when comparing the percentage of countries that adopted certain
standard reform measures in the decade 1995-2005 with the percentage of countries that did so during
the decade 2005-2015 (Figure 7.2). Along many (though not all) dimensions of reform (including
establishment of regulatory agencies and wholesale markets, as well as private sector participation along
the energy supply chain), the percentage of countries taking such measures during the earlier decade was
significantly higher than during the more recent period; and almost all of these differences are highly
statistically significant. This pattern of slowing reform can also be seen graphically in Figures 7.3 and 7.4,
which further illustrate that the slowing pace of reform does not reflect saturation, since even the most
prevalent reform measures have in no case been adopted in more than 70 percent of developing countries
suggesting there would be room for further uptake should additional countries so choose.




16
  “Some degree” of reform is defined as at least partial vertical unbundling, at least introduction of Independent
Power Producers, and at least some degree of private sector participation in either generation or distribution. “Full
extent” of reform is defined as establishment of a regulator, full vertical and horizontal unbundling, creation of a
power market and some degree of private sector participation both for generation and distribution.




                                                               41
      Figure 7.2: Comparing speed of diffusion of power sector reform measures across decades

                    Percentage of countries implementing reforms in time              1995-05     2005-1517
                    period:
 Regulation         Creation of regulatory entity **                                        43            18
 Restructuring      At least some degree of restructuring (at least partial                 33            17
                    vertical unbundling)*
                    Partial vertical unbundling                                              5             4
                    Full vertical unbundling*                                               20             7
                    Full vertical unbundling and horizontal unbundling                       8             6
 Competition        At least some degree of competition (at least IPPs)*                    41            33
                    Adoption of Monopoly + IPPs                                             15            15
                    Adoption of Single Buyer Model*                                         11             4
                    Adoption of Third Party Access                                           5             5
                    Creation of wholesale power market **                                    8             6
                    Creation of retail power market                                          2             3
 Private Sector     Private Sector Participation in generation **                           34             8
 Participation      Private Sector Participation in distribution **                         19             7
                    Divestiture of generation companies **                                  17             4
                    Divestiture of distribution companies **                                12             4
                    Private Sector Participation in transmission                             6             7
                    Divestiture of transmission companies                                    4             1
Source: Own elaboration based on RISE 2015 and World Bank PPI 1990-2015 databases
** Differences are statistically significant at the 5% level
* Differences are statistically significant at the 10% level




17
  The denominator for these percentages excludes those countries that had already implemented the respective
reform in the 1995-2005 period.


                                                     42
    Figure 7.3: Comparing speed of diffusion of fullest power sector reform measures over time




                Source: Own elaboration based on RISE 2015 and PPI 1990-2015 databases

Figure 7.4: Comparing speed of diffusion of some degree of power sector reform measures over time




                Source: Own elaboration based on RISE 2015 and PPI 1990-2015 databases




                                                 43
Disaggregating the data further shows that, across the board, there are pervasive plateau effects. That is
to say that once a certain level of penetration is reached for a particular type of reform in a particular
region it simply seems to settle at that level for a number of years. This suggests that all the countries
interested in reforming in that region have already done so. The level at which the plateau is reached
differs across regions and according to the reform measure involved. In general, in Latin America the
plateau is reached at the level of at least 80 percent of countries, while in less reform-oriented regions
such as Sub-Saharan Africa and the Middle East, the plateau is reached at 40 percent of countries or less
depending on the measure.

While a majority of developing countries have taken some measures related to restructuring, competition
and private sector participation in their power sectors, only a minority of them have actually gone all the
way on any of the dimensions of reform (Figure 7.5). While 70 percent of countries have taken at least
one step towards competition, only 20 percent have succeeded in implementing a power market. And
while 44 percent of countries have undertaken some measure of restructuring, only 20 percent have
completed the full vertical and horizontal unbundling of the sector. As a result, the prevalence of countries
with some intermediate stage of reform is much higher than the prevalence of countries that have
reformed fully.

    Figure 7.5: Prevalence of differing degrees of power sector reform across developing countries

 Percentage of countries             Some degree of reform               Full extent of reform
 Restructuring                                                      52                                   20
 Competition                                                        70                                   20
 Private sector participation                                       74                                   40
Source: Own elaboration based on World Bank RISE 2015 and World Bank’s PPI 1990-2015 databases

    C. Some elements of the power sector reform agenda have proven far more popular than others

While the various measures associated with the 1990s power sector reform model were originally
conceived as a package, it is clear that developing countries have been quite selective in their adoption of
these reforms. Some elements of the package have proved much more popular than others. Broadly, the
different reform measures can be divided into three groups according to their level of popularity (Figure
7.6).

The most popular group of measures are applied by a majority of 60 to 70 percent of developing countries.
Foremost among these is the creation of a regulatory entity. This measure is relatively straightforward in
political terms, because it entails adding a new element to the sector rather than changing what is already
there. While a regulatory entity could in principle represent a challenge to the political hegemony of the
sector, in practice regulators have not always been given sufficient powers to provide such contestability.
The next most widespread reform measure was private sector participation in generation, most often
through BOTs or Independent Power Projects, although in many cases also through divestiture. Private
sector participation in generation has proved less challenging to implement, in part because it can often
be applied to new plants, thereby avoiding the need to change institutions that already exist; but also
because it involves low levels of employment, is relatively straightforward to operate, is far removed from
the customer interface, and lends itself to a simple ring-fenced power purchase arrangement, either with
a utility which may already be creditworthy or one whose creditworthiness can be enhanced through
some form of state guarantee. Despite the high uptake of these policies, it is relevant to note that a full



                                                     44
third of developing countries, have not been willing or able to undertake even these relatively tractable
measures during the 20-year period that they have been widely put forward in policy circles.

The second group of measures are applied by approximately half of developing countries. These include
vertical unbundling of the power utility and private sector participation in distribution. Both of these
represent a higher degree of disruption to the status quo. In the case of unbundling, the incumbent utility
has to be restructured into multiple entities with consequent governance and human resource challenges.
In the case of distribution private sector participation, the degree of political sensitivity is quite high since
it involves changing the point of interface with the public, and likely imposing stronger payment discipline
and higher tariffs, as well as reforming the practices of a larger workforce.

The least popular group of measures are applied by up to 20 percent of developing countries only. It
makes sense that the creation of power markets would fall into this group, since its establishment is only
relevant in larger power systems, is contingent on the prior adoption of many of the other reform
measures, and entails relinquishing a high degree of state influence over the sector. The comparative
rarity of private sector participation in transmission partly reflects that this was never in any case a strong
policy prescription of the reform model, due to the many public good functions provided by the power
grid. Finally, management contracts have not been widely adopted in the power sector, with the exception
of Sub-Saharan Africa where experience has been mixed. While they are relatively easy to introduce from
a political and technical standpoint, the resulting impacts have been quite limited.

  Figure 7.6: Prevalence of different types of power sector reform measures in the developing world

 Percentage of developing countries with…
 A regulatory entity                                                                                        72
 Some use of BOT/BOO contracts                                                                              69
 Some form of private sector participation in generation                                                    63
 Some use of divestiture                                                                                    61
 Some degree of vertical unbundling                                                                         44
 Some form of private participation in distribution                                                         44
 Some use of concession contracts                                                                           39
 A competitive power market                                                                                 20
 Horizontal unbundling in addition to vertical unbundling                                                   20
 A Single Buyer Model                                                                                       18
 Some form of private sector participation in transmission                                                  14
 Some use of management contracts                                                                           10
Source: Own elaboration based on RISE 2015 and PPI 1990-2015 databases

    D. Developing countries packaged power sector reforms in ways unrelated to the original logic

Power sector reform measures were originally conceived as a coherent and inter-related package, and it
was envisaged that they would be implemented according to a certain logical sequence. Regulation would
typically be the starting point, so that the rules and incentives of the sector would be clearly specified,
before any changes were made to the institutional actors. This would be followed by unbundling to create
the desired sector architecture, which once completed would pave the way for potential changes in
ownership. Given that the distribution segment represents the beginning of the payment chain for
electricity, it was generally thought that it made sense to begin private sector participation with
distribution, so as to improve the operational performance and commercial viability of the sector, and


                                                       45
generate a solid revenue stream that would then provide the basis for remunerating private sector
participation in the generation sector. Only after all these elements were in place would it make sense to
move towards a wholesale power market, which relies on a multiplicity of actors and a strong set of
commercial incentives that would be achieved by prior unbundling and private sector participation
measures. However, earlier stages of competition could be introduced along the way, with IPPs being
feasible even prior to unbundling and single buyer or third-party access arrangements becoming feasible
following unbundling.

The analysis suggests that overall about one-third of developing countries have not observed this
packaging. Rather they have adopted different dimensions of reform unevenly and leading to imbalances
in their sector structures.

As has been noted, the implementation of reforms was quite selective, and this selectivity was not always
informed by taking into account synergies between different combinations of reforms. The following
figures 7.7-7.11 cross-tabulate the pattern of uptake for the different dimensions of reform and analyze
their mutual coherence. Three situations are possible. In the first case, reforms proceed pari passu along
the different dimensions and a coherent outcome is achieved; these cases are located in the upper right
triangle of the matrix. In the second case, reforms are out of balance in such a way that one dimension of
reform has gone further ahead than is really warranted by achievements along a related dimension; these
are located along the diagonal. In the third case, reforms are out of balance in such a way that one
dimension of reform has not gone far enough to support the extent of reform already enacted on a
different dimension; these cases are in the lower triangle of the matrix.

In the case of competition, effective reform entails that competition be preceded by certain other
reforms. These include: (i) vertical unbundling that separated out naturally monopolistic elements from
those that were potentially competitive; (ii) private sector participation that introduced commercial
orientation among the potentially competing players in generation; and (iii) regulation to ensure that
these players would continue to act in the public interest.

A first pairwise comparison looks at the balance between competition and restructuring measures (Figure
7.7). The analysis finds that about 15 percent of countries have gone further with competition than their
degree of reform on unbundling would prepare them for. As an example, almost 10 percent of countries
have introduced power markets before completing sector unbundling. At the same time, a further 15
percent are in the opposite situation of having got further ahead with sector restructuring than they are
with their market competition process. As an example, just over 10 percent of countries have effected full
vertical and horizontal unbundling of the sector, but still practice a Single Buyer Model when they look
structurally prepared for a power market.

A second pairwise comparison looks at the balance between competition and private sector participation
measures (Figure 7.8). In this case, about 25 percent of countries have their competition reforms lagging
their reform on private sector participation. For example, almost 17 percent of countries have introduced
private sector participation in both generation and distribution, yet have not taken their competition
measures any further than allowing Independent Power Producers. At the other end of the spectrum,
about 7 percent of countries have taken competition further than their degree of private participation
would tend to support.




                                                   46
A third pairwise comparison looks at the balance between restructuring and private sector participation
measures (Figure 7.9). In 24 percent of countries private sector participation has gone ahead of
restructuring reforms. For example, almost 11 percent of countries have private sector participation in a
utility that remains vertically integrated. By contrast, only about 6 percent of countries seem to have
introduced reform on competition without taking parallel measures to incorporate the private sector.

In the case of regulation (Figure 7.10, 7.11), strictly speaking a regulatory entity is not essential when the
sector is organized as a publicly-owned vertically-integrated monopoly. This is because the whole
rationale for state ownership is to act in the public interest and there are no wider market relations to be
regulated. Moreover, with both the regulator and the public utility reporting directly to the line ministry,
it can be difficult for the regulator to exercise authority. Nonetheless, 13 percent of developing countries
find themselves in the situation of having created regulators when their utility remains an integrated
state-owned monopoly. On the other hand, it is critical to have a regulator once private ownership or
operation has been introduced to any part of the sector, and as the reforms of competition continue.
However, 13 percent of developing countries find themselves in the situation of lacking regulatory entities
despite introducing private sector participation, while 12 percent of developing countries lack regulatory
entities despite having commenced along the competition process.

                     Figure 7.7 – 7.11: Coherence between various reform measures

7.7 Competition and restructuring reform

 Percentage of       Vertically          Partially           Fully vertically Fully vertically  Total
 countries           integrated          vertically          unbundled        and
                                         unbundled                            horizontally
                                                                              unbundled
 Monopoly                     28.2**              2.4**                   0.0             0.0**       30.6
 IPPs                         22.4**                2.4                   1.2             1.2**       27.1
 Single Buyer                    2.4                5.9                   0.0              10.6       18.8
 Model
 Bilateral                         0.0                 0.0                1.2              2.4           3.5
 Contracting
 with TPA
 Wholesale                         1.2                 2.4                0.0              1.2           4.7
 market
 competition
 Retail market                     1.2                 7.1                1.2              5.9          15.3
 competition
 Total                            55.3                20.0                3.5            21.2         100.0




                                                       47
7.8 Competition and private sector participation reform

 Percentage      Monopoly   IPPs             Single Bilateral     Wholesale   Retail     Total
 of                                          Buyer Contracting Competition Competition
 countries                                   Model with TPA
 Public              24.7                0.0    2.4           1.2         0.0        0.0     28.2
 PSP in               3.5               14.1   11.8           0.0         2.4        1.2     32.9
 Generation
 Only
 PSP in               0.0               16.5    4.7               2.4           2.4            14.1      40.0
 Generation
 and
 Distribution
 Total               28.2               30.6   18.8               3.5           4.7            15.3     100.0

7.9 Restructuring and private sector participation reform

 Percentage of      Vertically          Partially           Fully vertically Fully vertically  Total
 countries          integrated          vertically          unbundled        and
                                        unbundled                            horizontally
                                                                             unbundled
 Public                     22.9**                   2.4*               1.2*              2.4*       28.9
 PSP in                     21.7**                   4.8*               1.2*              6.0*       33.7
 Generation Only
 PSP in                          10.8                13.3                1.2            13.3           38.6
 Generation and
 Distribution
 Total                           55.4                20.5                3.6            21.7          100.0

7.10   Regulation and private sector participation reform

 Percentage of countries                   No regulator   Regulator   Total
 Public                                              16.4        12.5        28.9
 PSP in Generation only**                             6.8        25.0        31.8
 PSP in Distribution only                             0.9         1.1         1.9
 PSP in Generation and Distribution**                 5.0        33.7        38.6
 Total                                               27.7        72.3       100.0




                                                      48
7.11     Regulation and competition reform

 Percentage of countries                        No regulator          Regulator    Total
 Monopoly                                                      15.9         13.6            29.5
 Independent Power Producer**                                   7.2         22.3            29.5
 Single Buyer Model*                                            2.3         15.9            18.2
 Bilateral contracting + TPA                                    0.0          3.4             3.4
 Wholesale market competition                                   0.0          4.5             4.5
 Retail market competition*                                     2.3         12.5            14.8
 Total                                                         27.7         72.3           100.0
** Differences are statistically significant at the 5% level
* Differences are statistically significant at the 10% level

    E. Developing countries sequenced power sector reforms in ways unrelated to the original logic

The anomalies in reform packaging observed above suggest that developing countries may not have been
sequencing reform according to the original concept. This typically counseled introducing regulation prior
to undertaking any private sector participation in either generation or distribution, so that the framework
for oversight of the private company was established ahead of any transaction. This is logical since the
quality of the regulatory framework could be expected to affect the overall value of the private sector
participation transaction. In addition, the conceptual framework suggests that it makes most economic
and financial sense to introduce the private sector into distribution ahead of generation. The reason is
that improving the commercial and financial performance of the distribution sector is usually the only way
to ensure the financial solvency of the entire electricity supply chain, since cash flows originate with
customers at the retail end and are passed up the chain to eventually finance investments in the
generation sector. By commencing private sector participation at the distribution end, a strong cash flow
would be generated facilitating subsequent private finance of generation. Nevertheless, in practice,
distribution private sector participation tends to be more difficult than generation both politically and in
terms of attracting market interest.

An analysis of the prevalence of different sequences of reform measures sheds light on this issue (Figure
7.12). What is clearest is that there is no dominant sequence of reform measures that has been followed
across countries; rather all possible permutations can be found. Overall, 34 percent of countries
introduced regulation before undertaking any private sector participation in generation or distribution,
but were outnumbered by the 52 percent of countries that did things the other way around. Similarly,
some 20 percent of countries introduced private sector participation into distribution ahead of
generation, but were greatly outnumbered by the 40 percent of countries that started with generation
instead.




                                                               49
           Figure 7.12: Overview of sequence of reform measures on 4 dimensions of reform

 Percentage of countries introducing        First         Second        Third        Last           Not at all
 Regulation                                         34             17            6             15          28
 Restructuring (At least partial vertical
 unbundling                                         17             19            9              7          48
 Competition (At least wholesale
 competition)                                        2             3             5             10          80
 Private sector participation in
 generation                                         35             17            2              8          38
 Private sector participation in
 distribution                                       17             8             3             16          56

    F. Developing country power sector reform is stuck at an intermediate stage in many cases, and
       announced reforms are not always fully implemented

To get an overall picture of the extent of the reform status in each country, an aggregated Power Sector
Reform Index is constructed. This is based on a simple scoring methodology detailed in Box 3, giving each
country a single score on a scale of 0 to 100. It is important to reiterate that the index is intended to be
descriptive, that is documenting the diffusion and uptake of reforms, rather than normative, that is
evaluating countries according to how far they have gone in adopting reforms. Countries may have
perfectly good reasons for not pursuing reforms that may not be applicable to their circumstances. For
example, a wholesale electricity market would not make sense for a small island state. Individual country
scores for 88 developing countries are reported in Figure 7.14 and range all the way from 0 to 100.
Aggregate scores are reported over time in Figure 7.13, which highlights the slowdown in the adoption of
reforms after 2000.

The index identifies five developing countries (or about 6 percent of the total) that have not taken any
measures towards power sector reform. They tend to be conflict affected states mainly in Africa, such as
Eritrea, Guinea, Liberia, Solomon Islands and South Sudan.

At the other extreme are the 5 countries with scores above 90 percent. They are mainly large middle-
income countries in Latin America & Caribbean, notably Argentina, Guatemala, Peru, the Philippines and
Turkey.

Overall, the median score on the power sector reform index is just short of halfway at 43, and three-
quarters of developing countries score below 72 on the index. This illustrates clearly how the bulk of
developing countries find themselves at the early or intermediate stage of the power sector reform
agenda.

Developed countries on average score higher on the reform index than developing ones (Figure 7.16). It
is instructive to compare the frequency distribution of reform scores between developed and developing
countries. The distribution for the developed countries has a strong modal value in the 80-90 bracket,
unlike the distribution for developing countries which is relatively flat. The median score for the 20
developed countries at 77 is accordingly significantly higher than the corresponding score of 37 for the 88
developing countries. Nevertheless, it is also striking that there are stark outliers in the developed country
group, with Kuwait and Japan scoring under 40 on the index.



                                                     50
Countries that score high values on the index undertook reforms at differing speeds (Figure 7.17). To
understand the time periods needed to accomplish major reforms, attention is confined to those
countries that completed the bulk of the reform agenda by introducing a regulatory entity, undertaking
full vertical and horizontal unbundling, introducing a wholesale power market and privatizing at least 50
percent of their generation and distribution sectors. Of the relatively small group of 8 in this category,
reforms in Latin America were enacted relatively rapidly in no more than five years, with Peru taking 3
years, Argentina 4 years, and Guatemala 5 years. Reforms in the Europe and Asia region took substantially
longer, in the 10-20 year range: 12 years in Turkey, 13 years in India, 15 years in the Philippines, 16 years
in Romania, and 18 years in Ukraine.

For a sample of 15 case study countries, an Announced Reform Index is computed by recalculating the
Power Sector Reform Index based on official announcements or policy commitments rather than actual
policy enactments. The results in Box 4 reveal varying gaps between a country’s reform announcements
and delivery. In some cases, reforms can be delayed for several years, and the divergence between
announced reforms and those actually implemented can amount to as much as 50 points on the reform
index. Political regime changes, union opposition and disputes among private players are some of the
reasons for the observed discrepancy.

 Box 3: Power Sector Reform Index
 In order to aggregate across the four dimensions of power sector reform considered in this study,
 a simple Power Sector Reform Index is constructed. The index gives each country a score on an
 interval of 0 to 100 on each dimension of power sector reform. The scores are based on giving
 equal weight to each step on each dimension of the reform continuum (see tabulation below). The
 average of the four 0-100 scores is used to provide an overall summary of the extent of reform,
 although it would also be feasible to weight the four differently according to their relative difficulty
 and importance.
 Regulation                       No regulator                               Regulator
                                       =0                                       = 100

 Restructuring            Vertically     Partial vertical         Full vertical         Vertical &
                         integrated        unbundling             unbundling            horizontal
                             =0                = 33                   = 67          unbundling = 100
 Competition            Monopoly         IPPs         Single Buyer        Bilateral     Competitive
                           =0            = 25            Model           Contracts         market
                                                          = 50               = 75           = 100
 Private Sector         0.5*(Percentage of generation capacity with private sector participation)
 Participation                                               +
                        0.5*(Percentage of distribution utilities with private sector participation)




                                                      51
Box 4: Delivering on Reform Announcements

Announced reforms are by no means always implemented, and adoption can occur significantly delayed after the
passing of a law or a formal official commitment to implement reforms. Reasons for such delays include political
regime changes, union opposition to reforms and disagreements between parties or private consortiums. A detailed
comparison between reforms announced and reforms actually enacted for 15 country cases over a 25-year period
helps to shed light on two issues: first, the extent to which countries enact sudden ‘big bang’ reforms versus gradual
or incremental reforms over time; and second, the extent to which countries follow through on implementation of
reform announcements.

Pakistan is an example of a country that undertook a comprehensive package of reforms, although these were
implemented only after some delay. Full reforms on restructuring, private sector participation and establishment of
a regulatory entity were announced in 1992, yet – as a result of political regime changes – only a fraction of the
announced measures had actually been implemented four years later. This delay was followed by a period of bold
reforms, with the power sector reform index increasing from 10 to 69 within a six-year period. However, since the
introduction of private sector participation in distribution in 2005, no further reforms were enacted (other than
increases in private sector participation in generation). In particular, announced reforms on unbundling K-Electric
and expanding private sector participation to other distribution utilities have not been followed through.

                                   Reforms announced and implemented in Pakistan

                   100
                   90
                   80
                   70
                   60
                   50
                   40
                   30
                   20
                   10
                    0



                          Competition Sub-Index   PSP Sub-Index        Regulation Sub-Index   Restructuring Sub-Index
                          Promised Competition    Promised PSP         Promised Regulation    Promised Restructuring




On the other end of the spectrum, Senegal’s reform has been much more gradual and falls substantially short of
what was originally announced. Reforms began with some Independent Power Projects in the late 1990s, followed
by the establishment of a regulatory agency in 1998. Private sector participation in the power utility, Senelec, was
reversed after two years in 2001 following union opposition to reforms and a change of government, and a second
attempt to concession the company proved unsuccessful. Further, reforms for vertically unbundling Senelec that had
been passed by law in 1998, have yet to be implemented. As of 2015, Senegal’s score on the power sector reform
index was 56, whereas if it had implemented all the announced reforms the score would have been 93.




                                                                  52
Box 4 continued:

                                    Reforms announced and implemented in Senegal
                100
                   90
                   80
                   70
                   60
                   50
                   40
                   30
                   20
                   10
                   0



                        Competition Sub-Index   PSP Sub-Index          Regulation Sub-Index   Restructuring Sub-Index
                        Promised Competition    Promised PSP           Promised Regulation    Promised Restructuring



Overall, looking across the 15 case study countries, by 2015 the gap between announcement and delivery of reforms
led to Power Sector Reform Index scores that were between 10 and 50 points below where they would have been
had all announced reforms been fully implemented. The smallest gaps were found in Ukraine, Peru and Uganda,
while the largest gaps were found in Tajikistan and Tanzania.

                        Reforms announced and implemented in 15 case study countries
               100
                90
                80
                70
                60
                50
                40
                30
                20
                10
                   0




                                        2015 Delivered Reform Score      2015 Promised Reform score


      Source: Elaboration based on PPI 1990-2015 database, RISE and Rethinking Power Sector Reform Data




                                                                  53
Figure 7.13: Aggregate score on Power Sector Reform Index by year and sub-index




 Source: Own elaboration based on RISE 2015, PPI 1990-2015 databases and industry data




                                          54
Figure 7.14: Scores on Power Sector Reform Index (0,100) for 88 developing countries, by sub-index




         Source: Own elaboration based on RISE 2015, PPI 1990-2015 databases and industry data




                                                  55
Figure 7.15: Aggregate score on Power Sector Reform Index across the developing world as of
                                           2015




  Source: Own elaboration based on RISE 2015, PPI 1990-2015 databases and industry data




                                           56
      Figure 7.16: Frequency distribution of Power Sector Reform Index scores, OECD and developing
                                              countries, 201518




               Source: Own elaboration based on RISE 2015, PPI 1990-2015 databases and industry data

           Figure 7.17: Time elapsed between first step of reform and full extent of reform (years)




               Source: Own elaboration based on RISE 2015, PPI 1990-2015 databases and industry data




18
     Index excludes Germany, Spain and the United Kingdom.


                                                        57
    G. The uptake of reforms is substantially affected by country characteristics

The uptake of various different sector reform measures is closely related to the characteristics of
countries, in terms of their geography, income level, power system size, and political economy. As a
general rule, reform uptake is much stronger in Latin America and Caribbean and Europe and Central Asia,
than it is in the Middle East and Africa. There is typically also a strong positive effect between a country’s
income group and the prevalence of reform, and an even stronger positive effect with the physical size of
the power system. There is some weaker evidence that oil importers go further with their reforms than
oil exporters. In terms of political variables, uptake of all reforms but competition increase for a political
system that is based on competition between multiple poles of power rather than one that is dominantly
hierarchical. The size and statistical significance of these effects vary according to the dimension of reform
(Figure 7.18).

In the case of regulation, the effects are quite small, perhaps reflecting the fact that regulation is a
relatively easy reform to adopt. The strongest and only statistically significant differences observed are
income groups. In particular, the prevalence of regulatory agencies is highest for the upper-middle-
income group. Furthermore, the leading geographic group, Latin America and Caribbean, was 48
percentage points more likely to have introduced reforms on regulation that the lagging group, the Middle
East and North Africa. Interestingly, region does not have a statistically significant influence on the
prevalence of regulation.

In the case of restructuring, there are some very large effects, particularly across regions, and according
to income group, power system size and net oil trade status. The gap on unbundling between the leading
region, Europe and Central Asia, and the lagging region, Sub-Saharan Africa, is as much as 60 percentage
points, and statistically significant. Moreover, being a higher income country, an oil importing state, or a
country with a large power system above 10 gigawatts, can all add between 14 and 46 percentage points
to the probability of unbundling the power sector.

In the case of competition, the largest statistically significant differential is again across geographic
regions. The gap between the leading region, Latin America and Caribbean, and the lagging region, Middle
East and North Africa, is as much as 74 percentage points. It is also striking that countries with competitive
political systems are not necessarily more likely to countenance competitive power markets. Being a
country with a large power system adds around 50 percentage points to the likelihood of undertaking
power system competition. The size effect is particularly stark in the case of wholesale power markets.
There are simply no cases of countries with national power systems under a gigawatt of capacity having
adopted wholesale power markets; which makes sense given that their systems are too small to support
enough generators for a competitive market to be meaningful. Among countries with large systems in
excess of 10 gigawatts, around 50 percent have a wholesale power market, and this is more than twice
the ratio for smaller systems in the one to five gigawatt range.

In the case of private sector participation, the gap between the leading region, Latin America and
Caribbean, and the lagging region, Sub-Saharan Africa, is 43 percentage points. Countries in higher income
groupings are more likely to have private sector participation by a differential of 23 percentage points.
Again, being a country with a large power system also adds around 30 percentage points to the likelihood
of undertaking power system private sector participation. By and large there are no signs of convergence
between countries in different size groupings. Thus, the differences in the uptake of private sector
participation in these countries are becoming increasingly pronounced over time. Countries with system


                                                     58
sizes above a gigawatt are twice as likely to have private sector participation in generation as those with
smaller systems. In the case of distribution, the threshold is higher and it is only in systems larger than
five gigawatts that the probability of private sector participation doubles relative to countries with smaller
system sizes.

Such pronounced differences in reform uptake across country groupings over a 20-year period of intensive
policy effort suggest that country characteristics seriously constrain the applicability of the standard
power sector reform model in certain environments. The fact that regional variations are the largest of
any observed suggests that either some of the other effects are aggregated and accentuated by geography
(for example, the concentration of small, low-income, fragile countries in Africa) or that there are some
additional region-specific drivers that are not being picked up elsewhere, including perhaps “bandwagon”
or “domino” effects within regions. On just about every type of reform measure, Latin America has been
the pioneering region, while the Middle East and North Africa region has systematically lagged on reform
(Figure 7.19). For other regions, however, the pattern tends to vary depending on the nature of the reform
measure.

Finally, Figure 7.20 reports the average Power Sector Reform index score for countries of different
characteristics. This confirms the picture that came through in the analysis of the individual dimensions
of reform. Countries with higher income levels and large power systems score approximately twice as high
on the Power Sector Reform Index as the rest, more competitive political economies and higher degrees
of rule of law co-move with slightly higher scores on the Index. A similar discrepancy is observed between
countries in Latin America and Caribbean and those in the Middle East & North Africa.

        Figure 7.18: Summary of how country characteristics influence uptake of reform measures19

 Percentage point difference               Regulation              Restructuring   Competition   Private sector
 between lowest and highest                                                                      participation
 adoption rates
 Across geographic regions                        48                   60**            74**           43
 Increasing income group                         31**                  27**             33*           23*
 Increasing power system size                      9                   46**            35*            30*
 Non-fragile state                                 8                    12               1            (6)
 Oil importer                                      9                   14**             (8)            0
 Increasing rule of law                           (7)                   (7)              3            11
 Increasingly competitive
                                                   15                    11             (2)            7
 political system
** Differences are statistically significant at the 5 level
* Differences are statistically significant at the 10 level




19
     Tests are between the two extreme categories in each country grouping.


                                                              59
Figure 7.19: Power Sector Reform Index over time and by region




                             60
                  Figure 7.20: Variations in Power Sector Reform Index Score by country characteristics

(a) By income group**                                                 (b) By region**




(c) By system size**                                                  (d) By rule of law




(e) By fragility status                                               (f) By political economy*




        ** Differences are statistically significant at the 5 level
        * Differences are statistically significant at the 10 level



                                                                      61
8. Conclusion

Some 25 years have elapsed since the Washington Consensus on power sector reform began to promote
among developing countries a reform agenda. This agenda encompassed the establishment of regulatory
entities, the vertical and horizontal unbundling of vertically integrated national monopoly utilities, private
sector participation in generation and distribution, and the introduction of competitive markets for power
generation. Exploiting a unique new data set on the timing and scope of power sector reforms adopted
by 88 countries across the developing world, this paper seeks to improve our understanding of the uptake,
diffusion, duration, packaging and sequencing of power sector reforms, and the extent to which they were
affected by the economic and political characteristics of the countries concerned.

Overall, power sector reform in the developing world lags far behind what was implemented in the
developed world during the same time period. The median score for OECD countries on a Power Sector
Reform Index developed in this paper was 77, compared to 37 for developing countries. Closer inspection
shows that the most significant differences lie in the area of vertical and horizontal unbundling, which is
twice as common in OECD as in developing countries, as well as implementation of wholesale power
markets, which is ten times more likely in OECD than developing countries. Nonetheless, even among
OECD countries that have introduced wholesale power markets, no country has fully privatized its sector.
Moreover, 17 percent of the OECD countries that introduced a wholesale power market did so without
fully vertically unbundling their power sectors; this percentage was twice as high for developing countries
that reached the same stage of competition.

The paper finds that following rapid diffusion during the decade 1995-2005 the spread of power sector
reforms slowed significantly in the subsequent decade 2005-2015, on almost every dimension of reform.
The overall score for the Power Sector Reform Index in developing countries climbed 23 points from 12
to 35 in 1995-2005, but only 8 points to 43 in 2015. The slowdown is particularly evident in terms of the
number of countries establishing regulatory entities or conducting private sector participation in
generation or distribution in the later decade.

The one reform that does seem to have been almost universally adopted in the developing world by 2015
was the introduction of Independent Power Producers in the generation segment. This has now been
done in 96 percent of developing countries. However, most other reforms come nowhere close to having
been so widely adopted. For example, only 72 percent of developing countries had established a
regulatory entity by 2015, only 44 percent had undertaken vertical unbundling, and a mere 7 percent had
established a wholesale power market. Overall, 12 percent of developing countries in 2015 were still
operating with vertically integrated state-owned monopoly enterprises.

Only a small minority of developing countries were able to fully implement the reform model as originally
conceived. A mere half dozen developing countries (Argentina, Guatemala, India, Peru, the Philippines
and Turkey) scored above 90 percent on the Power Sector Reform Index, indicating that almost all possible
reform measures were taken. The time taken to implement such an extensive program of reform has
varied widely across countries, and was typically much faster in Latin America than elsewhere, ranging
from only 3 years in Peru to around 15 years in the Philippines.

Yet for the majority of countries, reforms were only selectively adopted, often according to ease of
implementation, and reform programs often stagnated midway. A third to half of developing countries


                                                     62
find themselves in such an intermediate stage of reform, having partially implemented reforms in some
areas but not in others, and in many cases reforms have been halted for over a decade. A number of
countries have even experienced reform reversals undoing private sector participations in 18 countries,
competition measures in three countries, and utility restructuring measures in two countries.

Furthermore, reforms have sometimes been packaged and sequenced in ways unrelated to the original
logic. For example, 25 percent of developing countries have allowed for private sector participation
without following through on competition, while another 15 percent have gone further on competition
than their sector restructuring efforts would prepare them for. Some 13 percent of developing countries
have created regulatory entities without having introduced private sector participation to their utilities,
while a similar share find themselves in the opposite situation. While the principles of reform suggest that
distribution private sector participation should precede the private sector participation in generation, the
percentage of countries doing so was about the same as those that began by privatizing generation.

Country characteristics such as geography, income group, power system size, and attributes of the
political system seem to have had a statistically significant influence on the uptake of reform. One of the
largest influences has been system size: countries with installed capacity above 10 GW scored more than
twice as high on the reform index as those with systems below 1 GW. Similarly, countries in the middle-
income bracket, and those with relatively competitive political economies also scored much higher than
others. Geographic region was also an important driver, with two distinct groupings. Latin America and
the Caribbean stands out as the pioneering region for power sector reform, starting earlier and
introducing more reforms than any other. However, over time, Europe and Central Asia has caught up to
a substantial extent. On the other hand, Middle East and North Africa, Sub-Saharan Africa, as well as South
Asia and East Asia and Pacific started from further behind and introduced reforms more slowly over the
entire period.

Moreover, of the 34 countries (scoring under 33) that are still at an early stage of power sector reform,
the vast majority fall into one of the categories of countries facing wider socioeconomic challenges that
will make power sector reform challenging: Fragile states (14 cases), small systems (31 cases), low income
bracket (16 cases), or weak rule of law (32 cases). 16 of these countries are in Sub-Saharan Africa. In fact,
there is not a single large stable middle-income country in this group. This raises questions about the
applicability of the classic power sector reform agenda in those countries that currently remain most in
need of sector reform.

In summary, these patterns of uptake of power sector reform illustrate that while the Washington
consensus reforms have become commonplace across the OECD, they remain very challenging to
implement in their entirety in a developing country environment. Policy prescriptions for power sector
reform diffused rapidly around the world during the decade 1995-2005 and experienced significant uptake
in stable middle-income countries characterized by large power systems. However, even among this
group, only a handful of countries were able to fully implement the reform model as originally envisaged,
and typically over a lengthy period. A much larger group of countries implemented reforms selectively
(typically emphasizing regulation and IPPs) and often ended up at an intermediate stage of reform, often
without the impetus to introduce further reform. In addition, a significant minority of countries barely got
started with reform and do not appear to present suitable conditions for doing so.




                                                     63
           Annex 1A: Overview of Developing Country Level Scores in the Power Sector Reform Index, 1990–2015
Country                  Scores Over Time                        Scores on Different Dimensions of Reform, 2015
                     1995     2005     2015   Regulation   Restructuring       Competition                      Private sector
                                                                                                                participation
Afghanistan          0        0       1       0            0                   0                                1
Algeria              0        63      51      25           12.5                12.5                             1
Angola               0        0       57      25           25                  6.25                             1
Argentina            99       99      96      25           25                  25                               21
Armenia              34       81      74      25           25                  12.5                             11
Bangladesh           16       79      70      25           25                  12.5                             7
Belarus              0        31      25      25           0                   0                                0
Benin                0        0       25      25           0                   0                                0
Bolivia              2        10      34      0            0                   25                               9
Brazil               16       95      81      25           25                  25                               6
Burkina Faso         0        8       31      25           0                   6.25                             0
Burundi              0        0       25      25           0                   0                                0
Cambodia             0        41      43      25           0                   6.25                             12
Cameroon             3        37      56      25           0                   6.25                             25
Central African      0        31      25      25           0                   0                                0
Republic
Chad                 3        3       13      0            0                  0                                 13
Chile                53       69      75      25           25                 0                                 25
China                32       66      76      25           12.5               25                                14
Colombia             80       82      77      25           12.5               25                                14
Congo, Dem. Rep.     0        0       0       0            0                  0                                 0
Congo, Rep.          0        31      25      25           0                  0                                 0
Côte d'Ivoire        14       45      56      25           0                  6.25                              25
Dominican Republic   17       96      82      25           25                 25                                7
Ecuador              16       79      77      25           25                 25                                2
Egypt, Arab Rep.     0        47      38      25           0                  12.5                              1
Eritrea              0        0       0       0            0                  0                                 0
Ethiopia             0        0       38      25           12.5               0                                 0
Ghana                0        39      72      25           25                 18.75                             3
Guatemala            17       98      92      25           25                 25                                17
Guinea               0        0       0       0            0                  0                                 0
Haiti                0        1       9       0            0                  6.25                              3
Honduras             40       42      45      25           0                  6.25                              14
India                17       96      89      25           25                 25                                14
Indonesia            8        8       10      0            0                  6.25                              3
Iran, Islamic Rep.   16       16      15      0            0                  12.5                              2
Jordan               4        82      85      25           25                 12.5                              22
Kazakhstan           17       65      59      0            25                 25                                9
Kenya                0        32      54      25           12.5               12.5                              4
Korea, Rep.          0        0       2       0            0                  0                                 2
Kyrgyz Republic      16       47      38      0            25                 12.5                              0
Lao PDR              16       17      23      0            0                  12.5                              11
Lebanon              0        0       1       0            0                  0                                 1
Liberia              0        0       0       0            0                  0                                 0
Madagascar           0        31      34      25           0                  6.25                              3
Malawi               0        0       25      25           0                  0                                 0
Malaysia             33       65      60      25           12.5               12.5                              10
Maldives             0        0       0       0            0                  0                                 0
Mali                 0        32      33      25           0                  6.25                              2
Mauritania           0        31      25      25           0                  0                                 0
Mexico               31       40      53      25           0                  25                                3



                                                             64
Country                  Scores Over Time                        Scores on Different Dimensions of Reform, 2015
                     1995     2005     2015   Regulation   Restructuring       Competition                      Private sector
                                                                                                                participation
Mongolia             0        47      38      25           0                   12.5                             1
Morocco              1        19      33      0            0                   18.75                            15
Mozambique           3        34      42      25           0                   6.25                             11
Myanmar              0        0       29      0            12.5                12.5                             4
Nepal                31       33      35      0            12.5                12.5                             10
Nicaragua            48       81      87      25           25                  25                               12
Niger                0        31      25      25           0                   0                                0
Nigeria              1        40      81      25           25                  12.5                             18
Pakistan             9        56      52      25           0                   18.75                            8
Peru                 65       97      91      25           25                  25                               16
Philippines          11       90      93      25           25                  25                               18
Poland               1        64      80      25           25                  25                               5
Romania              0        96      87      25           25                  25                               12
Russian Federation   3        3       64      0            25                  25                               14
Rwanda               0        31      34      25           0                   6.25                             3
Senegal              3        50      63      25           0                   18.75                            19
Sierra Leone         0        0       42      25           12.5                0                                5
Solomon Islands      0        0       0       0            0                   0                                0
Somalia              3        3       13      0            0                   0                                13
South Africa         32       32      36      25           0                   6.25                             5
South Sudan          0        0       0       0            0                   0                                0
Sri Lanka            0        1       3       0            0                   0                                3
Sudan                0        1       26      25           0                   0                                1
Tajikistan           0        1       13      0            0                   6.25                             6
Tanzania             8        40      34      25           0                   6.25                             3
Thailand             16       16      43      25           0                   12.5                             5
Togo                 0        31      36      25           0                   6.25                             4
Tunisia              0        8       8       0            0                   6.25                             1
Turkey               17       97      95      25           25                  25                               20
Uganda               3        82      80      25           25                  12.5                             17
Ukraine              79       96      86      25           25                  25                               11
Uzbekistan           0        31      25      0            25                  0                                0
Vanuatu              22       22      63      25           0                   12.5                             25
Venezuela, RB        16       48      44      0            25                  12.5                             6
Vietnam              0        55      61      25           12.5                18.75                            4
Yemen, Rep.          0        0       0       0            0                   0                                0
Zambia               0        33      37      25           0                   6.25                             5
Zimbabwe             3        34      37      25           0                   0                                12




                                                             65
                                     Annex 1B: Overview of Adoption of Washington Consensus Reforms in the Power Sector, 1990 – 2015
Country20                Year of         Restructuring timeline                Competition timeline                      Year of    Private            Years of private sector participation in
                         establishment                                                                                   1st IPP    generation share   distribution/transmission companies (nr
                         of regulatory                                                                                              (% of installed    of companies)
                         entity                                                                                                     capacity)
Afghanistan              -21             -                                     -                                         -          9.5                -
Algeria                  2002            Partial vertical unbundling in 2002    Single Buyer model since 2001            2004       9.6                -
Angola                   2007            Full vertical unbundling in 2014       Monopoly plus IPPs model since 2015      -          9.0                -
Argentina                1992            Full vertical unbundling in 1995       Retail Competition model since 1995      1992       69.3               1993 (1), 1995 (4), 1996 (4), 1997 (2)
Armenia                  1997            Partial vertical unbundling in 1995    Single Buyer model since 1995            -          68.5               2002 (1)
                                         Full vertical unbundling in 1997
Bangladesh               2003            Full vertical and horizontal          Single Buyer model since 1995             1997       42.2               2006 (1)
                                         unbundling in 1996
Belarus                  2000            Horizontal unbundling in 1997         -                                         -          0.1                1995 (1), 2000 (1)
Benin                    2009            -                                     -                                         -          0.0                -
Bolivia                  -               -                                     Monopoly plus IPPs model since 1998       1998       41.5               1995 (1), 2000 (1)
                                                                               Wholesale Competition model since 1996
Brazil                   1997            Horizontal unbundling in 1995          Single Buyer model in 1995               1993       44.1               -
                                         Full vertical unbundling in 1998       Wholesale Competition model since 1998
Burkina Faso             2010            -                                      Monopoly plus IPPs model since 1998      1998       0.8                2001 (1)
Burundi                  2011            -                                     -                                         -          0.4                -
Cambodia                 2001            -                                      Monopoly plus IPPs model since 1997      1997       94.9               -
Cameroon                 1998            -                                      Monopoly plus IPPs model since 2009      -          99.2               1993 (1), 1998 (1)
Central African          2005            -                                     -                                         -          0.0                1996 (1), 1997 (2), 1998 (1), 2006 (1)
Republic
Chad                     -               -                                     -                                         -          100.0              -
Chile                    1978            Horizontal unbundling in 1982         -                                         1992       99.5               1993 (1), 1998 (1)
                                         Partial vertical unbundling in 1995
                                         Full vertical unbundling in 2000
China                    2003            Partial vertical unbundling in 1995   Single Buyer model since 1995             1992       36.8               1990 (1)
                                         Horizontal unbundling in 2003
Colombia                 1992            Partial vertical unbundling in 1995    Wholesale Competition model since 1995   1993       69.2               1996 (1), 1997 (2), 1998 (1), 2006 (1)
Congo, Dem. Rep.         -               -                                     -                                         -          0.0                -
Congo, Rep.              2003            -                                     -                                         -          0.0                -
Côte d'Ivoire            1998            -                                      Monopoly plus IPPs model since 1995      1994       100.0              1990 (1)


              20
                 For a full list of the market players (regulatory entity, wholesale market and transmission system operators) please refer to the RISE project on
              rise.esmap.org
              21
                 “-“ denotes no reform


                                                                                              66
Country20            Year of         Restructuring timeline                Competition timeline                      Year of   Private            Years of private sector participation in
                     establishment                                                                                   1st IPP   generation share   distribution/transmission companies (nr
                     of regulatory                                                                                             (% of installed    of companies)
                     entity                                                                                                    capacity)
Dominican Republic   1998            Partial vertical and horizontal       Single Buyer model in 1995                1994      59.1               1998 (1), 1999 (1)
                                     unbundling in 1998                    Wholesale Competition model since 2001
                                     Full vertical unbundling in 2001
Ecuador              1998            Full vertical and horizontal           Single Buyer model in 1995               1992      19.8               -
                                     unbundling in 1998                     Wholesale Competition model since 2015
Egypt, Arab Rep.     1997            Horizontal unbundling in 2000          Monopoly plus IPPs model in 1999         1999      6.6                -
                                                                            Single Buyer model since 2000
Eritrea              -               -                                     -                                         -         0.0                2003 (1)
Ethiopia             2014            Partial vertical unbundling in 2013   -                                         -         2.2                1993 (1), 1995 (5), 2001 (1), 2003 (1) 2006
                                                                                                                                                  (1)
Ghana                2000            Full vertical and horizontal           Monopoly plus IPPs model in 1999         1999      22.4               1995 (1), 1997 (1), 1998 (1)
                                     unbundling in 2008                     Bilateral Contracts model since 2008
Guatemala            1996            Full vertical unbundling in 1997       Single Buyer model in 1995               1994      68.9               1998 (1), 1999 (1)
                                                                            Wholesale Competition model since 1998
Guinea               -               -                                     -                                         -         0.0                -
Haiti                -               -                                      Monopoly plus IPPs model since 1995      2009      25.1               -
Honduras             1995            -                                      Monopoly plus IPPs model since 1995      1994      60.3               2003 (1)
India                1998            Full vertical unbundling in 2003       Single Buyer model in 1995               1991      33.3               1993 (1), 1995 (5), 2001 (1), 2003 (1) 2006
                                                                            Bilateral Contracts model in 2003                                     (1)
                                                                            Wholesale Competition model since 2003
Indonesia            -               -                                      Monopoly plus IPPs model since 1995      1992      26.8               -
Iran, Islamic Rep.   -               -                                      Single Buyer model since 1995            2004      17.4               -
Jordan               2002            Full vertical unbundling in 1998       Single Buyer model since 1998            2007      77.2               2008 (2)
                                     Horizontal unbundling in 2007
Kazakhstan           -               Full vertical and horizontal           Single Buyer model in 1995               -         34.9               1995 (1), 1997 (1), 1998 (1)
                                     unbundling in 1998                     Wholesale Competition model since 1998
Kenya                2006            Horizontal unbundling in 1996          Monopoly plus IPPs model in 1996         1996      31.3               -
                                     Partial vertical unbundling in 1997    Single Buyer model since 1997
Korea, Rep.          -               -                                     -                                         -         19.3               -
Kyrgyz Republic      -               Full vertical unbundling in 2001       Single Buyer model since 1995            -         0.0                -
Lao PDR              -               Horizontal unbundling in 2015          Single Buyer model since 1995            1996      86.3               -
Lebanon              -               -                                     -                                         -         6.9                2003 (1)
Liberia              -               -                                     -                                         -         0.0                2000 (1)
Madagascar           1999            -                                      Monopoly plus IPPs model since 2007      2007      23.3               -
Malawi               2007            -                                     -                                         -         0.0                -
Malaysia             2001            Partial vertical unbundling in 1995    Single Buyer model since 1995            1993      57.9               2005 (1)
Maldives             -               -                                     -                                         -         1.3                1994 (2), 1995 (1), 1996 (1), 1997 (1)



                                                                                          67
Country20            Year of         Restructuring timeline                Competition timeline                      Year of   Private            Years of private sector participation in
                     establishment                                                                                   1st IPP   generation share   distribution/transmission companies (nr
                     of regulatory                                                                                             (% of installed    of companies)
                     entity                                                                                                    capacity)
Mali                 2000            -                                      Monopoly plus IPPs model since 2014      -         16.5               1995 (1), 2003 (1)
Mauritania           2001            -                                     -                                         -         0.1                -
Mexico               1995            -                                      Monopoly plus IPPs model in 1998         1998      25.3               2005 (3)
                                                                            Wholesale Competition model since 2013
Mongolia             2001            -                                      Single Buyer model since 2001            2012      4.8                1993 (14), 2007 (6)
Morocco              -               -                                      Single Buyer model in 1997               1997      36.8               1997 (1), 1998 (1), 2001 (2)
                                                                            Bilateral Contracts model since 2008
Mozambique           2004            Horizontal unbundling in 1998          Monopoly plus IPPs model since 2014      2014      88.6               2010 (1)
Myanmar              -               Partial vertical and horizontal        Single Buyer model since 2006            2006      29.5               -
                                     unbundling in 2006
Nepal                -               Partial vertical unbundling in 1995   Single Buyer model since 1995             1994      28.5               2003 (1)
Nicaragua            1979            Full vertical and horizontal          Single Buyer model since 1995             1996      49.2               1995 (1)
                                     unbundling in 1999
Niger                1999            -                                     -                                         -         0.0                -
Nigeria              2005            Full vertical unbundling in 2010       Monopoly plus IPPs model in 2001         2001      47.7               2013 (11)
                                     Full horizontal unbundling in 2013     Single Buyer model since 2010
Pakistan             1997            -                                      Monopoly plus IPPs model in 1995         1992      49.6               2005 (1)
                                                                            Single Buyer model in 1997
                                                                            Bilateral Contracts model since 2002
Peru                 1996            Full vertical and horizontal           Wholesale Competition model since 1995   1996      80.3               2002 (1)
                                     unbundling in 1995
Philippines          2001            Full vertical unbundling in 2001      Monopoly plus IPPs model in 1995          1992      79.9               2003 (1)
                                                                           Single Buyer model in 2001
                                                                           Bilateral Contracts model in 2004
                                                                           Wholesale Competition model in 2006
                                                                           Retail Competition model since 2006
Poland               1997            Horizontal unbundling in 1997         Wholesale Competition model since 1995    -         36.7               -
                                     Full vertical unbundling in 2013
Romania              2000            Full vertical and horizontal          Monopoly plus IPPs model in 1997          2009      14.8               2005 (3)
                                     unbundling in 2000                    Bilateral Contracts model in 1998
                                                                           Wholesale Competition model in 2000
                                                                           Retail Competition model since 2007
Russian Federation   -               Horizontal unbundling in 2005         Wholesale Competition model since 2006    -         19.2               1996 (1), 2009 (3), 2010 (5), 2011 (1), 2013
                                     Full vertical unbundling in 2006                                                                             (9)
Rwanda               2001            -                                     Monopoly plus IPPs model since 2010       2010      22.4               2003 (2), 2005 (1)




                                                                                          68
Country20         Year of         Restructuring timeline                Competition timeline                    Year of   Private            Years of private sector participation in
                  establishment                                                                                 1st IPP   generation share   distribution/transmission companies (nr
                  of regulatory                                                                                           (% of installed    of companies)
                  entity                                                                                                  capacity)
Senegal           1998            -                                      Monopoly plus IPPs model in 1997       1997      100.0              2010 (1)
                                                                         Single Buyer model in 1998
                                                                         Bilateral Contracts model since 2012
Sierra Leone      2011            Partial vertical unbundling in 2011   -                                       -         37.5               1994 (1)
Solomon Islands   -               -                                     -                                       -         0.0                1998 (1)
Somalia           -               -                                     -                                       -         5.2                -
South Africa      1994            Horizontal unbundling in 1995          Monopoly plus IPPs model since 2006    2006      4.2                1995 (1)
South Sudan       -               -                                     -                                       -         0.0                1997 (1)
Sri Lanka         2002            -                                     -                                       1995      25.0               -
Sudan             2011            -                                     -                                       -         7.6                -
Tajikistan        -               Horizontal unbundling in 2002          Monopoly plus IPPs model in 2006       2006      16.9               2002 (1)
Tanzania          2001            -                                      Monopoly plus IPPs model in 1995       1994      21.3               -
Thailand          2007            -                                      Single Buyer model in 1995             1993      43.7               -
Togo              2000            -                                      Monopoly plus IPPs model in 2008       2008      34.7               -
Tunisia           -               -                                      Monopoly plus IPPs model in 1999       1999      10.1               -
Turkey            2001            Full vertical unbundling in 2001       Single Buyer model in 1995             1990      66.8               1996 (1), 2009 (3), 2010 (5), 2011 (1), 2013
                                                                         Retail Competition model in 2001                                    (9)
Uganda            1999            Full vertical unbundling in 2001       Monopoly plus IPPs model in 1999       2007      63.0               2003 (2), 2005 (1)
                                                                         Single Buyer model in 2001
Ukraine           1994            Full vertical and horizontal           Single Buyer model in 1995             2011      12.7               1998 (6), 2001 (6), 2006 (1), 2008 (1), 2010
                                  unbundling in 1995                     Wholesale Competition model in 1996                                 (3)
                                                                         Retail Competition model in 2010
Uzbekistan        -               Full vertical unbundling in 2001      -                                       -         0.0                -
Vanuatu           2007            Horizontal unbundling in 2011          Single Buyer model in 1995             2009      100.0              1994 (1)
Venezuela, RB     -               Full vertical unbundling in 1996,      Single Buyer model in 1995             -         0.9                1998 (1)
                                  reversed in 2007
Vietnam           2005            Partial vertical unbundling in 2005    Monopoly plus IPPs model in 1998       1997      34.1               -
                                  Horizontal unbundling in 2010          Single Buyer model in 2009
                                                                         Bilateral Contracts model in 2015
Yemen, Rep.       -               -                                     -                                       -         3.5                -
Zambia            1997            -                                      Monopoly plus IPPs model in 2013       -         9.8                1997 (1)
Zimbabwe          2003            Horizontal unbundling in 2015         -                                       -         99.2               -




                                                                                        69
                                 Annex 2: Overview of Cases of Failed Private Sector Participation in the Power Sector, 1990 - 2015
Country     Date of Policy   Company           Contract type   Sub-sector     Scope of PSP   Scope unit    Date of PSP   Form of            Terminating   Description
                             name(s)                                                                       Reversal      reversal           party
Albania     1996             Elbasan           Divestiture     Distribution   41             Nr of         2003          Na.                Na.           In 2003 the
                             Distribution                                                    connections                                                  private sector
                             Company                                                         (1000s)                                                      participation in
                                                                                                                                                          these
                                                                                                                                                          distribution
                                                                                                                                                          companies in
            1996             Shkodra           Divestiture     Distribution   38             Nr of         2003          Na.                Na.
                                                                                                                                                          1996 was
                             Distribution                                                    connections
                                                                                                                                                          reversed.
                             Company                                                         (1000s)
            1996             Vlore             Divestiture     Distribution   33             Nr of         2003          Na.                Na.
                             Distribution                                                    connections
                             Company                                                         (1000s)
Argentina   1996             Empresa de        Concession      Distribution   217            Nr of         2003          Private sector     Investor      In 2003, the
                             Distribucion de                                                 connections                 abandonment                      private sector
                             Electricidad de                                                 (1000s)                                                      abandoned
                             Entre Rios SA                                                                                                                their
                                                                                                                                                          investment in
                                                                                                                                                          the distribution
                                                                                                                                                          company
                                                                                                                                                          following a
                                                                                                                                                          devaluation of
                                                                                                                                                          the peso and
                                                                                                                                                          resulting loss of
                                                                                                                                                          financial
                                                                                                                                                          equilibrium
            1996             Empresa de        Concession      Distribution   63             Nr of         2008          Na.                Na.           The province of
                             Energia de                                                      connections                                                  Catamarca
                             Catamarca                                                       (1000s)                                                      nationalized
                                                                                                                                                          Edecat in
                                                                                                                                                          October of
                                                                                                                                                          2008.
Bolivia     1995             Empresa de Luz    Divestiture     Distribution   135            Nr of         2010          Nationalization    Government    In 2010 the
                             y Fuerza                                                        connections                                                  distribution
                             Electrica                                                       (1000s)                                                      company was
                             Cochabamba SA                                                                                                                nationalized as
            1995             Empresa Valle     Divestiture     Generation     289            MW            2010          Renationalizatio   Government    part of a series
                             Hermoso SA                                                                                  n                                of




                                                                                    70
Country      Date of Policy   Company           Contract type   Sub-sector       Scope of PSP   Scope unit    Date of PSP   Form of            Terminating   Description
                              name(s)                                                                         Reversal      reversal           party
             1995             Empresa Corani    Divestiture     Generation       126            MW            2010          Renationalizatio   Government    nationalizations
                              SA                                                                                            n                                of public
             1995             Empresa           Divestiture     Generation       216            MW            2010          Renationalizatio   Government    infrastructure
                              Guaracachi SA                                                                                 n                                providers,
                                                                                                                                                             following a
                                                                                                                                                             change of
                                                                                                                                                             government
                                                                                                                                                             and resulting
                                                                                                                                                             ideological
                                                                                                                                                             shift.
Brazil       2011             Jose de Alencar   Greenfield      Generation       300            MW            2011/2012     Private sector     Investor      In 2012 Bertin
                              Thermal Power                                                                                 abandonment                      Energia
                              Plant                                                                                                                          returned its
             2011             Cacimbaes         Greenfield      Generation       127            MW            2011/2012     Private sector     Investor      concessions of
                              Thermal Power                                                                                 abandonment                      separate power
                              Plant                                                                                                                          plants to the
             1998             Uruguaiana        Greenfield      Generation       639            MW            2011/2012     Private sector     Investor      government.
                              Combined-Cycle                                                                                abandonment
                              Power Plant
             1999             Rio Negro         Greenfield      Generation       158            MW            2008          Na.                Na.           Na.
                              Power Plant
Cabo Verde   1999             Electra           Divestiture     Generation,      35             Nr of         2006          Private sector     Investor      In 2006,
                                                                transmission &                  connections                 abandonment                      EDP/AdP
                                                                distribution                    (1000s)                                                      abandoned its
                                                                                                                                                             investment in
                                                                                                                                                             Electra,
                                                                                                                                                             following which
                                                                                                                                                             the company
                                                                                                                                                             was
                                                                                                                                                             recapitalized,
                                                                                                                                                             with the
                                                                                                                                                             government
                                                                                                                                                             buying back 51
                                                                                                                                                             of the
                                                                                                                                                             company's
                                                                                                                                                             shares.
Comoros      1998             Comorienne de     Concession      Generation,      16             MW            2001          Renationalizatio   Na.           Cancelled due
                              l'eau et de                       transmission &                                              n                                to
                              l'electricite                     distribution                                                                                 disagreements
                                                                                                                                                             over illegal



                                                                                       71
Country       Date of Policy   Company            Contract type    Sub-sector       Scope of PSP   Scope unit    Date of PSP   Form of            Terminating   Description
                               name(s)                                                                           Reversal      reversal           party
                                                                                                                                                                connections
                                                                                                                                                                and fuel
                                                                                                                                                                purchasing
Dominican     1999             Empresa de         Divestiture      Distribution     Na.            Na.           2003          Renationalizatio   Government    EdeNorte and
Republic                       Distribucion                                                                                    n                                Edesur were re-
                               Norte (Ede-                                                                                                                      nationalized in
                               Norte)                                                                                                                           2004 following
              1999             Empresa de         Divestiture      Distribution     Na.            Na.           2003          Renationalizatio   Government    unresolved
                               Distribucion Sur                                                                                n                                disputes
                               (Ede-Sur)                                                                                                                        between the
                                                                                                                                                                regulator and
                                                                                                                                                                the company.
Ecuador       2006             CATEG              Management       Generation &     400            Nr of         2007          Cancelled          Na.           Na.
                               Management         contract         Distribution                    connections                 contract
                               Contract                                                            (1000s)
Gambia, The   1993             SOGEA Rueil-       Lease contract   Generation,      Na.            Na.           1995          Cancelled          Public        Management
                               Malmaison;                          transmission &                                              contract                         Services
                               Management                          distribution                                                                                 Gambia's
                               Services                                                                                                                         management
                               Gambia                                                                                                                           contract was
                                                                                                                                                                terminated by
                                                                                                                                                                the government
                                                                                                                                                                in 1995.
Guinea        1995             Na.                Na.              Na.              Na.            Na.           2000          Cancelled          Both          Na.
                                                                                                                               contract




India         1996             Dabhol LNG-        Greenfield       Generation       1444           MW            2001          Private sector     Both          Ownership of
                               Fired Power                                                                                     abandonment                      the power plant
                               Plant                                                                                                                            was transferred
                                                                                                                                                                to Ratnagiri Gas
                                                                                                                                                                and Power
                                                                                                                                                                following
                                                                                                                                                                disputes over
                                                                                                                                                                the power
                                                                                                                                                                purchase
                                                                                                                                                                agreement
                                                                                                                                                                terms.



                                                                                           72
Country      Date of Policy    Company          Contract type   Sub-sector       Scope of PSP        Scope unit    Date of PSP      Form of            Terminating   Description
                               name(s)                                                                             Reversal         reversal           party
             1999              Central          Divestiture     Distribution     Na.                 Na.           2001             Renationalizatio   Government    CESCO was
                               Electricity                                                                                          n                                renationalized
                               Supply                                                                                                                                by the
                               Company of                                                                                                                            government
                               Orissa (CESCO)                                                                                                                        following
                                                                                                                                                                     financial
                                                                                                                                                                     difficulties.
Kazakhstan   1996              Almaty Power     Divestiture     Generation       1307                MW            2000             Na.                Na.           Planning
                               Consolidated                                                                                                                          difficulties
                                                                                                                                                                     resulted in the
                                                                                                                                                                     nationalization
                                                                                                                                                                     of the
                                                                                                                                                                     generation
                                                                                                                                                                     asset in 2000.
             1997              Petropavlovska   Divestiture     Generation       Na.                 Na.           1998             Na.                Na.           Na.
                               ya Tets-2
Mali                    2000   EDM              Concession      Generation,      Na.                 Nr of                   2005   Renationalizatio   Government    The concession
                                                                transmission &                       connections                    n                                contract was
                                                                distribution                         (1000s)                                                         terminated due
                                                                                                                                                                     to
                                                                                                                                                                     disagreements
                                                                                                                                                                     over tariffs and
                                                                                                                                                                     investment
                                                                                                                                                                     plans.
Peru                    1998   Electro Norte    Divestiture     Distribution                 140     Nr of                   2001   Renationalizatio   Government    Following
                                                                                                     connections                    n                                disputes over
                                                                                                     (1000s)                                                         management
                        1998   Electro          Divestiture     Distribution                 159     Nr of                   2002   Renationalizatio   Government    fees the
                               Noroeste                                                              connections                    n                                government
                                                                                                     (1000s)                                                         and private
                        1998   Electro Norte    Divestiture     Distribution                 140     Nr of                   2002   Renationalizatio   Government    investors
                               Medio                                                                 connections                    n                                reached a
                                                                                                     (1000s)                                                         settlement to
                        1998   Electro Centro   Divestiture     Distribution                 231     Nr of                   2002   Renationalizatio   Government    return the
                                                                                                     connections                    n                                distribution
                                                                                                     (1000s)                                                         companies to
                                                                                                                                                                     public
                                                                                                                                                                     ownership.
Russian                 2002   Tatenergo        Management      Generation                      24   MW                      2004   Na.                Na.           Na.
Federation                                      contract



                                                                                        73
Country         Date of Policy    Company            Contract type    Sub-sector       Scope of PSP     Scope unit    Date of PSP       Form of            Terminating   Description
                                  name(s)                                                                             Reversal          reversal           party
                           2003   Tomsk              Lease contract   Distribution                488   Nr of                    2007   Na.                Na.           Na.
                                  Municipal                                                             connections
                                  Utility Complex                                                       (1000s)
Senegal                    1999   Societe            Concession       Generation,                 300   MW                      2000    Share buyback      Government    In September
                                  Nationale                           transmission &                                                                                     2001, there was
                                  d'Electricite du                    distribution                                                                                       a change in
                                  Senegal                                                                                                                                government
                                  (SENELEC)                                                                                                                              and ideological
                                                                                                                                                                         shift resulting in
                                                                                                                                                                         the buyback of
                                                                                                                                                                         shares to
                                                                                                                                                                         renationalize
                                                                                                                                                                         SENELEC.
Togo                       2000   Togo Electricite   Concession       Generation &     Na.              Na.                     2006    Contract           Public        CEET's
                                  (CEET)                              Distribution                                                      cancellation                     concession was
                                                                                                                                                                         cancelled in
                                                                                                                                                                         2006 by the
                                                                                                                                                                         government
                                                                                                                                                                         following
                                                                                                                                                                         disputes over
                                                                                                                                                                         the
                                                                                                                                                                         concessionaire’
                                                                                                                                                                         s investments.
Venezuela, RB              1998   Sistema            Divestiture      Generation       Na.              Na.                     2007    Renationalizatio   Investor      SENECA was
                                  Electrico de                                                                                          n                                nationalized in
                                  Nueva Esparta                                                                                                                          2007, with the
                                  (SENECA)                                                                                                                               88 share of the
                                                                                                                                                                         private owners
                                                                                                                                                                         were
                                                                                                                                                                         transferred to
                                                                                                                                                                         state-owned
                                                                                                                                                                         entities.




                                                                                             74
