                                                   WPS8090


Policy Research Working Paper                     8090




 Background Paper to the 2018 World Development Report



                      On-the-Job Training
    Returns, Barriers to Provision, and Policy Implications

                                  Priyam Saraf




Development Economics
Trade and Competitiveness Global Practice Group
June 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 8090


  Abstract
  Firms that provide on-the-job training do so when it is                            literature suggests that for most firms, a comprehensive
  critical to their productivity—and when productivity is                            policy approach that resolves external constraints to becom-
  critical to their survival. This paper begins by confirming                        ing more productive is likely to have a positive impact on
  a significant and positive return from on-the-job training                         the provision of on-the-job training and adoption of com-
  on wages and productivity, as well as the presence of posi-                        plementary policies. More direct forms of firm-level support
  tive externalities from on-the-job training, while discussing                      to improve management capabilities could also alleviate
  the methodological considerations at play. The paper then                          under-provision of on-the-job training. Where societies
  reviews and validates the presence of market failures such                         have improved welfare as a goal, public policy measures
  as information asymmetries within the firm as a result                             would be needed to complement on-the-job training
  of low-quality management practices that dampen firm                               for some specific groups of workers (older, less educated,
  demand for on-the-job training. Lack of competition in                             women). In essence, the paper highlights the importance
  the firm’s external environment appears to undermine                               of demand-side constraints for firms, rather than sup-
  adoption of on-the-job training and other complementary                            ply-side constraints, for the provision of on-the-job training.
  productivity-enhancing activities within the firm. The



  This paper—prepared as a background paper to the World Bank’s World Development Report 2018: Learning to Realize the
  Promise of Education—is a product of the Trade and Competitiveness Global Practice Group. It is part of a larger effort by
  the World Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions around
  the world. Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The author may be
  contacted at psaraf@worldbank.org.




          The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
          issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
          names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
          of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
          its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                        Produced by the Research Support Team
          On-the-Job Training: Returns, Barriers to
            Provision, and Policy Implications∗

                                             Priyam Saraf+




JEL: I25, J24, J31, M5, O15, O33
Keywords: on-the-job training, skills, human capital, productivity, wages, firms, employer,
management, workers, demand, information, competition, constraint



 ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS: The author is grateful to Jose Ernesto Lopez Cordova, Alexandria Valerio, Deon Filmer and
Marialisa Motta for their guidance and support to this work. Tara Beteille, Vincent Palmade and Leonardo Iacovone
provided excellent peer review comments that helped to improve the paper, for which the author is grateful.
Valuable inputs were provided at different stages by Alexandria Valerio, Damien Shiels, Daria Taglioni, Denis
Medvedev, Gaurav Nayyar, Joern Huenteler, Omar Arias, Rita Almeida, Sanda Liepina and Thomas Farole (in
alphabetical order). Asier Mariscal and Lucia Garcia Velazquez provided invaluable research support in collecting
data on skills, wages and productivity. The author is grateful to participants at the Skills Workshop in New Delhi on
April 28, 2014, for comments on the original proposal, and to seminar participants at the World Bank Human
Development Week in Washington DC on May 11th 2017 for helpful inputs. The interpretations of the literature,
and any errors associated with it, remain the author’s responsibility.


    Economist, World Bank Group email: psaraf@worldbank.org

                                                         1
Contents
1.      Introduction .......................................................................................................................................... 4
2.      Returns to OJT .................................................................................................................................... 10
     2.1 At current employer: Effect on productivity, wages and costs......................................................... 10
     2.2 At future employer: Evidence of positive externalities .................................................................... 15
3.      Barriers to Provision of OJT ............................................................................................................... 19
     3.1 Factors within firms: Information asymmetries, low management quality ..................................... 20
     3.2 Factors outside firms: Low competition ........................................................................................... 23
4.      Policy Considerations and Areas for Future Investigation................................................................ 26
     4.1 Demand-side considerations ............................................................................................................ 26
        4.1.1 Reforming product market regulation, increasing competition and trade ............................... 26
        4.1.2 Reducing uncertainty about returns, increasing information flows, providing certification .... 28
        4.1.3 Helping improve management skills for better HR policy formation ........................................ 29
        4.1.4 Using more gain-sharing instruments and performance-based compensation for workers .... 30
     4.2 Supply-side considerations ............................................................................................................... 30
        4.2.1 Targeting selective firms for government subsidies .................................................................. 30
        4.2.2 Lower cost of poaching for firms ............................................................................................... 32
        4.2.3 Lower coordination costs for a group of firms .......................................................................... 32
        4.2.4 Targeting support toward disadvantaged groups...................................................................... 33
     4.3 Areas for future investigation ........................................................................................................... 34
5.      Conclusion .......................................................................................................................................... 34
References .................................................................................................................................................. 36
Annexes ....................................................................................................................................................... 48
     Annex 1: Annotated Bibliography (key literature on various aspects related to OJT) ........................... 48
     Annex 2: Survey instrument to measure quality of management in a firm ........................................... 58




                                                                                2
Boxes
Box 1: How Does the Literature Define OJT? ................................................................................................ 5
Box 2: Key Questions Explored in the Literature Review.............................................................................. 6
Box 3: The Methodological Challenge of Comparing Returns across Training Programs........................... 10
Box 4: What Type of Workers Receive Training? ........................................................................................ 13
Box 5: Evidence of the Presence of Industry-specific General Skills........................................................... 18
Box 6: The Limited Role of Credit Constraints ............................................................................................ 25


Figures
Figure 1: Effects of OJT on Productivity and Wage Gains ........................................................................... 13
Figure 2: Effects of Worker Mobility on Productivity and Wages .............................................................. 17
Figure 3: Management Practice Scores across Countries ........................................................................... 21


Tables
Table 1: Constraints and Market Failures Associated with Providing OJT .................................................... 6
Table 2: Summary of Findings from the Literature on Constraints to Providing OJT ................................... 9
Table 3: Summary of Findings from the Literature on OJT ......................................................................... 35


Abbreviations

ALMP                                                  Active Labor Market Policies
CEO                                                   Chief Executive Officer
FDI                                                   Foreign Direct Investment
HRM                                                   Human Resource Management
IALS                                                  International Adult Literature Survey
ICT                                                   Information and communications technology
IRR                                                   Internal rate of return
MNC                                                   Multinational Corporation
MNE                                                   Multinational Enterprise
NCC                                                   Non-compete contracts
OECD                                                  Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
OJT                                                   On-the-job training
PPP                                                   Public-Private Partnership
R&D                                                   Research and Development
RPL                                                   Recognition of prior learning
SME                                                   Small and medium enterprise
TFP                                                   Total Factor Productivity
TVET                                                  Technical and Vocational Education and Training




                                                                     3
1.       Introduction
It is widely recognized that on-the-job training (OJT) is linked to an increase in worker wages,
firm productivity and, ultimately, long-term economic growth. Workers acquire most of their new
and improved skills on the job over the course of their lifetimes. To maintain competitiveness in a
context of rapidly changing preferences and technologies, firms need to continually acquire new
production and management technologies. This increases demand for better-skilled workers.

Even though training is beneficial for both firms and workers, the existence of OJT is far less
common than the evidence about its benefits may suggest. Possible explanations have been
explored in the microeconomic theoretical literature, including: information gaps and uncertainty
about key aspects of OJT, the free-rider problem (positive externalities) and credit constraints
regarding the supply of OJT. More recently, literature from other fields, such as management and
firm productivity, has pointed to barriers to adoption of managerial practices and new technologies
as factors that depress demand for OJT.1

Despite a rich theoretical literature on OJT, very little empirical evidence is available about which
constraints and market failures affect firms more. In the past two decades, there has been a rise in
the number of rigorous (and innovative) experimental research projects regarding how firms
become more productive. This paper leverages these findings together with the traditional
literature on training and labor mobility, to improve understanding of the barriers to providing
OJT. Several methodological challenges exist to quantifying the links between OJT, wages and
productivity. This paper discusses these as well.

First, we look at how the literature defines OJT.

A review of more than 80 papers in peer-reviewed journals on OJT and skills finds little agreement
on the best ways to define and measure skills. But some areas of convergence do surface (box 1).
The term skill reveals the modern understanding that what used to be thought of as invariant traits
can be altered through experience and intervention. Skills, in general, could be regarded as the
ability to carry out a task. More and more, there is growing recognition that not only intelligence
quotient (IQ) and cognition as measured by achievement tests (literacy, numeracy), but other types
of skills could be important predictors of success in many aspects of life (Heckman 2015). These
include socio-emotional, psychological and foundational skills (communications, team work,
interpersonal skills, analytical skills, and the ability to learn) that are important for trainability on
the job (Heckman, Stixrud and Urzua 2006) and ideally acquired early in life.



1
   The theoretical arguments around the market failures for OJT are well documented in the microeconomic
literature. In a seminal paper on training, Becker (1962) made a distinction between general and specific training.
Under perfect competition, he suggested that firms will not pay for general training of their workers, who can then
leave the firm searching for better-paid work that compensates them for the increased productivity they acquired
through general training. Hence the worker is the sole recipient of general training benefits and also bears the costs
of it. In a series of later papers, Acemoglu and Pischke (1998, 1999, 2000) argue that a substantial amount of training
is paid for by firms and is still general in nature. Firms pay for general training in the presence of a compressed wage
structure caused by imperfections in the labor market. With a compressed wage structure, training increases the
marginal product of labor more than the wage, which creates incentives for the firm to invest in general training.

                                                           4
Among these skills, OJT has been referred to as a post-school investment (Heckman, Lochner and
Taber 1998). According to them, investments in human capital occur over an individual’s life-
cycle, and post-school investments (often in the form of OJT) account for more than half of a
person’s life-time human capital. It can happen through a combination of learning-by-doing or
formal on-the-job training in the firm. Other authors have mentioned that OJT “plays a crucial role
to not only maintain but also improve [the] human capital of the workforce” (Konings and
Vanormelingen 2015, p. 485). Some say that “employer-provided training is by far the most
important source of further education and training after an individual enters the labor market”
(Hannson 2008, p.5). A substantial portion of these human capital investments are financed by
firms. Work-based training or OJT could be industry-specific or occupation-specific, general
(useful to many firms), or specific (useful to the firm that is conducting the training). However,
research on OJT and its impact is still in a preliminary stage; not surprisingly, “economists know
less about the incentives and returns to firms of investing in training compared with what they
know about the individual's returns of investing in schooling” (Almeida and Carneiro 2009, p. 1).

Box 1: How Does the Literature Define OJT?

According to the relevant literature, OJT has the following characteristics:
   The distinguishing feature of OJT is that the decision about whether to provide it is typically made by
    the firm with a specific business need in mind.
   OJT focuses on the acquisition of skills within the work environment under normal working conditions.
    It can also include training courses in the workplace or through a training institute for existing workers,
    master classes, internships and apprenticeships, or even Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs).
   OJT typically includes verbal and written instructions, demonstrations and observations, as well as
    hands-on practice and imitation.
Formal aspects of OJT have been measured in the literature (such as time spent training on the job and the
share of employees receiving formal training). But measuring the “unobservable” tacit learning through
interactions with co-workers, both within and outside the firm, has proven difficult (also called learning-
by-doing). Most studies on OJT measure formal training. Further, most studies do not separate the source
of funding for OJT—though in most cases, workers contribute only modestly to the direct cost of OJT, and
the firm bears the cost of OJT. The worker contribution is found to be through indirect means—for example,
accepting compressed wage structures (see Section 2.1). Lack of credit for the firm also does not appear to
significantly constrain the provision of OJT (see Section 3.2).


Next, as we review the literature, we develop a framework that looks at demand-side and supply-
side constraints to the provision of OJT, whereby each constraint is one that has been suggested
by the microeconomic literature on skills and OJT (table 1). In reviewing the literature, we try to
determine to what extent these reasons hold empirically.2 At a broader level, the analysis of the
constraints in table 1 will help answer the key questions covered in box 2. This is important for
policy makers trying different combinations of instruments to increase the incidence of OJT.


2
  For example, microeconomics suggests that two kinds of information asymmetry are at play: (i) where firms that
stand to gain a lot from OJT do not have correct information about its returns or how much they need it; and (ii)
where firms do not know what kind of training is available. Recent literature throws strong light on the first kind of
information asymmetry as a real problem that firms across sectors are dealing with; in the second case, there is not
enough empirical proof to suggest that it is a binding issue in the provision of OJT.

                                                          5
Table 1: Constraints and Market Failures Associated with Providing OJT

                           Information gaps and              Value of OJT not understood by firms (that
                          uncertainty about returns           is, accurate information about productivity
                                                              returns, costs, and wage rises).
                                                             Value is most misunderstood by firms that
                                                              stand to gain the most, and that do not
    Demand-side                                               realize how poorly run their firms are.
     constraints
                          Barriers to adoption of            Firm: Low adoption of new managerial
                        managerial practices and new          practices or new technologies among firms
                               technologies                   that reduces their demand for better skills,
                                                              and hence, for training. This could be due to
                                                              factors internal or external to the firm.
                                                             Worker: Misaligned compensation
                                                              structures limit worker incentive to adopt
                                                              and train in new technologies.
                           Information asymmetry             Firms do not know what kind of training is
                                                              available and how to go about providing it.
                             Free-rider problem              Firms that provide general OJT are not able
     Supply-side                                              to fully appropriate the rents to it.
     constraints              Credit constraints             Firms do not have adequate resources to
                                                              finance OJT, even though it may have
                                                              positive returns.

Box 2: Key Questions Explored in the Literature Review

Guided by this understanding of constraints/market failures and the available literature, the key questions
to be explored in this review are:

1. To what extent does a firm benefit from providing OJT? How do productivity gains for the firm
   compare to wage gains for the worker? What are the returns after factoring in the cost of training?
2. To what extent do future employers benefit from hiring trained workers? What is the extent of positive
   externality (and the associated free-rider problem) in the provision of OJT?
3. What are the barriers to provision of OJT at the firm level? Which barriers appear binding in nature?
   Here we will review the literature about constraints on the demand and supply side (see table 1 for the
   constraints description).
4. What are the policy implications of the findings from the literature? What are areas for future
   investigation?

The methodology involves reviewing more than 80 peer-reviewed papers that deal empirically
with OJT. Given the multidisciplinary nature of this topic (including issues such as education,
economic development, labor economics, personnel economics, firm productivity,
competitiveness), we do not restrict ourselves to the skills literature. In this regard, we review
leading papers from these fields to the extent that we find them useful in understanding the barriers
affecting provision levels of OJT. As an example, keywords (and variations on them) such as on-
the-job training, work-based training, skills, training, productivity, wages, manager, human


                                                      6
resource development, technology adoption and others were used based on the Journal of
Economic Literature (JEL) classification system.

Within these papers, we prioritize those that we find rigorous in their methodology and treatment
of selection issues. We prioritize papers that are rich in spelling out the “why” driving the empirical
phenomenon: a justification of the economic mechanisms driving the quantitative result.3 For
example, if the finding is that OJT-related wage increases tend to be lower than productivity gains,
then a natural question is whether the economic mechanism is one of imperfect competition-
general skills or perfect competition-specific skills. Does the paper test for one versus the other?
The economic justification would influence the type of policy advice (for instance, more support
to sector-specific skills or general training).

Most OJT literature deals with developed countries, but we also analyze papers that include
developing country examples to validate these findings. There are few rigorous empirical studies
that can compare different types of training programs—for example, OJT with active labor market
policies (ALMPs) and other types of training; see box 3. We also investigated a few areas where
we had hoped to find empirical links to OJT, but ultimately did not. We mention these in the
section on “Policy Considerations and Areas for Future Investigation.”

Summary of results by key questions

Regarding question 1 in box 2, we reviewed recent studies that measure the effect of OJT on wage
and productivity separately, and treat for selection issues.4 We also looked at literature that tries to
factor in the cost of training (direct costs, forgone earnings and opportunity costs) to determine
returns. Carefully designed literature that treats for selection issues suggests that OJT is linked
with wage and productivity gains, but with firms benefiting more than workers (Almeida and de
Faria 2014; Dearden, Reed, and Van Reenen 2006; and Konings and Vanormelingen 2015). (See
Section 2.1 for a detailed review.)

For question 2, we studied the literature on labor mobility to better understand whether the future
employer experiences productivity gains from hiring previously trained workers (Balsvik 2011;
Poole 2013; and Stoyanov and Zubanov 2012). The evidence points to the presence of positive
externalities because future employers tend to value and pay a premium for previously trained
workers. This also indicates that while much of the OJT is general enough, it is also industry-
specific in nature. Where accreditation and recognition of competence are effective, the
transferability of training wage premia occurs more often. (See Section 2.2 for a detailed review.)


3
  We provide an annotated list of references (Annex 1) that details key papers reviewed, as well as a complete list
of references containing all the papers found using this methodology.
4
  While there is considerable research connecting OJT to wage increases (Bartel 1995; Bartel and Sicherman 1999;
Booth 1991; Blanchflower and Lynch 1994; Blundell, Dearden and Meghir 1996; Frazis and Loewenstein 2005;
Greenhalgh and Stewart 1987; Lillard and Tan 1992; Lynch, 1992; Mincer 1989; Winkelmann 1994), empirical work
that connects OJT to firm productivity is more recent and limited (Almeida and de Faria 2014; Black and Lynch 2001;
Dearden, Reed, and Van Reenen 2006; Konings and Vanormelingen 2015). For a long time, wages were used as a
proxy to determine productivity gains from OJT. However, wage-productivity equality does not hold in imperfect
markets. Such studies might then underestimate the gains to firms.


                                                        7
For question 3, we reviewed the firm productivity and management literature that emphasizes the
importance of information processing, effective human resource policies, and management
capability for OJT provision and aligning worker incentives (Atkin and others 2015; Bandiera,
Barankay, and Rasul 2011; and Bloom and others 2013). In this regard, we find evidence of
information failures within the firm. (See Section 3.1 for a detailed review.)

Among the external conditions, we find that product market competition plays a key role in forcing
firms to be more efficient and productive by creating the pressure (and incentive) to invest in
innovation, exports, management capability, and/or adoption of new technology. These factors
have been shown to be complementary to the demand for OJT (Almeida and Aterido 2008; Black
and Lynch 2001; Frazis, Gittleman and Joyce 2000; Frazer 2006; Pierre and Scarpetta 2004; and
Rosholm, Nielsen, and Dabalan 2007). We did not find strong evidence pointing to credit
constraints or lack of information about training programs (or how to go about it) as binding
constraints to firm uptake of OJT (Atkin and others 2015; Bloom and others 2012; Carneiro and
Heckman and Lee 2004; and de Mel, McKenzie, and Woodruff 2008).5 (See Section 3.2 for a
detailed review.)

The purpose and contribution of this paper are twofold. First, it provides a review of systematic
empirical evidence regarding the links between OJT, wages, productivity, costs in the firm that
trains and, to an extent, at the future employer. This is helpful in assessing the extent to which
positive externalities are at play, the type of training imparted and who benefits from OJT. Second,
the review goes beyond the traditional literature on skills and education, and delves into the
literature on firm management (personnel economics) and productivity. As such, it provides a more
granular sense of the different types of barriers that the firms may be facing. To the best of our
knowledge, this has not been done before. Because firm productivity and survival are necessary
conditions for productivity-enhancing activities such as OJT, we need to cross over to that
literature to better understand the economic mechanisms at play both within and outside firms. We
believe this will enhance the understanding of “why” with regard to OJT provision. In addition, it
has direct implications on how governments decide whether to support this important training area.




5
 Studies show that access to information about new training in the market is not a binding constraint for sporting
goods firms in Pakistan and textiles firms in India (with an intervention that is available on the market, for example,
consulting services or sharing of information). Some firms are faster than others in accessing these tools, depending
on their management capability and other factors (Atkin and others 2005; Bloom and others 2012).

                                                          8
              Table 2: Summary of Findings from the Literature on Constraints to Providing OJT

               Constraint            Explanation                  Findings (from Empirical Literature)               Policy Considerations and
                                  (from Theoretical                                                                   Areas for Future Work
                                      Literature)
                              Value of OJT is not          Literature indicates that the returns to OJT (firm       Demand side considerations
                              understood by firms          productivity and worker wages) are positive. The
               Information    (accurate information on     internal rate of return is positive (see section 2.1).   Reforming product market
                 gaps and     productivity returns,                                                                 competition, trade, regulatory
               uncertainty    costs, wage rises); it may                                                            environment and other
                                                       Literature presents validation of information gaps,
                   about      be particularly                                                                       institutions (see section 4.1.1).
                                                       and finds that firm-level management is often not
                  returns     misunderstood by those   well-informed about the cost-benefit calculus of new Reducing uncertainty about
                              firms that stand the mosttraining, leading to ineffective HR policies (see     gains, increasing information
                              to gain, and that do not sections 2.1 and 3.1).                                flows, and providing
                              realize how poorly run                                                         certification systems (see
                              they are.                                                                      section 4.1.2).
                              Firm: Low adoption of    Evidence of external environmental factors such as
 Demand-                      new managerial practices low product market competition linked to low          Helping to improve
   side         Barriers to   or new technologies      adoption of productivity-enhancing activities (OJT, management skills for better
constraints     adoption of   among firms — reducing   new technologies, such as information and             HR policy formation (see
                managerial    their need for better    communications technology [ICT], management           section 4.1.3).
                 practices    skills and, hence,       practices). Within firms, low adoption of managerial
                 and new                                                                                     Using more gain-sharing
                              demand for training.     practices in developing countries with a
               technologies                                                                                  instruments and performance-
                              This could be due to     preponderance of family-owned firms depresses
                                                                                                             based compensation for
                              factors internal, or     demand for productivity-enhancing activities such as
                                                                                                             workers (see section 4.1.4).
                              external, to the firm.   OJT (see sections 3.1 and 3.2).
                                                                                                             Supply side considerations
                              Worker: Misaligned       Even if the firm management wants to adopt new
                              compensation structures technology, there is evidence of distorted HR policies Targeting selective firms for
                              limit worker incentives (linked to information gaps) that creates low          the provision of government
                              to train in new          incentives for workers to participate as they do not subsidies (see section 4.2.1).
                              technologies.            share in the gains (see sections 3.1 and 3.2).
                                                                                                             Lower coordination costs
               Information    Firms do not know what Literature review does not suggest this is a binding among firms (see section
               asymmetry      kind of training is      constraint because some firms in the market are able 4.2.2).
                              available on the market, to access this information, while others cannot.
                              and/or how to go about Simple interventions, such as increasing information Targeting support to
                              providing for it.        awareness, can help resolve the problem (see section disadvantaged groups (see
                                                       3.1).                                                 section 4.2.3).

                Free-rider    Firms that provide           There is evidence of productivity benefits for future Areas for future work
                problem       general OJT are not able     employers profiting from hiring workers trained in More rigorous analytical work
Supply-side
                              to fully appropriate the     the previous firm. Wage gains for existing workers in on OJT link to Public-Private
constraints
                              rents to training.           the future employer are higher when the firm hires a Partnerships (PPPs); impact of
                                                           trained worker (for example, from multinational       agglomeration on OJT; and
                                                           corporations) (see sections 2.1 and 2.2).             resolving methodological
                                                                                                               issues for better OJT
                 Credit       Firms do not have            For most firms, a lack of convincing evidence about
                                                                                                               measurement.
               constraints    adequate resources to        the presence of credit constraints is a significant
                              finance OJT, even            reason why firms under-provide training. This could
                              though it may have           be a bigger issue for microenterprises and low-
                              positive returns.            income workers (see section 3.2).


                                                                          9
The next section discusses the findings from the literature with respect to the four guiding
questions: OJT returns to the current employer, returns to the future employer of hiring previously
trained workers (i.e. the extent of the free rider problem), barriers to adoption (within and outside
firms) and policy considerations and suggestions for future research and investigation.

2.       Returns to OJT
2.1 At current employer: Effect on productivity, wages and costs
To what extent does a firm benefit from providing OJT? How do productivity gains for the firm compare
to wage gains for the worker? What are the returns after factoring in the cost of training?

At the level of aggregate economic growth, the skills level of the workforce is a first-order
determinant of country growth (Mankiw, Romer, and Weil 1990). Adding educational quality
measures beyond the quantity (years of education) produces better skills, mostly by improving
cognitive skills (Hanushek and Woessmann 2008).6 Indeed, measures of cognitive skills can
account for three times the variation in economic growth than models that include only years of
schooling.7 The impact is larger for more open economies.

Countries have used different kinds of training programs that range from government-subsidized
active labor market programs (ALMPs) for disadvantaged young adults to OJT for workers who
have completed primary and secondary school. ALMPs tend to prepare young adults for the job,
while OJT is typically for workers who are already employed—that is, on the job. Theoretically,
there would be nothing better than a systematic comparison across different kinds of training
programs (for example, OJT with ALMPs) to determine how best to spend public funds. However,
we cannot do this practically without running into serious methodological challenges.
Directionally, however, there is evidence of rather modest returns to ALMPs (Betcherman, Dar
and Olivas 2004), whereas the returns to OJT have been found to be higher (Konings and
Vanormelingen 2015). However, the challenge is that we are not able to attribute causality to
program design properly as these programs target different groups of trainees. Their quality varies,
and disentangling the priors of trainees from achieved results is hard. See box 3 for a summary of
the methodological challenges in comparing returns across training programs, as well as a short
review of ALMPs.

Box 3: The Methodological Challenge of Comparing Returns across Training Programs

Serious methodological issues are involved in comparing types of skill programs (such as ALMPs and
OJT), including:

(1) Training programs differ vastly in the type and quality of trainees they attract. Disentangling worker
selection into programs from causal effects is hard: Are the returns high because of the program or because
of the higher-ability students attracted to it (endogeneity)? More disadvantaged workers are likely to enroll




6
  There is a significant body of literature regarding the returns to secondary and tertiary education. The paper will
refer to it as required, without focusing on it per se. In general, secondary education is an important feeder into OJT,
and the two complement one another.
7
  Evidence indicates that a standard deviation in cognitive skills increases income by a range of [0, 0.48], being
mainly positive in several (mostly African) countries.

                                                          10
in government-driven ALMPs, which is not the case for OJT, where high skills beget more skills.8
(2) Training systems vary across and sometimes even within countries. Therefore, it is difficult to
successfully isolate, or even compare, system-level effects (local institutions, informality, and public
spending on training). For instance, Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD)
countries have extensive experience with ALMPs, technical and vocational education and training (TVET)
and OJT. Developing economies have much less experience with these programs.
(3) Program quality could vary widely between ALMPs and OJTs: there are master-trainers within firms,
access to the latest machines and equipment, and concrete opportunities to utilize the new skills. The fact
that a firm is conducting OJT could also imply less asymmetry of information between the needs of the
firms and the training output.

However, in an indirect way, by looking at the evolution of the content and setting of training used in
ALMPs—a widely studied area in social protection—we can arrive at some sense of what training
approaches work better. ALMPs use a mix of approaches, including in-classroom training programs;
workplace training; the interaction of the previous two types; and in-classroom and workplace training—
plus supplementary services, such as counseling and mentoring, monitoring, job search and placement
assistance, and soft and life skills training.

A comprehensive meta-assessment of training programs from 90 countries found some patterns of transition
from in-classroom only training toward combined measures of in-classroom, workplace training, and other
supplementary services (Fares and Puerto 2009). The meta-analysis of 345 studies of training programs
indicated that programs that combine different training approaches in ALMPs have a higher probability of
positive labor market impacts on employment. In particular, the combination of in-classroom and workplace
training increases the likelihood of positive labor market impacts by 30 percentage points over in-classroom
training only. When this interaction is combined with other services, the probability of a positive impact
increases by 53 percentage points.

In another relevant study, Betcherman, Dar and Olivas (2004) take an instructive approach about not
viewing ALMPs as a panacea to youth unemployment, given the modest returns to these. They emphasize
the following as good features to consider: a comprehensive package of services, programs oriented to
demand and linked to workplaces; careful targeting; and early engagement of employers in training design.
Both studies lament the lack of rigorous impact evaluations and cost-benefit analyses as a missing piece of
the puzzle—and an area for future research.

The following subsections focus on reviewing the literature on OJT (given the high returns), to
examine wages for workers, productivity for firms, costs of provision, and common measurement
challenges (that the more rigorous studies analyzed here have managed to address).




8
  ALMPs are typically government programs that intervene in the labor market to help the unemployed find work.
Many of these programs grew out of earlier public works projects designed to combat widespread unemployment
in the developed world during the inter-war period. ALMPs include: (i) public employment services, such as job
centers, help for the unemployed in their job search effort by disseminating information on vacancies, as well as by
providing assistance with upgrading interview skills; (ii) training schemes, such as classes and apprenticeships, help
the unemployed improve their skills and increase their employability prospects; and (iii) employment subsidies, in
the public or private sector, directly create jobs for the unemployed. These are typically short-term measures
designed to enable the unemployed to build work experience and prevent skill atrophy.


                                                         11
Upside to OJT: Productivity and wage effects
What is the upside to OJT, in terms of productivity gains and wage effects? Studies find positive
effects of OJT on direct measures of firm productivity and wages. For example, Konings and
Vanormelingen (2015) use firm-level panel data of OJT to estimate its impact on productivity and
wages in Belgium (figure 1). Treating for endogeneity of input factors and training, they find that
the increase in productivity of the trained worker is higher than the increase in wages the trained
worker commands because the worker participated in OJT. In numeric terms, the average sales per
worker, a proxy for productivity, increased from 1.7 to 3.2 percent, while their wages only
increased from 1.0 to 1.7 percent. This occurred in response to a 10 percent increase in the number
of workers who benefited from training.9
Another study confirms these results. Dearden, Reed, and Van Reenen (2006) study the impact of
work-related training on productivity. Using panel data from the United Kingdom, they ﬁnd that
OJT is associated with significantly higher productivity. In response to a 1 percent increase in
training, there is an increase in value-added per hour of about 0.6 percent, as well as an increase
in hourly wages of about 0.3 percent. They also provide evidence of training externalities (a topic
covered in greater detail in section 2.2), while controlling for firm selection and training.
Studies that look at the impact of OJT on productivity in developing countries are more limited
due to data constraints. Therefore, to get a directional sense, we reviewed studies that show a link
between the incidence of OJT and wage gains (which are studied widely in the developing world).
Evidence from two carefully prepared country studies suggests that individuals’ earnings can
substantially increase with OJT (Tan and Lopez-Acevedo 2003, for Mexico, and Rosholm, Nielsen
and Debalsen 2007, for Kenya and Zambia). Rosholm, Nielsen and Debalsen (2007) find a 20
percent wage increase, and Tan and Lopez-Acevedo (2003) find an impact of 5 to 7 percent due
to OJT. These studies also control for endogeneity. These studies also find that the incidence of
training is different for different groups by gender, prior skill level and age (box 4).




9
  Details on each study (as well as other papers reviewed), including data set descriptions, dependent and
independent data sets, and challenges with regard to methodology (if any) are included in Annex 1. Initial data
collection work is described in the internal memo (Saraf, Mariscal and Velazquez, 2016).

                                                      12
Figure 1: Effects of OJT on Productivity and Wage Gains


                            6.00
                                          3.2                        Note: In the case of Belgium, firm productivity gain ranges
    Size of the effect in



                            5.00
                            4.00                                     from 1.7 to 3.2 percent in response to an increase of 10
                            3.00                           1.7       percentage points in the fraction of workers who receive
              %




                            2.00
                                          1.7                        training. The average wage increases by only 1 to 1.7 percent
                                                           1.0
                            1.00                                     in response to the same independent variable.
                            0.00
                                   Productivity Gains   Wage Gains   Source: Konings and Vanormelingen, 2015.




                            6.00                                     Note: In the United Kingdom, a 1 percent increase in work-
    Size of the effect




                            5.00
                            4.00                                     related training is associated with an increase in value-added
                            3.00                                     per hour of about 0.6 percent for the firm, as well as an
           in %




                            2.00
                                         0.60                        increase in hourly wages of about 0.3 percent for the worker.
                            1.00                           0.30
                            0.00
                                   Productivity Gains   Wage Gains   Source: Dearden, Reed, and Van Reenen, 2006.



Box 4: What Type of Workers Receive Training?

Training is not equally distributed among employees. Indeed, certain types of workers usually receive more
training than others. More education and a higher threshold of skills from before begets more training. In
this regard, various studies (Barron, Black and Loewenstein 1989; Hansson 2009; Leuven and Oosterbeek
2004; and Lillard and Tan 1992) show that less-educated and older workers receive less training, and that
worker tenure increases the likelihood of training for the same job. Almeida and Carneiro (2009)
consistently show that the workforce in firms that provide training is more educated than the workforce in
firms that do not. The proportion of workers with a Bachelor’s or other college degree(s) is 6 percent and
3 percent in high and low training firms, respectively, versus 1.3 percent in non-training firms. Balsvik
(2011) also finds that firms that provide training to their workers tend to have a workforce with more years
of formal schooling.
Training incidence is also lower among female workers. Blundell, Dearden and Meghir (1996) find that
men have a much higher probability than women of undertaking employer-provided training and work-
related training leading to a formal vocational qualification. Evertsson (2004) finds that women are
significantly less likely to take part in formal OJT than men based on a Swedish pooled cross-sectional data
set. Her research concludes that among those who receive training, women are more likely to participate in
industry-specific training, while men participate in general training for lifelong skills.
There is no conclusive evidence that returns to training on productivity vary significantly with worker
characteristics such as gender, educational or skill levels. Wage premiums to those participating in training
while working for an employer are relatively homogeneous across age and educational attainment.
However, some factors might be influencing employers to have an unequal distribution of training
investments for these groups: discrimination, higher worker turnover for specific groups, prior skill levels,
distortionary public policy, selection into job characteristics in the firm or possibly other factors (Evertsson
2004; Hansson 2009; Leuven and Oosterbeek 2004; Lynch 1991; Melero 2004; and Veum 1995).
The impact of training on different groups can manifest differently: in the case of relatively young and/or
higher-educated workers, training provides transferable skills and increases mobility. For older and lower-


                                                                     13
educated workers, training allows them to attain and maintain the competencies required to bring
productivity in line with market wages, thereby sustaining the employment prospects of these groups.
It is clear from the literature that certain groups are likely to receive less OJT, thereby potentially amplifying
skill gaps and equity concerns. This would imply an area for government intervention to stimulate
acquisition of basic/secondary education, socio-emotional skills and others forms of training for these
groups. Given the modest returns to government-driven training programs such as ALMPs, the design of
these programs would need to factor into the latest evidence regarding what works and what does not (for
evidence on ALMPs, see box 3; for policy considerations, see section 4.2.3).

Cost of providing OJT
If training were free or cheap, it would suffice to look at its returns using productivity and wage
indicators. But the direct costs of training can be quite high. Data on costs are essential for
computing meaningful estimates of efficiency. However, for the most part, finding data that are
detailed enough and that contain cost information is rare.
Important work has been done in this area by Almeida and Carneiro (2009), who analyzed a range
of large manufacturing firms in Portugal in the 1990s—with detailed information on investments
in training and costs. They estimated training’s internal rate of return on firms and workers. They
classified costs into forgone earnings, opportunity costs and direct training costs.10
According to Almeida and Carneiro (2009), about three-quarters of the cost is associated with the
direct costs of training and only a quarter with forgone production. For the group of firms that
provide training, the internal rate of return on OJT is 8.6 percent, with the return diminishing over
time. For the entire sample, the internal rate of return of an additional hour of training is zero,
indicating a profitable investment. In general, these firms enjoy similar returns of investment on
training and physical capital, and yet, a small fraction of hours is dedicated to training (less than 1
percent). This could be reflecting the difficulty of appropriating the benefits of training. They
control for selection issues. However, external validity is limited as the sample is one of large
firms (>100 employees), limiting application of results to smaller and medium-size enterprises in
developing countries, where similar empirical work would be required.
Some other papers come to a similar conclusion regarding the cost of training. Bartel (1995) used
detailed data from a manufacturing firm in the United States, and found a 13 percent internal rate
of return. Frazis and Loewenstein (2005) characterized costs and obtained a 60 percent opportunity
cost of training and a 40 percent direct cost. Their internal rate of return was found to be 50 percent.
Methodological challenges associated with measuring returns to OJT
The literature on OJT faces a few methodological challenges that merit discussion. First, most data
on productivity and costs are for developed countries. Hence caution is required while doing cross-
country comparisons and applying results across contexts. Second, the definition of what is
considered training could vary by survey. Often, one cannot separate the formal aspects from the

10
  Forgone earnings are paid by the worker, direct costs are mostly paid by the firm, and opportunity costs can be
associated with both the worker (time dedicated to training that could instead be dedicated to other activities) and
the firm (the worker being trained could have been producing instead). The authors only had information about the
direct cost of training. They then calculated the forgone productivity costs of training using the marginal product of
labor and the time allocated to training. However, they could not disentangle the effect on both firm and worker
rates of return, so they estimated a joint rate of return.

                                                         14
learning-by-doing. Information about the length, type and timing of programs may not be
available, or may be self-reported. In some cases, perceptions of training might vary.11 In most
studies the sample includes large and formal firms due to data limitations. Hence it is important to
remember what OJT studies measure (and what they exclude). Finally, when measuring the impact
of training, it is important to treat for selection bias as the results may capture the superior attributes
of the worker rather than the actual effect of training. At the firm level, the main difficulty in
measuring impacts comes from the fact that firms offering OJT tend to already have a set of better
observable (and unobservable) characteristics.

The studies included in the review (for example, Almeida and Carneiro 2009; Dearden, Reed and
Van Reenen 2006; and Konings and Vanormelingen 2015) treat for selection issues and indicate
that even after this, increasing OJT could have productivity gains.

Beyond quantitative challenges, another issue with the literature on OJT is that few studies delve
into the economic mechanisms explaining the causal relationship between OJT and productivity.
To improve our understanding of the economic mechanisms, we will review the literature on
barriers to provision of OJT in section 3.1 and section 3.2 to explore these issues more.

In general, returns to firm productivity and worker wages are both positive (factoring in the cost
of OJT) with regard to OJT provision. Firm productivity gains are higher than wage gains,
indicating an imperfect pass-through of gains to workers and the presence of a high general skills
content to the OJT (see Section 2.2. for more information on type of skills).

2.2 At future employer: Evidence of positive externalities
To what extent do future employers benefit from hiring trained workers? What is the extent of positive
externality (and the associated free rider problem) in the provision of OJT?

To explain the gap between the productivity and wage premium for trained employees, theory
suggests a situation of general training in imperfect markets (Acemoglu and Pischke 1998, 1999,
2000; Becker 1962). Recent empirical evidence appears to validate this. The evidence points to
two specific results about firm provision of OJT: (i) productivity gains more than wage gains
indicating worker willingness to bear some cost for the training as the firm cannot fully appropriate
the benefits of OJT in imperfect markets (we saw this in the previous section 2.1); and (ii) future
employers willing to pay a wage premium for previously trained workers, indicating the presence
of transferrable (general) skills and positive externalities (we will discuss in this section 2.2).
Therefore, much of OJT is general training relevant to the current firm and others in the market.12
The literature reviewed validates the presence of general skills content in the training imparted.
Booth and Bryan (2005) ﬁnd that workplace training is associated with significantly higher wages
at current and future firms, with a larger impact at future firms, using a household panel survey in
the United Kingdom. Accredited OJT is more strongly associated with higher wages at both current

11
   Black and Lynch (1995) mention that “… a supervisor who is assigned to work side-by-side with a new employee
may view the time she spends with a new hire as training, whereas the employee views the fact that the supervisor
is always hanging around as monitoring, not training”.
12
   If the returns to future employers were not statistically significant, one could have argued for the wedge between
wages and productivity to be created by perfect competition and ﬁrm-speciﬁc training. However, this does not seem
to be the case given the rise of productivity at future employers as a result of hiring previously trained workers.

                                                         15
and future employers than is non-accredited training—and that only accredited training is
transferable between employers. However, the literature did not provide much by means of
explaining how firms were paying (individually or via cooperation) for these accredited general
skills. Findings from this research are consistent with Loewenstein and Spletzer (1998) and
Acemoglu and Pischke (1999, 2000).
In another related study involving labor movement between multinational companies (MNCs) and
non-MNCs in Brazil, Poole (2013) shows that when former MNC-employed workers move to
domestic firms, incumbent workers of the hiring domestic firms enjoy wage gains. This starts to
point to the positive externalities associated with more trained workers. At the average wage of a
typical domestic worker, a 10 percentage point increase in the share of former multinational
workers increases wages by $23 a year. For the average domestic establishment with 60 workers
in Brazil, the total implied wage effect from an enhanced foreign presence is roughly $1,400.
In a similar study in Ghana, Gorg and Strobl (2005) use firm-level data for a sample of
manufacturing plants to find that firms whose owners worked in MNCs in the same industry prior
to joining are more productive than other firms. In OECD countries, Stoyanov and Zubanov (2012)
show positive productivity effects of hiring workers that come from more productive firms (using
Danish data). They find that the effect is 0.35 percent per year for an average firm one year after
hiring. The accumulated gain in the fifth year is 1.64 percent. This result is similar to Balsvik
(2011), who using matched employer-employee data for Norway, finds that workers with MNC
experience contribute 20 percent more to the productivity of non-MNCs than workers without such
experience, even after controlling for unobservable characteristics of the workers.13
Through fixed effects, these studies are able to control for the firm-specific advantage of MNCs,
such as better technology (so that the gains are not attributed to MNCs simply being bigger or
better firms). Regarding the role of human capital developed in the previous firm as a factor in
increasing wages, Balsvik (2011) mentions that through on-the-job experience (or training),
workers in MNCs may be able to embody valuable knowledge and bring this knowledge to a new
employer. Stoyanov and Zybanov (2012) find that while the presence of human capital accentuates
the productivity gains, it does not fully explain it. This leads them to conclude that the presence of
knowledge spillovers or positive externalities are related to labor mobility. Poole (2013) finds that
among different types of workers, highly skilled workers from MNCs produce a larger effect.14




13
   Stoyanov and Zubanov also show that of the total output gain, two-thirds goes to the new firm, and 25 percent to
the incumbent workers. For Norway, the wage premium for movers from MNEs to non-MNEs is 5 percent compared
to workers (with similar characteristics) who stay in non-MNCs. The productivity gain premium is 20 percent in the
new employer, as compared to hiring non MNC workers. See Saraf, Mariscal and Velazquez (2016).
14
   The literature on R&D spillovers and labor mobility uses a human capital framework: since at least a part of the
knowledge acquired in the firm will move with the worker in the case of mobility, workers who receive access to
formal training/knowledge should be willing to pay for this by accepting a pay cut (Pakes and Nitzan 1983).

                                                        16
Figure 2: Effects of Worker Mobility on Productivity and Wages


                      2.5                                                                                                  8
                                                                                                          100                           Note: Danish data shows positive firm productivity




                                                                                     productivity gain…
                                                          1.64                                             80              25           effects of hiring workers from more productive firms. The




                                                                                        Share of the
                       2
Share of the effect




                                                                                                           60
                      1.5                                                                                                               effect is 0.35 percent per year for an average firm one
                                                                                                           40
                                                                                                                           66           year after hiring. The accumulated gain is 1.64 percent in
       in %




                       1                                                                                   20
                                                                                                           0                            4 years. Of the total output gain, two-thirds goes to the
                      0.5                                 0.35
                                                                                                                      Share of the      new firm, 25 percent to incumbent workers, and 8 percent
                       0
                                                                                                                    productivity gain   to the workers who bring the spillover.
                                                   Productivity gains                                                                   Source: Stoyanov and Zubanov, 2012


                                                   25                                                                                   Note: Norwegian data from Linked Employer-Employee
                        Share of the effect in %




                                                                                                                                        shows that the wage premium for movers from MNEs to
                                                   20
                                                                                                                                        non-MNEs is almost 5 percent, compared to workers who
                                                   15                                                                                   stay in non-MNEs. The productivity gain premium is as
                                                   10               20                                                                  much as 20 percent in the new employer as compared to
                                                                                                                                        hiring workers without MNE-experience.
                                                    5
                                                                                                                5                       Source: Balsvik, 2011.
                                                    0
                                                          Productivity gains               Wage premium



                                                                                                          1400
                                                        1400                                                                            Note: Data from Brazil shows a 10-percentage point
                               Average Increase in US




                                                                                                                                        increase in the share of former multinational workers’
                                                         900                                                                            wages by $23 per year, or roughly $1,400 per year for the
                                      Dollars




                                                                                                                                        average domestic firm in Brazil (for firms with
                                                         400                                                                            approximately sixty workers).
                                                                              23
                                                        -100                                                                            Source: Poole, 2013.

                                                        Increase per worker        Average firm increase




These studies demonstrate that future employers are able to benefit from hiring previously trained
workers, indicating the presence of general skills in the training (useful across multiple firms). In
addition, they demonstrate the positive externalities that exist due to the provision of OJT. The
future employer benefits by not paying the full cost of this advantage. Thus, the benefit to the firm
that provides training is less than the benefit to society. This includes the future firm and workers
in the future firm who enjoy spillover advantages of having a trained person in the workforce. In
an unregulated market, with positive externalities, less is produced than the socially optimal level.

How general are the general skills imparted through OJT? Firms do not seem to provide the type
of (very important) general skills, such as behavioral, psychological or socio-emotional skills,
perhaps because these are better provided during the formal education years of the worker, or
because firms may not have the methodology to train in these skills (Gonzales-Velosa, Rosas, and
Flores 2016). In fact, some studies indicate the presence of industry-specific general skills in OJT.
In other studies, the productivity effect of hiring workers from more productive firms within the
same sector was found to be twice as high as for workers from other sectors. This could imply that
the knowledge brought by new workers is, in large part, industry-specific, but also general enough


                                                                                                                                   17
to be applied in different firms (Gorg and Strobl 2005; Stoyanov and Zubanov 2012). The skills
imparted through OJT are more likely to be general, but industry-specific (see box 5).

Box 5: Evidence of the Presence of Industry-specific General Skills

The literature review highlights the presence of general skills content in training imparted, as well as
productivity gains in the future employers who hire previously trained or more productive workers (Balsvik
2011; Booth and Bryan 2005; Gorg and Strobl 2005; Poole 2013; Stoyanov and Zubanov 2012). The
question then becomes: How transferable are these general skills? For example, are these skills applicable
across sectors, for example, socio-emotional or behavioral skills?
Studies suggest that the type of general skills imparted through OJT are unlikely to be skills such as socio-
emotional or behavioral, even though they are highly valued by most employers. Socio-emotional or
behavioral skills are the most highly valued by employers and the most difficult to find in the labor market
(Busso and others 2012). However, only a fraction of firms give priority to behavioral skills in their OJT,
according to a recent study on Latin American countries (Gonzales-Velosa, Rosas, and Flores 2016). Even
firms that have the greatest difficulties fulfilling their requirements for socio-emotional skills tended to
offer more training in industry-specific skills. The tendency to give less training in behavioral skills may
result from a firm’s lack of capacity (for example, methodologies and technologies) to teach general skills.
It may also reflect the disincentives that arise due to a lack of appropriation given that most of the OJT in
this region is financed by the employer.
In fact, there seems to be evidence of the presence of industry-specific general skills in OJT. In two studies,
the productivity effect of hiring workers from more productive firms within the same sector was found to
be twice as high as for workers from other sectors. This implies that the knowledge brought by new workers
is, in large part, industry-specific, but also general enough to be applied in different firms (Gorg and Strobl
2005; Stoyanov and Zubanov 2012).
An example of such industry-specific general skills could be machining skills that are valuable across
automotive, tooling, electronics and other kinds of manufacturing sectors. It also helps to remember that
the distinction between general and specific skills is not binary because industry-specific skills could also
have general elements, and general skills could be specific to some sectors. A useful lens to use is whether
the skills imparted by one employer are useful to another firm, and whether the future employer is willing
to pay for such skills.
However, provision of skills may not be fully left to OJT. In times where automation stands to make several
existing jobs in manufacturing obsolete, emphasis needs to be placed on the general lifelong skills such as
socio-emotional and behavioral training that may be under-provided by the OJT market, but would be
critical to help workers adapt to new technologies. In this area, there is an argument for some public support.

There are three ways in which firms appear to cope with the presence of positive externalities and
the absence of corresponding regulation: increasing labor market rigidities that raises the cost of
switching for the worker, voluntary cooperation or under-provision. From 2000-08, many firms
used non-compete contracts (NCCs) to increase the cost of switching employers for workers.
Indeed, the number of non-compete cases has been on a rise in the United States. In 2009 poaching




                                                      18
became such a serious issue in Silicon Valley that firms worked on a cooperative basis not to
approach each other’s employees.15
At other times, firms under-provide OJT, consistent with what is shown in the research and
development (R&D) literature: firms reduce their R&D expenditures due to the risks of R&D
workers moving to other employers. In this context, they also increase patenting (Kaiser, Kongsted
and Ronde 2008; and Kim and Marschke 2005). In the section on “Policy Considerations and
Areas for Future Investigation,” we revisit the evidence to suggest potential instruments that
governments can consider using.
In summary, much of OJT is general enough, but at the same time, industry-specific. Where
accreditation and recognition of competence is effective, the transferability of training wage
premia occurs more often. Some kind of policy effort to internalize the positive externalities and
bring provision levels closer to the social optimum might be useful. Under-provision could be a
more serious issue in developing countries where property rights are still a work in progress,
enforceability of contracts low and cooperation harder due to high informality. Policy support is
also perhaps required in the provision of general lifelong skills such as socio-emotional traits that
are likely to be under-provided by firms.

3.      Barriers to Provision of OJT
What can we learn from the literature on constraints and barriers —such as information gaps
among firm management, low demand for complementary technologies, low product market
competition and credit constraints—that might influence provision of OJT? Which ones appear
binding in nature?

Complementarity of skills and technology is well acknowledged (Acemoglu 1998; Berman,
Bound, and Griliches 1994; Bugamelli and Pagano 2004; Doms, Dunne, and Troske 1997; Disney,
Haskel and Heden 2003). This holds for developing countries, as shown in the recent work by the
World Bank in South Asia, where new technology adoption was positively and significantly linked
with the share of more educated employees in the firm (Lopez-Acevdeo, Medvedev, and Palmade
2016). Adoption of new technologies tends to require training workers who could learn to operate
it. Complementarity between skills and management practice has also been shown recently
(Bloom, Eifert, Mahajan, McKenzie and Roberts 2013). Management capability is viewed as a
form of soft technology (or intangible capital) that helps a firm utilize its factor inputs, such as
trained labor, more efficiently. In turn, training helps to improve the quality of managers, creating
a virtuous cycle of sorts.
Regarding the context of OJT, we are particularly interested in understanding how firms develop
effective policies (such as for training and compensation). The role of management (owners,
managers) is of great importance. Management accesses information in the market, makes critical
decisions about human resources and decides how much training to provide, to whom, and how to
compensate them. We want to understand how these mechanisms play out within firms, and what



15
  Although with negative results, as they got sued for anticompetitive practices and had to settle in 2014 (more on
this issue in the section on policy considerations).


                                                        19
barriers exist in their path. In this context, then, we review the recent empirical management
capability and organizational (personnel) economics fields.
The literature has also identified external conditions positively linked to OJT provision at the firm
level. Favorable external conditions include advancing competition, improving regulatory
environment, influencing firm conditions by providing incentives to adopt new technologies, and
improving management and providing OJT. We review this evidence to understand what type of
conditions would facilitate boosting the demand for OJT.16
3.1 Factors within firms: Information asymmetries, low management quality
How do firms decide on human resource policies? What steps are involved in accessing market
information about new practices and training? Who accesses this information, and who does the
cost-benefit analysis of such training? How accurate are their expectations? How adequate are
their cognitive skills for information processing? How quickly do they act on it?

These are the types of questions addressed in this section.

There is a small but growing literature with robust field evidence about the link between
management capability and firm productivity. We draw on this literature to provide suggestive
evidence regarding the barriers to effective policy-making within firms—which in turn impacts
decisions regarding the provision of OJT (Atkin and others 2015; Bandiera, Barankay, and Rasul
2011; Bloom and others 2013).

More often than not, management teams - within firms - access information about training and
decide whether to provide it. They also tend to decide based on their internal cost-benefit analysis.
The literature reveals that, across countries, substantial variations exist in management practices
across organizations and sectors (Bloom and Van Reenen 2007; Bloom and others, 2012).17 In
developing countries like Brazil, China and India, management scores are lower than in the United
Kingdom or United States, reflecting lower management capabilities in general. Among
management practices, those pertaining to human resource management are the most relevant for
our purposes: policies on evaluating worker performance, designing incentives for worker
performance, training provision and so on.




16
   In a sense, the provision of OJT could be likened to the adoption of other productivity-enhancing activities such as
information and communications technology (ICT) or R&D. In the case R&D and OJT, the ability of a firm to
appropriate rents may be more limited than in the case of ICT.
17
   They have been using double-blind survey techniques and randomized sampling methods to gather information
on management practices for more than 10,000 organizations across 20 countries. See Annex 2 for the survey
instrument.

                                                          20
Figure 3: Management Practice Scores across Countries




Source: Bloom and Van Reenen 2007; Bloom and others 2012

The literature indicates that despite the presence of large gains, management teams within firms
do not adopt new practices readily. In a study investigating the reasons for this, Bloom and others
(2013) show that adopting new practices—such as factory operations, quality control, inventory,
HRM and sales management—raised productivity by 17 percent in the first year for their sample
of Indian textile firms. This was achieved through improved quality and efficiency, as well as
reduced inventory. Within three years, this led to the opening of more production plants. Their
methodology included randomizing free consulting to provide these practices.18

Despite high (and proven) returns, low management capabilities and (resultant) poor human
resource policies at the firm level depressed demand for these practices. These mechanisms are
likely at play for decisions which are at the discretion of firm management—such as adoption of
OJT, R&D or ICT.

Based on firm management and organizational economics literature, there is also evidence of
information failures within the firm that lead to low demand (and supply) of OJT within firms.
Bloom and others (2013) find that firm-level management is often not well-informed about the
cost-benefit calculus of new training, Indeed, firm owners have been misinformed about the cost-
benefit of new practices. For example, in the case of the textile industry in India, for commonly
known business training where information is widely available, owners held the mistaken view
that they did not need training. Through deep interviews, the authors found that such owners were
comparing themselves with other (low-quality) local firms and judging that their quality was good

18
  During the second phase of Bloom’s experiment, the consulting firm worked closely with plant management staff
for four months on the job. During this time, they put the procedures into place, fine-tuned them, stabilized them
so that employees could readily carry them out. For example, one of the practices was holding daily meetings for
management to review production and quality data. The consultant attended these meetings for the first few weeks
to help the managers run them, provided feedback on how to run future meetings, and adjusted their design. The
third phase involved the measurement of results.


                                                       21
based on these comparators. The same firms, when compared to international benchmarks, were
lagging.

Almeida, Behrman and Robalino (2012) explain that skill provision failures might arise because
individual expectations could be based on partial observations of labor market outcomes in the
local economy, as well as the experience and advice of peers, friends and family that can be
unrepresentative of the average experience. That appears to be the case here. Regarding the issue
of information failures, Atkin and others (2015) suggest that if firms believed that adopting OJT
would lead to non-trivial costs (due to incorrect information about cost-benefit), that is, they had
low prior knowledge about the utility of a new practice, they may be (rationally) unwilling to pay
even quite small transaction costs. This could then lead to inefficient outcomes.

We ask, then, what prevents the management within firms from having more informed views about
the cost-benefit of new practices even when it is available in the market? This question brings us
to the composition of the “management” within a firm. In this case as well as in many developing
country contexts, several of these (small and medium) firms are family-owned businesses. Firm
owners do not fully trust outsiders or non-family members. As a result, these family-owned firms
suffer from a limited number of professional managers (in proportion to workers). A lack of
delegation, limited managerial time, and limited autonomy are linked to poor decision-making on
most fronts: in finance, purchasing, operations, and/or human resources.

In Bloom’s work in India, non-family members were given only lower-level managerial positions
with authority only over basic day-to-day activities. The span of control constraints also meant
that a limited number of managers had time to process new information, do the necessary quality
checks, develop an accurate cost-benefit perspective, and arrive at a more informed view about
fairly obvious productivity-enhancing practices. In a study on competitiveness of auto-parts firms
in India, the on-duty line manager at the plant level was found not to have authority to ‘pull the
line’ at the first sight of a defect and needed to gain permission from the SME owner (Saraf 2016).
It also raises questions about the extent to which such family-owned firms invest in the skills of
the manager to solve the more unusual problems (Caliendo and others 2015).

With respect to incentives to adopt training, a recent experimental study from the field of
organizational economics shows how poorly informed human resource policies could affect
worker incentives to adopt new training (even when the firm management wanted to introduce it).
This work is a cautionary tale about poorly designed worker compensation structures that reduce
their motivation to adopt a new form of training (Atkin and others 2015). The paper studies
technology adoption in a cluster of soccer-ball producers in Sialkot, Pakistan. The authors invented
a cutting-edge technology that reduced waste of the raw material (benefiting the firm’s profits),
and gave the technology to a random subset of producers. However, after 15 months, take-up
remained very low. Not only was the technology not disseminated, it was not even adopted.

The suggested explanation has to do with the perverse incentives impacting the workers in charge
of cutting activities. Most workers were paid a piece rate, and the new die would slow the cutters
in the learning period—but also potentially in the longer run. As a consequence, if cutters are paid
at a pure piece rate, their effective wage falls. Therefore, unless owners modify the payment
scheme, the benefits of the new technology accrue to the owners and the costs are borne by the
plant workers. Realizing this, the workers resist adoption. In this case, information asymmetries

                                                22
seemed to work in both directions. First, management’s misperception about the continued benefit
of using piece-rates, and second, employees misinforming the owners about the value of the
technology to prevent its uptake. Evidence from the OECD validates this, and suggests that firms
that adopt more performance-based schemes are more likely to offer job training (for example,
Gittleman, Horrigan and Joyce 1998).

Regarding the final issue of information asymmetry about the types of programs available in the
market, two studies (Bloom and others 2013; Atkin and others 2015) find that it exists, but is not
a critical problem. For textile firms, for less commonly known practices, once this information was
provided to firm owners through consulting firms, adoption rates improved drastically. In the
Pakistan study, the only firm that successfully adopted the new technology was found to pay a
performance bonus (a better gain-sharing arrangement), indicating that such knowledge was
available in the market. However, few owners adopted the new practice. These cases indicate that
compared to information asymmetry about types of training available, it is in fact, information
barriers within the firm at the level of managers/owners, that are perhaps more binding in nature.

3.2 Factors outside firms: Low competition

Studies show that the environment in which the firm operates matters in terms of OJT adoption.
External factors (such as competition) can act as levers to pull internal factors (such as
management capability and adoption of complementary technologies). Firms facing greater
competition in their product markets are inclined to raise the minimum productivity threshold to
operate profitably and reduce inefficiencies. They do this through both investing in productivity-
enhancing activities (such as OJT and ICT), and reducing costs, which in turn helps them capture
greater market shares of existing ones (Almeida and Aterido 2008; Lopez-Acevdeo and others
2016). Competition also helps to reallocate resources from the less productive to the more
productive firms, increasing the incentives for all firms, to invest in the within-firm productivity
levers discussed in section 3.1.
The literature also indicates that trade and foreign direct investment (FDI) can affect productivity
through providing greater opportunities for exporting and learning by doing, increasing access to
new markets, more competition from imports, and selection and reallocation effects (Melitz 2003;
Pavcnik 2002; Bloom, Draca and Van Reenen 2016). Complementary studies have examined the
role of human capital in the process of adopting new technologies—which becomes even more
important as markets open up and standards become more demanding (Bartel and Lichtenberg
1987; Berman, Bound, and Griliches 1994; Bugamelli and Pagano 2004; Doms, Dunne, and
Troske 1997; Disney, Haskel and Heden 2003).
Let us focus on the case of exporters as an example. Bustos (2011) found that exporters tend to be
more skill intensive in both production and non-production occupations in Argentina. She also
showed that technology and skill deepening are positively associated at the firm level. Brambilla,
Lederman and Porto (2012) observed that the nature of destination markets matters for the type of
skills provided. In more sophisticated destination markets, exporting firms need to meet higher
standards, while also being cost competitive. These results, in the form of an exporter productivity
premium, are confirmed in developing countries by Blalock and Gertler (2004), Clerides, Lachand
Tybout (1998), and De Loecker (2007). Export is linked to being able to make higher quality
products, which requires better human capital (Fieler, Eslava and Xu 2014; Khandelwal 2010).

                                                23
In the auto-parts sector in India, a handful of auto suppliers who were exposed to greater
competition since the 1990s achieved higher productivity and became global suppliers, while car-
makers who were protected remained sub-scale and unproductive to a large extent (Saraf 2016).
Opening up markets through reduction of import tariffs from 60 to 12.5 percent since the 1990s
enabled auto-parts suppliers to cross the fixed cost of exporting through accessing cheaper
intermediate inputs, learning from working with discerning buyers in OECD and other markets,
and forming technical alliances to learn new technologies. Although there were subsidized public
training programs, these global suppliers invested in their own OJT programs to ensure a supply
of talented line managers, business managers, and technical floor-level workers to maintain the
high productivity levels required to participate in export markets.
More product market competition is found to be linked to increasing aggregate management
capability—another channel that affects provision of OJT, as previously noted. More competitive
product markets would push the badly managed firms out and “raise the stakes” for existing firms
that could capture more market share and allocate better resources toward them (Bloom and others
2009).19 In such markets, managers would be more fearful of losing their jobs and firm owners
would be more likely to select competent Chief Executive Officers (CEOs) (ideally non-family
member).20

Another way more competition and trade could influence internal firm levers is by helping firms
grow or creating the conditions for this. Large firms tend to invest more in skills, R&D and other
technologies. Indeed, studies also show a positive correlation between firm size and OJT provision
in developed and developing countries (Almeida and Aterido 2008; Black and Lynch 2001; Frazer
2006; Frazis, Gittleman and Joyce 2000; Pierre and Scarpetta 2004; and Rosholm and others 2007).
Some of these studies also find that firms that initiate more innovative activities (for example,
more investment in R&D) tend to train more. Pierre and Scarpetta (2004) and Almeida and Aterido
(2008) find that larger and more innovative firms tend to train more (based on data from the World
Bank Enterprise Data Surveys for 66 countries). There is evidence of a positive and significant
relationship between OJT and firm characteristics (size, innovative activities, and technology
adoption) for the Latin America and Caribbean region (Gonzales-Velosa, Rosas, and Flores 2016).
Overall, the argument for competition and trade increasing the incidence of OJT is not very
different from the reasons why firms exposed to competition increase their demand for other
productivity-enhancing activities, such as ICT or R&D.21 However, as in the case of these
activities, it remains unclear whether the directional link is from size to productivity, or vice versa.
Do firms grow larger first, obtain economies of scale, and then demand new technologies and
OJT? Or, does it work the other way around? Do firms that are able to adopt productivity-

19
   In their surveys, Bloom and others (2009) asked managers how many competitors they faced, and found the
average management score was significantly higher when firms reported facing more competitors. Using other
measures of competition not reported by managers, like the import penetration rates (measured by imports as a
share of domestic production) or Lerner indices of competition, yields a similar general result that management
quality tends to increase with competitive intensity.
20
   Meritocratic selection of a CEO (ideally a non-family member) is linked to better management outcomes. However,
as family-owned firms typically have less debt, they are less vulnerable to product market pressures, and continue
to survive—although with economic losses.
21
   See Bayo-Moriones and Lera Lopes 2007; Dasgupta and others 1999; Giunta and Trivieri 2007; Haller and
Siedschlag 2011; Hollenstein 2004; Keller, 2004; Kowtha and Choon 2001; Kretschmer, Miravete, and Pernías 2012;
Narula and Zanfei, 2005; and Lucchetti and Sterlacchini 2004.

                                                       24
enhancing activities cross the fixed cost to export markets and become bigger? Some clues to
potential answers are offered by the seminal work by Melitz (2003), who put forth an explanation
connecting firm size to a firm’s total factor productivity. Melitz proposed a theory for selection
into exporting: only the most productive firms overcome the sunk costs of exporting and foreign
direct investment (FDI), start to export, and grow as a result.22 This remains an area for future
investigation.
Finally, the effect of the regulatory environment, such as labor market reforms, can vary depending
on the exact kind of regulation. Reforms that increase the number of temporary workers — and
simultaneously protect existing employees through unions—are linked to lower OJT. While
stricter hiring regulations and rigidity in the working hours are associated with a higher investment
in OJT, stricter firing costs tend to be associated with reduced investment in job training by
employers (Almeida and Aterido 2008). There is a lot of variation in results depending on the type
of labor regulation. Constraints in the credit markets do not appear as binding constraints (box 6).




Box 6: The Limited Role of Credit Constraints

The literature review did not provide much evidence regarding the role of credit constraints as binding
barriers to the provision of OJT. Although in most developing countries, capital markets could be imperfect,
these imperfections do not appear to have a significant bearing on the under-provision problem. Carneiro
and Heckman (2004) suggest a low importance of credit constraints in explaining investments in education.
Hannson (2008), using the International Adult Literature Survey (IALS), finds that 25 percent of workers
reported wanting to take further training. However, only 4-7 percent claimed that it would be too expensive
as the reason for not participating. In evidence from Ghana, Gorg, Strobl and Walsh (2007) note that lower
wage bounds — like credit constraints, efficiency wages or minimum wages — do not prevent OJT.

In the case of microenterprises, credit constraints could play a role. In an experiment from Sri Lanka, De
Mel, McKenzie, and Woodruff (2008) find high returns — higher than existing interest rates — to drops of
cash of US$100 or US$200 (or of capital of roughly similar magnitudes). This suggests that the
microenterprises might be operating under credit constraints. However, for microenterprises, skills have
not arisen as the top constraint in analyses, according to the World Bank Enterprise Surveys. Low-income
workers might be more affected by credit constraints, suggesting some role for government support.

However, for most firms, the marginal importance of credit constraints for OJT provision is likely to be a
consequence of employers financing most of the training, and workers being accustomed to receiving
training without paying any direct costs (although they contribute indirectly through compressed wages).
Studies have pointed to other challenges involving information gaps about returns, ineffective HR policies,
or the barriers to demand for training as the main constraints.


22
   Empirical data seems to support this (Bernard, Eaton, Jensen and Kortum 2003; Mayer, Melitz and Ottaviano
2014). In a recent World Bank study regarding competitiveness in South Asia (World Bank 2016), researchers found
that across sectors, local firms were managing to cross the productivity barrier by learning through working with
lead firms in the domestic market, acquiring technologies and/or becoming more efficient. Thereafter, as the
markets were deregulated and new markets opened (for example, in the auto-parts sector as well as apparel), they
were able to meet the stricter requirements of export markets. In addition, they were also able to compete with
incoming imports. In time, such firms grew in size.

                                                       25
4.       Policy Considerations and Areas for Future Investigation
What are the policy implications of these findings? What are areas for future investigation?

This paper confirms that OJT could be a powerful instrument in helping firms become more
productive and keeping abreast of technological change. At the same time, workers benefit through
wage gains at current and future employers. Thus, the first step for policy makers and practitioners
would be to familiarize themselves with the empirical data on returns to OJT, as has been captured
in this report. OJT programs have shown a high rate of return where studied carefully. The
evidence also shows that future employers benefit from hiring previously trained workers,
indicating that the social benefit is greater than the private benefit—thereby making a case for OJT
as a public good of sorts. This paper clarifies the extent to which oft-mentioned theoretical
constraints are real constraints and backed by data. This is critical to any evidence-based policy-
making effort.

To improve how the public sector supports and engages with OJT, it would need to communicate,
partner with and improve its understanding of firm-level challenges (for example, how information
failures operate within firms, how human resource policies are formulated, and how to help firms
upgrade skills), as well as work more closely with private firms. This would require bolstering the
capacity of public institutions that work with the private sector to include skilled personnel who
can effectively help the private sector.

Finally, regarding specific policy considerations, it is important to highlight that the guiding
principle for any policy in this area should be to correct for market failures that prevent firms and
workers from fully internalizing the costs and benefits of OJT — rather than crowding them out.23
In the sections that follow, we will discuss considerations for policy makers, utilizing the
framework of demand- and supply-side constraints (table 1). Conclusions follow with a discussion
of areas for future research/investigation, as well as remaining open questions.

4.1 Demand-side considerations24
Regarding demand-side considerations, the following question is posed: What policy directions
would help increase the uptake of training/complementary activities leading to an attendant
increase in the demand among firms for OJT? The demand for OJT is more likely to improve in
environments of high product market competition (see section 4.1.1), more information within the
firm (see section 4.1.2) and improved firm management capability (see section 4.1.3). For workers,
presence of aligned incentives in the form of gain sharing compensation could help increase uptake
of OJT opportunities (see section 4.1.4).

4.1.1 Reforming product market regulation, increasing competition and trade
The literature suggests an important role for (product market) competition in encouraging the
adoption of new practices and technologies. Competitive environments act as a channel to increase

23
   The case of OJT is one of positive production externalities — a rare form of externalities. To alleviate this market
failure, policies that decrease the marginal cost to the firm of providing OJT would bring levels closer to the social
optimal. In order to achieve a level close to the social optimal, the marginal benefit to the firm of providing OJT
would need to increase (see section 4.1 on demand-side considerations), and/or, the marginal cost would need to
decrease (see section 4.2 on supply-side considerations).
24
   These would increase the marginal benefit of providing OJT to the firm, or to all firms in the market.

                                                          26
the demand for human capital. There are many types of product market reforms. Although it is
outside the scope of this paper to go into the details of all instruments, the key ones are noted here.

The principle driving product market reforms is to increase competition in the domestic market,
as well as to link markets across domestic and international firms. This not only increases the
opportunities for local firms (through the trade route), but also allows them to interact with other
firms. In doing so, such firms can learn new technologies and adopt better practices. These could
be achieved through: (i) reforming restrictive trade policies that could protect unproductive local
firms and restrict the expansion of the more productive firms; (ii) aligning domestic and
international standards so that local firms have the incentive to learn new technologies to serve the
demands of more sophisticated markets overseas; (iii) strengthening trade logistics to reduce the
cost of doing business locally and internationally; (iv) supporting firm-level capacity building
through incentives for R&D, as well as improvements in management practices and production
processes; and (v) reforming distortionary regulations that create an incentive to remain small e.g.
labor regulations for SMEs. These would also enable local firms to access opportunities in
international value chains, thereby providing an impetus to improve productivity.25

The example of an auto part firm from India that became a global supplier in the wake of the
liberalization of import tariffs (from 60 to 12 percent in 10-15 years) is instructive. In a recent
sectoral study from the World Bank, Saraf (2016) traces the evolution of the automotive sector in
South Asia. The Chairman of the leading auto-parts company is reported mentioning: “We train
workers and lose them to others. But we still train because the ones who stay are crucial for our
productivity. Unskilled workers are cheaper, but costs match up when their mistakes are
financially accounted for. We cannot afford that type of delay and quality when we need to serve
clients in Germany and the US.”

The channels through which product market reform would help in increasing the uptake of OJT
are likely to be two-fold. First, at the market level, it would amplify the number and size of
opportunities, and increase the demand for productive activities that would require better human
capital to realize the benefits.26 Firms that do not invest in improving their human capital would


25
   A useful area for future research would be to test the sensitivity of OJT to various aspects of product market
reforms. Some common product market reform areas include: reducing average rates of protection and harmonizing
tariff schedules across intermediate and final goods; improving standards and product market regulations;
facilitating imports for exporters (for example, through better functioning duty-drawback schemes); and
strengthening trade logistics to reduce customs clearance, tax burden and transit times. Many services-related
regulations might go beyond the scope of “product-market” reform, for example, e-commerce rules. Depending on
the country and the sector context, further analysis would be required to ascertain the appropriate instrument.
World Bank work regarding competitiveness in South Asia (Hallward-Driemeier 2007) suggests that an inefficient
business environment would lead to low and uncertain returns on investment, dragging down productivity and
reducing the incentive to adopt technical improvements on the factory floor. As seen from the literature, this would,
in turn, reduce demand for complementary activities such as OJT.
26
  It is possible that even when the size of opportunity increases in the light of reforms, firms may choose production
processes and technologies that might be capital-intensive — avoiding the need for more investment in human
capital. This seems unlikely in developing countries because labor inputs tend to be relatively cheaper. Further, firms
that are profit-maximizing entities will not want to under-utilize a cheaper input. Second, training might increase the

                                                          27
be penalized more, thereby raising the marginal benefit to training for firms that do provide
training. Such firms can then capture a greater market share (a new share in new markets, as well
as capturing shares away from competitors in existing markets). To some extent, this would tackle
the issue of free-riders because in competitive markets, the marginal cost of not training for “all
firms” would increase during the same time period. The future employer would need to invest in
training at the same time as the current employer, and both would have similar risks of poaching.

Second, within the firm, managers would have to make greater efforts to conduct due diligence
regarding information about new practices and technologies to remain competitive. This would
help to alleviate the information failure issues. Further, it would help firms create the right in-
house incentives and policies to motivate workers to participate in training.

Firms that export, meet international standards, innovate and adopt more advanced production
technologies (such as MNCs) tend to have better management capability (Bloom and Van Reenen
2007) and more training incidence (in the Latin America and Caribbean region, see Gonzalez-
Velosa and others 2016). In effect, such reforms would increase the ability of the product market
to allocate resources efficiently. It would do so by enabling more productive firms to grow and the
badly managed ones to exit.

The literature about firm productivity also shows a link between productive activities and firm
size: firms that are large tend to participate in exports, innovation, R&D and FDI. Large firms also
tend to do more OJT.27 Thus, policies that support reforming licensing, size restrictions, labor laws
and strengthening property rights might be steps in the right direction for developing countries.

4.1.2 Reducing uncertainty about returns, increasing information flows, providing certification
The literature suggested the presence of information failures among firm management that reduce
the adoption of beneficial OJT. As noted, product market reforms could provide an incentive for
more due diligence on the part of firm managers and owners with regard to information processing
and better HR policies. At the same time, governments could provide further support by using low-
cost means to help firms interact and learn from each other.

One such part of increasing information flows in the market concerns greater coordination among
firms. Government-facilitated demonstration projects, networking sessions, and greater
informational awareness efforts regarding evidence about productivity, wages and cost effects

cost of inputs through wage hikes over time. However, the literature indicates that even in developed markets, firm
productivity increases more than the wage gain.
27
   Size and productivity: which comes first? Causality is difficult to establish, as firms that are already more productive
are more likely to enter export markets than less productive firms (Amiti and Konings 2007; Atkin and others 2014;
Melitz 2003; Clerides and others 1998; Goldberg and others 2010; and Wagner 2007.) Lopez-Acevedo, Medvedev,
and Palmade (2016) note that “competition plays a key role in forcing inefficient, unproductive, or unprofitable firms
to either improve or exit and transfer their resources to more efficient, productive, or profitable firms, thus boosting
economy-wide productivity. More formally, there are two mutually reinforcing mechanisms — spurred on by
competition in product and factor markets — that increase productivity. First, greater competition, from either
domestic or international sources, pushes firms to become more efficient at doing what they do: for example, by
learning from international exposure, investing in innovation, improving business practices, adopting better
technology including ICT, and improving the input mix. This is the within-firm component of productivity growth.
Second, competition also induces inefficient firms to transfer resources to more efficient ones or exit altogether,
boosting economy-wide productivity — this is the between-firm component of productivity growth.”

                                                            28
could help firms to better understand the cost-benefit calculus of OJT. These could be cost-
effective ways for the government to engage with the private sector, while also including academic
institutions, industry leaders and business associations.

Policies that support the formation and expansion of information platforms between large firms
and local suppliers about lead firm requirements/standards on the one hand, and product offerings
of local firms on the other hand, might help reduce the information asymmetry in the market. In
so doing, it could increase the demand for skilled labor among small and medium enterprises
(SMEs). In many cases, the information platform could serve to reduce information gaps regarding
certifications of local suppliers by providing these data online. For public programs that help firm
upgrading, it could have as a filtering criterion the accreditation of the training provider (including
the firm).

For workers, the literature clarifies that accredited OJT is more strongly associated with wage
gains at both current and future employers. This would also suggest the importance of signaling
and policy interventions for providing greater certification and formal recognition of prior learning
(RPL). However, reduced asymmetric information between workers and firms could increase
turnover, thereby discouraging firms from providing OJT. Thus, it is likely that the effects on OJT
provision levels are mixed: the worker demand for OJT would increase due to better signaling, but
the firm supply would fall due to greater worker turnover. However, Acemoglu and Pischke (2000)
show that by guaranteeing workers a higher wage, certification provides an incentive for workers
to exert more effort in the skill acquisition process. If so, then this might alleviate some of the
supply contraction on the firm side.

4.1.3 Helping improve management skills for better HR policy formation
The literature shows this is one area of skills that has an impact on firm productivity and worker
incentives to adopt new skills. Increasingly aware of the importance of investments in managerial
capabilities, governments across the world are experimenting with programs that boost these
capacities at the firm level. In Latin America and Africa, for example, authorities are piloting
interventions which provide SMEs with access to individualized consulting services (similar to the
approach by Bloom and others 2013), as well as more novel approaches of providing group
consulting services. Such services can be delivered at a lower cost and can help leverage group-
learning dynamics (similar to agricultural extension services).

Another innovative approach to fill the management capability gap in smaller firms could be to
provide incentives for diaspora knowledge transfer and exchange. Building on evidence that shows
significant productivity and wage gains to hiring trained workers from MNCs, some countries have
targeted programs and policy frameworks to encourage movement of diaspora members who have
obtained superior management training from firms outside the country back to the home country
(Aguinas and Newland 2012; Brinkerhoff 2006; and Meyer and others 1997). In such programs,
the home country may facilitate diaspora members’ personal efforts to transfer skills to the
homeland, or work to connect home-country firms to advanced institutions in countries of
destination in which diaspora members have ties. In some cases, country-of-destination
governments, acting alone or with regional organizations, may partner with home country
governments to provide technical assistance. Although some of these initiatives have had a positive



                                                  29
impact, particularly in OECD countries where they were conceived, making such programs viable
in the long run for developing countries is still a challenge.28


4.1.4 Using more gain-sharing instruments and performance-based compensation for workers
Due to heterogeneous parties and agency issues, workers may not have incentives to cooperate
with the firm in adopting new technologies and training. At times, the worker could transmit
incorrect information about the impact of new technologies to management to restrict its uptake,
causing further inefficiencies. To avoid this problem, the greater use of gain-sharing contracts and
performance-based pay for workers are suggested. Studies show that firms using such instruments
are more readily able to adopt new technologies. Reforms that increase competition in these
markets would prompt better compensation policies through two routes. First, firms would want
to invest in better technologies, creating a rise in demand for training, a complementary activity.
Second, in these markets, the firm management would need to be more diligent about designing
attractive HR and compensation policies for fear of losing good workers, thereby alleviating issues
of misaligned incentives among workers.
4.2 Supply-side considerations29
In general, government interventions - such as subsidizing training or providing direct financial
support - to increase the supply of OJT need to be considered with caution as they could crowd
out what private sector firms would have already provided. As seen in many countries, this could
then reduce the quality of overall OJT provision.30 Government support towards firms to
encourage more OJT should minimize crowding out existing private provision through appropriate
targeting and due-diligence of the firms (see section 4.2.1). Through ensuring enforceability of
contracts and lowering coordination costs among firms, governments could encourage more
supply of OJT (see sections 4.2.2 and 4.2.3).
The review indicates that demand constraints are more critical to address as the way to increase
OJT provision. However, it also finds that there are cases where a private sector led OJT approach
would lead to distributional issues and tend to underprovide certain types of skills that are
important for the workers (and for society) in the long run but less for the firm in the short run. As
such, when societies have improved welfare as a goal, interventions could be required to restore
equality of opportunity rather than reinforce existing inequalities (see section 4.2.4).
4.2.1 Targeting selective firms for government subsidies
Government financial support should only go where training would otherwise not occur, or to
internalize a positive externality by reducing the marginal cost of OJT provision for firms. In this
context, co-financing schemes are a better tool for the alignment of incentives with workers and
training providers (in this case, firms), as well as a better use of public monies. Very rarely should
the government pay the full cost of training given the presence of other parties that benefit. The

28
   Some examples of diaspora programs that encourage skill transfer are: the Return of Qualified Afghans (RQA)
program, the Moroccan Migrations and Développement Economique dans la région de l’Oriental (MIDEO),
Colombia’s Red Caldas de Colciencias, Senegal’s Senexpert programme, and ChileGlobal in Chile.
29
   Supply-side considerations would decrease the marginal cost of OJT to the firm, or to all firms in the market.
30
   Since training is difficult to monitor or quantify, there are serious risks of government failure, such as low-quality
training by an external third party (for example, an ALMP or private TVET institutes). An external party may find it
more difficult to motivate both the firm and the worker to behave efficiently.

                                                           30
employer-worker combination should bear the remaining cost. This would also require better
targeting mechanisms for public support to training.
In order to encourage an activity that has positive externalities for society, policies should use
appropriate targeting methodology to help those firms that have a higher propensity to provide
training, but need an additional push to cross the fixed cost point of training. What the specific
targeting indicators would be would depend on the country and the sector context. However, the
literature confirms a few common features that targeting methodologies could consider including:
firms engaged in productive activities (exports, innovation, R&D, selling high-quality products,
ICT adoption) tend to offer more OJT. Other firm-level metrics could also be considered, such as
the presence of professional managers in family-owned firms (better management); performance-
based pay (alignment of worker incentives); and the number of technical alliances (new
technologies). The targeting methodology should include an assessment of the sensitivity of these
characteristics (export-orientation, involvement in R&D) to the propensity to provide OJT, the
growth trajectory of the firm (over the short and medium run), and a sense of what the firm is
already investing to prevent crowding out.
How to target and with what kind of training is an emerging area of research in private sector
development. In a recent randomized control trial (Anderson, Chandy & Zia 2016), businesses that
received training increased profits significantly compared to those in the control group. Marketing
training was significantly more effective for businesses with lower prior business exposure,
whereas finance training was significantly more effective for larger, more established businesses.
This indicates that programs targeting training at firms to improve management skills must look
at the starting point of the company.31
For firms at the size spectrum ends, that is, for the very large and micro firms, government support
is likely to crowd out other training, or simply be ineffective. For instance, large firms linked to
export markets are known to train with or without government support. If government offers its
support through subsidies, it would crowd out this segment of the private sector, creating a
deadweight loss for society. For firms in the middle – SMEs – with the above-mentioned
characteristics, there is a higher likelihood of success. However, for firms on the margin,
government intervention may have a net positive effect by encouraging greater training that would
not otherwise have occurred without its support.
The question of policy instrument could be an important one. Whether a tax deduction, a levy/grant
scheme, or a grant, these instruments are prone to abuse and require careful design and monitoring
by the implementing agencies. For example, in the absence of appropriate measures and
monitoring, the employer may use government support toward other organizational needs,
subsidize wages of employees, or train those who would otherwise have received training. Thus,
a correct evaluation of the impact of different instruments requires information regarding the
responsiveness of wages and training prices to changes in payroll taxes and other instruments.
Each policy choice also has different administrative costs, as well as a bureaucratic responsibility


31
   Companies in two treatment groups were given marketing training and finance training respectively. The authors
found that businesses assigned to marketing training were more likely to implement practices connected to top-
line business growth (e.g. market research, marketing tactics, and sales tactics). In contrast, finance training
tended to shift a firm owner’s focus towards greater efficiency in the business through more finance/accounting
activities that economized on costs to boost profits.

                                                       31
for monitoring and compliance. While much data exists for developed/OECD countries, it is a
policy area requiring further experimentation and data collection in developing countries.
To summarize, in order to calculate the optimal size of government support, policy makers would
need to consider the type of firm, whether its skill efforts are systemic, how close it is to the
frontier, its absorptive capacities (including management quality), and the extent of externalities.
4.2.2 Lower cost of poaching for firms
One question to consider regarding costs is: In which ways could companies coordinate to reduce
the cost of poaching? In this regard, it would be instructive to learn from examples that have not
worked before moving on to some new approaches.
When four key Silicon Valley companies (Apple, Adobe Systems, Google, and Intel) signed a
non-poaching agreement (2005-2009) to prevent employee attrition, it resulted in a lawsuit by the
employees. In 2009, the companies decided to settle. The rationale of the companies was two-fold:
first, to avoid having to rehire and retrain employees given the high levels of labor mobility in the
technology sector; and second, to protect intellectual property to which the employees had become
privy. However, this provoked a heated debate about anti-competitive practices and forced the four
companies to settle. These tactics are also unlikely to work in developing country contexts where
enforceability of contracts is often weak.
Other options to consider could be instruments, such as Non-Compete Contracts (NCCs), payback
clauses or back-loading bonuses to increase the worker cost of switching, as well as the attrition
for the firm.32 With NCCs, the employee is not allowed to join a competitor for a defined period
of time after quitting the current firm. This reduces labor mobility. In effect, it allows the company
to reduce the benefits that the future employer could use. In the case of back-loading contracts, the
employee receives a bonus at the end of a period during which he or she agrees to stay with the
company. It is up to the employee to decide whether he/she prefers to stay for that length of time
[to obtain the bonus], or whether the outside offer is more attractive. All of these instruments
increase the cost of switching for the employee, and reduce the (probability adjusted) marginal
cost for the firm. With payback clauses, the employee has to pay back the cost of training if he/she
leaves before a certain time period, as contractually agreed upon prior to the training.
The common basis among these instruments that help to increase the switching cost among
employees and reduce the cost of poaching is the assurance of rule of law and enforceability of
contracts. This is an area where developing countries would need to pay more attention and
communicate policies that would ensure a stronger rule of law among private sector firms.
4.2.3 Lower coordination costs for a group of firms
Governments could try to reduce coordination costs among firms through the provision of
common/sharing facilities or industry-/cluster-based training centers. In the past, the initiative,
land, and some financial support came from the state and federal governments. However, the
curriculum design, methodology, teacher recruitment, and other management matters were decided
by the private sector or non-profit organization.33. The private or non-profit entity assumes the role

32
   Downloaded on December 11, 2016 from: http://knowledge.wharton.upenn.edu/article/silicon-valleys-
poaching-case-growing-debate-employee-mobility/
33
   See the example of the Penang Skill Development Centre (a public-private partnership [PPP] skill center), Dundar
and others (2014).

                                                        32
of an ‘aggregator’, and the government acts as a facilitator. The government supports capital
expenditures, such as equipment for training. After a few years of operation, the training center
can then assume responsibility for recurring costs (materials, trainers, and so on). In some cases,
the private sector firms can share the cost of introducing accredited providers and content.
In other similar models, grant funding from governments could help industrial clusters cover basic
start-up costs by establishing common/shared facilities — with the firms donating space and
paying the cost of training (now arguably lower per person due to economies of scale). Thus,
instead of financing the direct cost of training, government resources support a group of firms,
helping them to meet the fixed costs of cooperating to provide skills that are commonly required.
In theory, these arrangements could work because they do not help a single firm, but rather a group
of firms to assess common skill gaps, produce skill upgrading plans, create apprenticeship
programs, and obtain skills for a fee. In practice, the impact and efficiency of such programs is not
yet fully known. Rigorous impact evaluations are required to measure the outcomes of such
programs, which are becoming a popular way of increasing coordination among firms and
addressing positive externality issues.
4.2.4 Targeting support toward disadvantaged groups
Better targeting is also required for workers to alleviate distribution issues. The literature notes
that highly skilled workers are more likely to receive training, whereas certain groups of workers
(including women and older people) receive less training.
The government approach could vary based on the type of skills in question, as well as the
seriousness of the distribution issue. For more general skills and groups that may be at a
disadvantage but remain capable of accessing credit markets (that is, at a non-serious
disadvantage), policies that support an easing of regulations around access to finance for education
and training could encourage greater participation. This could take the form of training and
education loans with low interest rates or credit default guarantees. With a credit default guarantee,
instead of directly paying for skills, the government allows for a guarantee or form of insurance to
the training provider (in case the trainee defaults on the loan). This is achieved by the issuer of the
bonds insuring the buyer’s potential losses as part of the agreement. The efficiency of these
investments would need to be tested, taking into account the welfare gains.
In cases of serious distribution issues, the government could direct greater resources toward
general training for disadvantaged groups. In this regard, a short-term policy intervention to
provide targeted government support on the grounds of equity would be best. However,
governments should use more efficient training methods than ALMPs. The literature review shows
that the following programs maximize the chances for success: (i) a comprehensive program
combining traditional in-classroom training with workplace training; and (ii) supplementary
services, such as counseling and mentoring, monitoring, job search and placement assistance, as
well as soft and life skills training.
This means that training programs for targeted worker groups should aim to create an opportunity
for all of these elements to come together, if they are to have a chance of genuinely helping them.
For instance, classroom learning provides general skills that increase labor mobility across a
worker’s lifetime. However, it may not provide practical knowledge of technical skills in specific
occupations which may be required to cross initial barriers to entry and survival in the firm. This


                                                  33
is where the workplace training component refines practical skills of the trainees and exposes them
to industry standards, technical equipment, and gives them a sense of operating in a real workplace.
It is important for trainees to fit in well into the new environment. This will also help to increase
worker retention. The trainee needs access to a system for counseling, mentoring and job matching
services to find the right opportunities. Over the longer term, more investment and better learning
outcomes in basic and secondary education, as well as achievement of lifelong skills for such
groups, would be needed to correct the problem at its origin in the future.
4.3 Areas for future investigation
There are a few interesting analytical questions for future investigation. However, robust literature
was found to be limited. For example: What is the relationship between economic
geography/agglomeration and provision of training? What is the relationship between different
public-private partnership (PPP) models of training and the impact on a firm’s provision level of
OJT? What are the empirical reasons for the lack of private training markets for general OJT?
These could be stimulating questions for future investigation.

In general, much more work is also required to identify the conditions (that is, the characteristics
of the firms, type of training, and types of workers) in which OJT is offered, as well as the
economic mechanisms through which OJT contributes to firm productivity. This would improve
the targeting of policy interventions. Finally, more attention is needed with regard to techniques
to resolve methodological concerns associated with OJT measurement.


5. Conclusion
While creating gains for workers and society, firms that provide on-the-job training do so when it
is critical to their productivity—and when productivity is critical to their survival. This paper
begins by confirming a significant and positive return from on-the-job training on wages and
productivity, as well as the presence of positive externalities from on-the-job training, while
discussing the methodological considerations at play. The paper then reviews and validates the
presence of market failures such as information asymmetries within the firm as a result of low-
quality management practices that dampen firm demand for on-the-job training. Lack of
competition in the firm’s external environment appears to undermine adoption of on-the-job
training and other complementary productivity-enhancing activities within the firm.
The literature suggests that for most firms, a comprehensive policy approach that resolves external
constraints to becoming more productive is likely to have a positive impact on the provision of on-
the-job training and adoption of complementary policies. More direct forms of firm-level support
to improve management capabilities could also alleviate under-provision of on-the-job training.
Where societies have improved welfare as a goal, public policy measures would be needed to
complement on-the-job training for some specific groups of workers (older, less educated,
women). In essence, the paper highlights the importance of demand-side constraints for firms,
rather than supply-side constraints, for the provision of on-the-job training.




                                                 34
              Table 3: Summary of Findings from the Literature on OJT

               Constraint               Explanation                Findings (from Empirical Literature)            Policy Considerations and
                                    (from Theoretical                                                               Areas for Future Work
                                        Literature)
                              Value of OJT is not           Literature indicates that the returns to OJT (firm Demand side considerations:
                              understood by firms (accurate productivity and worker wages) are positive.
               Information    information on productivity   Internal rate of return is positive (see Section 2.1). Reforming product market
                 gaps and     returns, costs, wage rises); it                                                      competition, trade,
               uncertainty    may be particularly                                                                  regulatory environment and
                                                            Literature presents validation of information gaps,
                   about      misunderstood by those firms                                                         other institutions (see
                                                            and finds that firm-level management is often not
                  returns     that stand the most to gain,                                                         Section 4.1.1).
                                                            well-informed about the cost-benefit of new
                              and that do not realize how   training, leading to ineffective HR policies (see      Reducing uncertainty about
                              poorly run their firms are.   Section 2.1 and 3.1).                                  gains, increasing
                              Firm: Low adoption of new     Evidence of external environmental factors such as information flows, providing
                              managerial practices or new   low product market competition linked to low           certification systems (see
 Demand-        Barriers to   technologies among firms —    adoption of productivity-enhancing activities (OJT, Section 4.1.2).
   side         adoption of   reducing their need for betternew technologies, such as information and
constraints     managerial    skills, and hence, demand for communications technology [ICT], management Helping to improve
                 practices    training.                     practices). Within firms, low adoption of              management skills for better
                 and new                                    managerial practices in developing countries with HR policy formation (see
               technologies   Worker: Misaligned            preponderance of family-owned firms depresses Section 4.1.3).
                              compensation structures limit demand for productivity-enhancing activities such
                              worker incentives to train in as OJT (see sections 3.1 and 3.2).                     Using more gain-sharing
                              new technologies.                                                                    instruments and
                                                            Even if the firm management wants to adopt new performance-based
                                                            technology, there is evidence of distorted HR          compensation for workers
                                                            policies (linked to information gaps) that creates (see Section 4.1.4).
                                                              low incentives for workers to participate as they do Supply side considerations:
                                                              not share in the gains (see sections 3.1 and 3.2).
                                                                                                                   Targeting selective firms for
               Information    Firms do not know what kind Literature review does not suggest this is a binding the provision of government
               asymmetry      of training is available in the constraint because some firms in the market are      subsidies (see Section
                              market, and/or how to go        able to access this information, while others        4.2.1).
                              about providing for it.         cannot. Simple interventions, such as increasing
                                                              information awareness, can help resolve the          Lower coordination costs
                                                              problem (see section 3.1).                           among firms (see Section
                                                                                                                   4.2.2).
                Free-rider    Firms that provide general      There is evidence of productivity benefits for
                problem       OJT are not able to fully       future employers profiting from hiring workers       Targeting support to
Supply-side                   appropriate the rents to        trained in the previous firm. Wage gains for         disadvantaged groups (see
constraints                   training.                       existing workers in the future employer are higher Section 4.2.3).
                                                              when the firm hires a trained worker (for example,
                                                                                                                   Areas for future work:
                                                              from MNCs) (see section 2.1 and 2.2).
                                                                                                                   More rigorous analytical
                 Credit       Firms do not have adequate For most firms, a lack of convincing evidence
                                                                                                                   work on OJT link to PPPs;
               constraints    resources to finance OJT,       about the presence of credit constraints is a
                                                                                                                   impact of agglomeration on
                              even though it may have         significant reason why firms under-provide
                                                                                                                   OJT; and resolving
                              positive returns.               training. This could be a bigger issue for
                                                                                                                   methodological issues for
                                                              microenterprises and low-income workers (see
                                                                                                                   better OJT measurement.
                                                              section 3.2).



                                                                      35
References
Acemoglu, D., & Pischke, J.-S. (1998). Why Do Firms Train? Theory and Evidence. The
     Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113(1), 79–119.
Acemoglu, D., & Pischke, J.-S. (1999). The structure of wages and investment in general
     training. Journal of Political Economy, 107(3), 539–572.
Acemoglu, D., & Pischke, J.-S. (2000). Certification of training and training outcomes. European
     Economic Review, 44(4-6), 917–927. Retrieved from
     http://econpapers.repec.org/RePEc:eee:eecrev:v:44:y:2000:i:4-6:p:917-927
Acemoglu, D., Kremer, M., & Mian, A. R. (2008). Incentives in Markets, Firms and
     Governments. Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization, 24(2), 273–306.
Acemoglu, D. (1998). Why Do New Technologies Complement Skills? Directed Technical
     Change and Wage Inequality. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113 (4), 1055-1089.
Acevedo, G. L., & Tan, H. W. (Eds.). (2011). Impact evaluation of small and medium enterprise
      programs in Latin America and the Caribbean. World Bank Publications.
Aghion, P., & Tirole, J. (1997). Formal and Real Authority in Organizations. Journal of Political
      Economy, 110(3), 567–591. Retrieved from
      http://econpapers.repec.org/RePEc:ucp:jpolec:v:105:y:1997:i:1:p:1-29

Agunias, D. R., & Newland, K. (2012). Developing a road map for engaging diasporas in
      development: A handbook for policymakers and practitioners in home and host countries.
      IOM/MPI.
Akerlof, G. A., & Kranton, R. E. (2005). Identify and the Economics of Organizations. Journal
       of Economic Perspectives, 19(1), 9–32.
Albinger, H. S., & Freeman, S. J. (2000). Corporate Social Performance and Attractiveness as an
       Employer to Different Job Seeking Populations. Journal of Business Ethics, 28(3), 243–
       253. N-
Alfaro, L., & Charlton, A. (2009). Intra-industry foreign direct investment. American Economic
        Review, 99(5), 2096–2119. http://doi.org/10.1257/aer.99.5.2096
Almeida, R. K., & Aterido, R. (2008). The incentives to invest in job training: do strict labor
      codes influence this decision. The World Bank Social Protection Discussion Paper,
      (0832).
Almeida, R. K., & de Faria, M. L. (2014). The Wage Returns to On-the-Job Training: Evidence
      from Matched Employer-Employee Data. IZA Discussion Papers. Retrieved from
      http://ideas.repec.org/p/iza/izadps/dp8314.html
Almeida, R., & Carneiro, P. (2009). The return to firm investments in human capital. Labour
      Economics, 16(1), 97–106. Retrieved from
      http://econpapers.repec.org/RePEc:eee:labeco:v:16:y:2009:i:1:p:97-106
Almeida, R., Behrman, J., & Robalino, D. (2012). The Right Skills for the Job? (R. Almeida, J.
      Behrman, & D. Robalino, Eds.). The World Bank. http://doi.org/10.1596/978-0-8213-
      8714-6
                                                36
Ambec, S., & Barla, P. (2006). Can Environmental Regulations be Good for Business? an
     Assessment of the Porter Hypothesis. Review of Energy Studies, 14(2), 42–62.
Amiti, M., & Konings, J. (2007). Trade liberalization, intermediate inputs, and productivity:
       Evidence from Indonesia. The American Economic Review, 97(5), 1611-1638.
Anderson, S., Rajesh, C., & Zia, B. (2016). Pathways to Profits: Identifying Separate Channels
      of Firm Growth through Business Training. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper
      no. 7774
Andreoni, J. (1989). Giving with Impure Altruism: Applications to Charity and Ricardian
      Equivalence. Journal of Political Economy, 97(6), 1447–58. Retrieved from
      http://econpapers.repec.org/RePEc:ucp:jpolec:v:97:y:1989:i:6:p:1447-58
Andreoni, J. (1990). Impure Altruism and Donations to Public Goods: A Theory of Warm-Glow
      Giving? Economic Journal, 100(401), 464–77. Retrieved from
      http://econpapers.repec.org/RePEc:ecj:econjl:v:100:y:1990:i:401:p:464-77
Aronsson, T., & Johansson-Stenman, O. (2008). When the Joneses’ consumption hurts: Optimal
      public good provision and nonlinear income taxation. Journal of Public Economics, 92(5-
      6), 986–997. Retrieved from
      http://econpapers.repec.org/RePEc:eee:pubeco:v:92:y:2008:i:5-6:p:986-997
Aterido, R., & Hallward-Driemeier, M. (2007). Investment climate and employment growth: The
       impact of access to finance, corruption and regulations across firms.
Atkin, D., Chaudhry, A., Chaudry, S., Khandelwal, A. K., & Verhoogen, E. (2015).
       Organizational barriers to technology adoption: Evidence from soccer-ball producers in
       Pakistan (No. w21417). National Bureau of Economic Research.
Backhaus, K. B., Stone, B. A., & Heiner, K. (2002). Exploring the Relationship Between
      Corporate Social Performance and Employer Attractiveness. Business and Society, 41(3),
      292–318.
Bagnoli, M., & Lipman, B. (1989). Provision of Public Goods: Fully Implementing the Core
      through Private Contributions. Review of Economic Studies, 56(4), 583–601. Retrieved
      from http://econpapers.repec.org/RePEc:oup:restud:v:56:y:1989:i:4:p:583-601.
Balsvik, R. (2011). Is labor mobility a channel for spillovers from multinationals? Evidence from
       Norwegian manufacturing. The Review of Economics and Statistics, 93(1), 285-297.
Bandiera, O., Barankay, I., & Rasul, I. (2011). Field experiments with firms. The Journal of
       Economic Perspectives, 25(3), 63-82.
Banerji, A. C. W. F. A. K. E. P. H. R. D. T. J.-P. (2010). Stepping up skills for more jobs and
       higher productivity, 1–36. Retrieved from
       http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2010/06/12515032/stepping-up-skills-more-
       jobs-higher-productivity
Baron, D. P. (2001). Private Politics, Corporate Social Responsibility, and Integrated Strategy.
       Journal of Economics & Management Strategy, 10(1), 7–45. Retrieved from
       http://econpapers.repec.org/RePEc:bla:jemstr:v:10:y:2001:i:1:p:7-45


                                                37
Barrett, A., & O'Connell, P. J. (2001). Does training generally work? The returns to in-company
        training. Industrial & labor relations review, 54(3), 647-662.
Barron, J. M., Black, D. A., & Loewenstein, M. A. (1989). Job Matching and On-the-Job
       Training. Journal of Labor Economics, 7(1), 1–19. Retrieved from
       http://ideas.repec.org/a/ucp/jlabec/v7y1989i1p1-19.html
Bartel, A. P. (1995). Training, Wage Growth, and Job Performance: Evidence from a Company
        Database. Journal of Labor Economics, 13(3), 401–25. Retrieved from
        http://econpapers.repec.org/RePEc:ucp:jlabec:v:13:y:1995:i:3:p:401-25
Bartel, A. P., & Lichtenberg, F. R. (1987). The comparative advantage of educated workers in
        implementing new technology. The Review of Economics and statistics, 1-11.
Bartel, A. P., & Sicherman, N. (1999). Technological Change and the Labor Market. NBER
        Reporter, 16.
Bayo-Moriones, A., & Lera-López, F. (2007). A firm-level analysis of determinants of ICT
      adoption in Spain. Technovation, 27(6), 352-366.
Becker, G. S. (1962). Investment in human capital: A theoretical analysis. Journal of Political
       Economy, 70, 9–49.
Benabou, R. J., & Tirole, J. (2003). Intrinsic and Extrinsic Motivation. Review of Economic
      Studies, 70(3), 489–520. Retrieved from
      http://econpapers.repec.org/RePEc:oup:restud:v:70:y:2003:i:3:p:489-520
Bergstrom, T., Blume, L., & Varian, H. (1986). On the Private Provision of Public Goods.
       Journal of Public Economics, 29, 25–49.
Berman, E., Bound, J., & Griliches, Z. (1994). Changes in the demand for skilled labor within
      US manufacturing: Evidence from the annual survey of manufacturers. The Quarterly
      Journal of Economics, 367-397.
Bernard, A. B., Eaton, J., Jensen, J. B., & Kortum, S. (2003). Plants and productivity in
       international trade. The American Economic Review, 93(4), 1268-1290.
Besley, T. J., & Ghatak, M. (2003). Incentives, Choice, and Accountability in the Provision of
       Public Services. Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 19(2), 235–249. Retrieved from
       http://econpapers.repec.org/RePEc:oup:oxford:v:19:y:2003:i:2:p:235-249
Besley, T. J., & Ghatak, M. (2007). Retailing public goods: The economics of corporate social
       responsibility. Journal of Public Economics, 91(9), 1645–1663. Retrieved from
       http://econpapers.repec.org/RePEc:eee:pubeco:v:91:y:2007:i:9:p:1645-1663
Betcherman, G., Dar, A., & Olivas, K. (2004). Impacts of active labor market programs: New
       evidence from evaluations with particular attention to developing and transition
       countries. Social Protection, World Bank.
Biewen, M., Fitzenberger, B., Osikominu, A., & Waller, M. (2007). Which Program for Whom?
      Evidence on the Comparative Effectiveness of Public Sponsored Training Programs in
      Germany. ZEW - Zentrum für Europäische Wirtschaftsforschung / Center for European
      Economic Research. Retrieved from
      http://econpapers.repec.org/RePEc:zbw:zewdip:5868

                                                38
Biggs, T., Shah, M., & Srivastava, P. (1995). Training and productivity in African manufacturing
       enterprises. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper Series, 1–48. Retrieved from
       http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/1995/08/439656/training-productivity-
       african-manufacturing-enterprises
Bishop, J. (1994). The Impact of Previous Training on Productivity and Wages. In Training and
       the Private Sector – International Comparisons (Ed.), Training and the Private Sector –
       International Comparisons. Chicago: University Chicago Press.
Black, S. E., & Lynch, L. M. (2001). How to compete: the impact of workplace practices and
       information technology on productivity. Review of Economics and statistics, 83(3), 434-
       445.
Blakemore, A. E., & Hoffman, D. L. (1988). Seniority Rules and Productivity: An Empirical
      Test. Earnings in Britain. London: Institute for Fiscal Studies.
Blalock, G., & Gertler, P. J. (2004). Learning from exporting revisited in a less developed
       setting. Journal of Development Economics, 75(2), 397-416.
Blanchflower, D. G., & Lynch, L. M. (1994). Training at work: a comparison of US and British
       youths. In Training and the private sector: international comparisons (pp. 233-260).
       University of Chicago Press.
Blank, R. M. (2000). When Can Public Policy Makers Rely on Private Markets? The Effective
       Provision of Social Services. Economic Journal, 110(462), C34–49. Retrieved from
       http://econpapers.repec.org/RePEc:ecj:econjl:v:110:y:2000:i:462:p:c34-49
Bloom, N., & Van Reenen, J. (2007). Measuring and explaining management practices across
      firms and countries. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(4), 1351-1408.
Bloom, N., Genakos, C., Sadun, R., & Van Reenen, J. (2012). Management practices across
      firms and countries. The Academy of Management Perspectives, 26(1), 12-33.
Bloom, N., Eifert, B., Mahajan, A., McKenzie, D., & Roberts, J. (2013). Does management
      matter? Evidence from India. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128(1), 1-51.
Bloom, N., Draca, M., & Van Reenen, J. (2016). Trade induced technical change? The impact of
      Chinese imports on innovation, IT and productivity. The Review of Economic Studies,
      83(1), 87-117.
Bloom, N., Kretschmer, T., & Van Reenan, J. (2009). Work-life balance, management practices
      and productivity. In International differences in the business practices and productivity of
      firms (pp. 15-54). University of Chicago Press.
Blundell, R., Dearden, L., & Meghir, C. (1996). The Determinants of Work-Related Training in
      Britain. London.
Blundell, R., Dearden, L., Meghir, C., & Sianesi, B. (1999). Human Capital Investment: The
      Returns from Education and Training to the Individual, the Firm and the Economy. Fiscal
      Studies, 20(1), 1–23.
Booth, A. L. (1991). Job‐related formal training: who receives it and what is it worth? Oxford
       bulletin of economics and statistics, 53(3), 281-294.


                                                39
Booth, A. L., & Bryan, M. L. (2005). Testing some predictions of human capital theory: New
       training evidence from Britain. Review of Economics and statistics, 87(2), 391-394.
Brambilla, I., Lederman, D., & Porto, G. (2012). Exports, export destinations, and skills. The
      American Economic Review, 102(7), 3406-3438.

Brinkerhoff, J. M. (2012). Creating an enabling environment for diasporas’ participation in
       homeland development. International Migration, 50(1), 75-95.

Brinkerhoff, J. M. (2006). Diasporas, skills transfer, and remittances: Evolving perceptions and
       potential. Converting migration drains into gains: Harnessing the resources of overseas
       professionals, 1-32.
Bugamelli, M., & Pagano, P. (2004). Barriers to Investment in ICT. Applied Economics, 36(20),
     2275-2286.
Busso, M., Bassi, M., Urzúa, S., & Vargas, J. (2012). Disconnected: Skills, education, and
       employment in Latin America. Inter-American Development Bank.
Bustos, P. (2011). Trade liberalization, exports, and technology upgrading: Evidence on the
       impact of MERCOSUR on Argentinian firms. The American economic review, 101(1),
       304-340.
Caliendo, L., Mion, G., Opromolla, L. D., & Rossi-Hansberg, E. (2015). Productivity and
       organization in Portuguese firms (No. w21811). National Bureau of Economic Research.
Carmichael, L. H. (1983). Firm Specific Human Capital and Promotion Ladders. Bell Journal of
      Economics, 14. Retrieved from http://econpapers.repec.org/RePEc:qed:wpaper:452
Carneiro, P., Heckman, J., & Lee, S. (2004). Comparative advantage and schooling. Working
       Paper, University College London, London, UK.
Chung, T.-P. (2000). The Returns to Education and Training: Evidence from the Malaysian
      Family Life Surveys. School of Economics, University of Kent. Retrieved from
      http://econpapers.repec.org/RePEc:ukc:ukcedp:0007
Clerides, S. K., Lach, S., & Tybout, J. R. (1998). Is learning by exporting important? Micro-
       dynamic evidence from Colombia, Mexico, and Morocco. Quarterly journal of
       Economics, 903-947.
Conti, G. (2005). Training, productivity and wages in Italy. Labour Economics, 12(4), 557–576.
       Retrieved from http://econpapers.repec.org/RePEc:eee:labeco:v:12:y:2005:i:4:p:557-576
Cornes, R., & Sandler, T. (1984). Easy Riders, Joint Production, and Public Goods. Economic
       Journal, 94(375), 580–98. Retrieved from
       http://econpapers.repec.org/RePEc:ecj:econjl:v:94:y:1984:i:375:p:580-98
Cornes, R., & Sandler, T. (1994). The comparative static properties of the impure public good
       model. Journal of Public Economics, 54(3), 403–421. Retrieved from
       http://econpapers.repec.org/RePEc:eee:pubeco:v:54:y:1994:i:3:p:403-421




                                                40
Dasgupta, S., Sarkis, J., & Talluri, S. (1999). Influence of information technology investment on
      firm productivity: a cross-sectional study. Logistics Information Management, 12(1/2),
      120-129.
De Loecker, J. (2007). Do exports generate higher productivity? Evidence from Slovenia.
      Journal of international economics, 73(1), 69-98.
De Mel, S., McKenzie, D., & Woodruff, C. (2008). Returns to capital in microenterprises:
      evidence from a field experiment. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1329-1372.
Dearden, L., Reed, H., & Van Reenen, J. (2006). The Impact of Training on Productivity and
      Wages: Evidence from British Panel Data. Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics,
      68(4), 397–421. http://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-0084.2006.00170.x
Dewatripont, M., Jewitt, I., & Tirole, J. (1999). The Economics of Career Concerns, Part I:
      Comparing Information Structures. Review of Economic Studies, 66, 183–198.
Disney, R., Haskel, J., & Heden, Y. (2003). Restructuring and productivity growth in UK
       manufacturing. The Economic Journal, 113(489), 666-694.
Doms, M., Dunne, T., & Troske, K. R. (1997). Workers, wages, and technology. The Quarterly
      Journal of Economics, 253-290.
Dundar, H., Millot, B, Savchenko, Y., Aturupane, H., & Piyasari, T. (2014). Building the Skills
      for Economic Growth and Competitiveness in Sri Lanka. World Bank, Washington DC.
Engel, E. M. R. A., Fischer, R. D., & Galetovic, A. (1997). Highway Franchising: Pitfalls and
       Opportunities. American Economic Review, 87(2), 68–72. Retrieved from
       http://econpapers.repec.org/RePEc:aea:aecrev:v:87:y:1997:i:2:p:68-72
Evertsson, M. (2004). Formal on-the-job training: A gender-typed experience and wage-related
       advantage? European Sociological Review, 79-94.
Fares, J., & Puerto, O. S. (2009). Towards comprehensive training. World Bank.
Fieler, A. C., Eslava, M., & Xu, D. (2014). Trade, Skills, and Quality Upgrading: A Theory with
        Evidence from Colombia (No. w19992). National Bureau of Economic Research.
Fitzenberger, B., & Volter, R. (2007). Long-run effects of training programs for the unemployed
       in East Germany. Labour Economics, 14(4), 730–755. Retrieved from
       http://econpapers.repec.org/RePEc:eee:labeco:v:14:y:2007:i:4:p:730-755
Frazer, G. (2006). Learning the master’s trade: Apprenticeship and human capital in Ghana.
        Journal of Development Economics, 81(2), 259–298. Retrieved from
        http://econpapers.repec.org/RePEc:eee:deveco:v:81:y:2006:i:2:p:259-298
Frazis, H., & Loewenstein, M. A. (2005). Reexamining the Returns to Training: Functional
        Form, Magnitude, and Interpretation. Journal of Human Resources, 40(2). Retrieved from
        http://econpapers.repec.org/RePEc:uwp:jhriss:v:40:y:2005:i:2:p453-476
Frazis, H., Gittleman, M., & Joyce, M. (2000). Correlates of training: An analysis using both
        employer and employee characteristics. Industrial & Labor Relations Review, 53(3), 443-
        462.



                                               41
Friedman, M. (1970, September 13). The Social Responsability of Business is to Increase its
      Profits. The New York Times Magazine, pp. 222–126.
Frye, M. B., Nelling, E., & Webb, E. (2006). Executive Compensation in Socially Responsible
       Firms. Corporate Governance: An International Review, 14(5), 446–455. Retrieved from
       http://econpapers.repec.org/RePEc:bla:corgov:v:14:y:2006:i:5:p:446-455
Gittleman, M., Horrigan, M., & Joyce, M. (1998). “Flexible” workplace practices: evidence from
       a nationally representative survey. Industrial & Labor Relations Review, 52(1), 99-115.
Giunta, A., & Trivieri, F. (2007). Understanding the determinants of information technology
       adoption: evidence from Italian manufacturing firms. Applied Economics, 39(10), 1325-
       1334.
Goldberg, P. K., Khandelwal, A. K., Pavcnik, N., & Topalova, P. (2010). Multiproduct firms and
      product turnover in the developing world: Evidence from India. The Review of
      Economics and Statistics, 92(4), 1042-1049.
Gonzalezs-Velosa, C., Rosas, D., & Flores, R. (2016). On-the-Job Training in Latin America and
      the Caribbean: Recent Evidence. IDB Publication.
Görg, H., & Strobl, E. (2005). Spillovers from foreign firms through worker mobility: An
       empirical investigation. The Scandinavian journal of economics, 107(4), 693-709.
Greenhalgh, C., & Stewart, M. (1987). The effects and determinants of training. Oxford Bulletin
      of Economics and Statistics, 49(2), 171-190.
Hall, R. E., & Lazear, E. (1984). The Excess Sensitivity of Layoffs and Quits to Demand.
       Journal of Labor Economis, 2(2), 233–257. Retrieved from
       http://econpapers.repec.org/RePEc:nbr:nberwo:0864
Haller, S. A., & Siedschlag, I. (2011). Determinants of ICT adoption: Evidence from firm-level
        data. Applied Economics, 43(26), 3775-3788.
Hansmann, H. (1996). The Changing Roles of Public, Private, and Nonprofit Enterprise in
     Education, Health Care, and Other Human Services. National Bureau of Economic
     Research, Inc. Retrieved from http://econpapers.repec.org/RePEc:nbr:nberch:6565
Hansson, B. (2009). Job-related training and benefits for individuals: A review of evidence and
      explanations.
Hanushek, E. A., & Woessmann, L. (2008). The role of cognitive skills in economic
      development. Journal of economic literature, 46(3), 607-668.
Hashimoto, M. (1981). Firm-Specific Human Capital as a Shared Investment. American
      Economic Review, 71(3), 475–82. Retrieved from
      http://econpapers.repec.org/RePEc:aea:aecrev:v:71:y:1981:i:3:p:475-82
Heckman, E. R. (2015). Financial Literacy in the Workplace. In J. Liebowitz (Ed.), Financial
     Literacy Education: Addressing Student, Business, and Government Needs (pp. 179-
     196). Auerbach Publications.




                                               42
Heckman, J. J., LaLonde, R. J., & Smith, J. A. (1999). The economics and econometrics of
     active labor market programs (Vol. 3, Part A). Elsevier. Retrieved from
     http://econpapers.repec.org/RePEc:eee:labchp:3-31
Heckman, J. J., Lochner, L., & Taber, C. (1998). Explaining rising wage inequality: Explorations
     with a dynamic general equilibrium model of labor earnings with heterogeneous agents.
     Review of economic dynamics, 1(1), 1-58.
Heckman, J. J., Stixrud, J., & Urzua, S. (2006). The effects of cognitive and noncognitive
     abilities on labor market outcomes and social behavior (No. w12006). National Bureau of
     Economic Research.
Hollenstein, H. (2004). Determinants of the adoption of Information and Communication
       Technologies (ICT): An empirical analysis based on firm-level data for the Swiss
       business sector. Structural change and economic dynamics, 15(3), 315-342.
Holmstrom, B., & Milgrom, P. (1991). Multitask Principal-Agent Analyses: Incentive Contracts,
      Asset Ownership, and Job Design. Journal of Law, Economics and Organization, 7, 24–
      52. Retrieved from http://econpapers.repec.org/RePEc:oup:jleorg:v:7:y:1991:i:0:p:24-52
Jaffe, Adam, B., Peterson, S. R., Portney, P. R., & Stavins, R. N. (1995). Environmental
        Regulation and the Competitiveness of U.S. Manufacturing: What Does the Evidence
        Tell US? Journal of Economic Literature, 33(1), 132–163.
Jara, O. (2002). Evaluacion del Sistema de capacitación en Chile: Inversion publica y los
        beneficios para las personas. (O. Jara, Ed.). Santiago, Chile: Editorial Universitaria. -
        Book
Jensen, M. C. (2002). Value Maximization, Stakeholder Theory, and the Corporate Objective
       Function. Business Ethics Quarterly, 12(2), 235–256.
Johanson, R., & Wanga, G. (2008). Skills Training for the Informal Sector in Tanzania. World
       Bank.
Johnson, J. P. (2002). Open Source Software: Private Provision of a Public Good. Journal of
      Economics & Management Strategy, 11(4), 637–662. Retrieved from
      http://econpapers.repec.org/RePEc:bla:jemstr:v:11:y:2002:i:4:p:637-662
Johnston, R. J., & Roheim, C. A. (2006). A Battle of Taste and Environmental Convictions for
       Ecolabeled Seafood: A Contingent Ranking Experiment. Journal of Agricultural and
       Resource Economics, 31(02). Retrieved from
       http://econpapers.repec.org/RePEc:ags:jlaare:8617
Kahyarara, G., & Teal, F. J. (2008). The Returns to Vocational Training and Academic
      Education: Evidence from Tanzania. World Development, 36(11), 2223–2242. Retrieved
      from http://econpapers.repec.org/RePEc:eee:wdevel:v:36:y:2008:i:11:p:2223-2242
Kaiser, U., Kongsted, H. C., & Rønde, T. (2008). Labor mobility and patenting activity.
        University of Copenhagen, Department of Economics, Centre for Applied
        Microeconometrics (CAM) Working Paper, 7.
Katz, E., & Ziderman, A. (1990). Investment in General Training: The Role of Information and
       Labour Mobility. Economic Journal, 100(403), 1147–58. Retrieved from
       http://econpapers.repec.org/RePEc:ecj:econjl:v:100:y:1990:i:403:p:1147-58

                                                 43
Keller, W. (2004). International technology diffusion. Journal of economic literature, 42(3), 752-
        782.
Khandelwal, A. (2010). The long and short (of) quality ladders. The Review of Economic
      Studies, 77(4), 1450-1476.
Kim, J., & Marschke, G. (2005). Labor mobility of scientists, technological diffusion, and the
       firm's patenting decision. RAND Journal of Economics, 298-317.
Kitzmueller, M., & Shimshack, J. P. (2012). Economic Perspectives on Corporate Social
      Responsibility. Journal of Economic Literature, 50(1), 51–84. Retrieved from
      http://econpapers.repec.org/RePEc:aea:jeclit:v:50:y:2012:i:1:p:51-84
Konings, J., & Vanormelingen, S. (2015). The Impact of Training on Productivity and Wages:
      Firm-Level Evidence. Review of Economics and Statistics, 97(2), 485–497.
      http://doi.org/10.1162/REST_a_00460
Kotchen, M. J. (2006). Green Markets and Private Provision of Public Goods. Journal of
      Political Economy, 114(4), 816–845. Retrieved from
      http://econpapers.repec.org/RePEc:ucp:jpolec:v:114:y:2006:i:4:p:816-845
Kowtha, N. R., & Choon, T. W. I. (2001). Determinants of website development: a study of
      electronic commerce in Singapore. Information & management, 39(3), 227-242.
Kretschmer, T., Miravete, E. J., & Pernías, J. C. (2012). Competitive pressure and the adoption
       of complementary innovations. The American Economic Review, 102(4), 1540-1570.
Leete, L. (2001). Whither the Nonprofit Wage Differential? Estimates from the 1990 Census.
       Journal of Labor Economics, 19(1), 136–70. Retrieved from
       http://econpapers.repec.org/RePEc:ucp:jlabec:v:19:y:2001:i:1:p:136-70
Leuven, E., & Oosterbeek, H. (2004). Evaluating the Effect of Tax Deductions on Training.
      Journal of Labor Economics, 22(2), 461–488. Retrieved from
      http://econpapers.repec.org/RePEc:ucp:jlabec:v:22:y:2004:i:2:p:461-488
Leuven, E., & Oosterbeek, H. (2008). An alternative approach to estimate the wage returns to
      private-sector training. Journal of Applied Econometrics, 23(4), 423–434. Retrieved from
      http://econpapers.repec.org/RePEc:jae:japmet:v:23:y:2008:i:4:p:423-434
Leuven, E., Oosterbeek, H., & Van Ophem, H. (2004). Explaining international differences in
      male skill wage differentials by differences in demand and supply of skill. The Economic
      Journal, 114(495), 466-486.
Lillard, L. A., & Tan, H. W. (1992). Private sector training: who gets it and what are its effects?.
        Research in labor economics, 13, 1-62.
Lillard, L. A., & Tan, H. W. (1992). Private Sector Training: who gets it and what are its effects?
        Research in Labor Economics, 13.
Loewenstein, M. A., & Spletzer, J. R. (1999). General and specific training: Evidence and
      implications. Journal of Human Resources, 710-733.
Lopez-Acevedo, G, Medvedev, D, Palmade, V. (2016). South Asia’s Turn: Policies to Boost
      Competitiveness and Create the Next Export Powerhouse. World Bank, Washington DC.
      https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/25094

                                                 44
Lopez-Acevedo, G., & Tan, H. W. (2011). Impact Evaluation of Small and Medium Enterprise
      Programs in Latin America and the Caribbean. Retrieved from
      https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/2298
Loureiro, M. L. (2003). Rethinking new wines: implications of local and environmentally
       friendly labels. Food Policy, 28(5-6), 547–560. Retrieved from
       http://econpapers.repec.org/RePEc:eee:jfpoli:v:28:y:2003:i:5-6:p:547-560
Loureiro, M. L., & Lotade, J. (2005). Do fair trade and eco-labels in coffee wake up the
       consumer conscience? Ecological Economics, 53(1), 129–138. Retrieved from
       http://econpapers.repec.org/RePEc:eee:ecolec:v:53:y:2005:i:1:p:129-138
Lucchetti, R., & Sterlacchini, A. (2004). The adoption of ICT among SMEs: evidence from an
      Italian survey. Small Business Economics, 23(2), 151-168.
Lynch, L. M. (1991). The role of off-the-job vs. on-the-job training for the mobility of women
       workers. The American Economic Review, 81(2), 151-156.
Lynch, L. M. (1992). Private Sector Training and its Impact on the Earnings of Young Workers.
       American Economic Review, 82-1. Retrieved from http://www.nber.org/papers/w2872
Macchiavello, R., Rabbani, A., & Woodruff, C. (2015). The Market for Training Services: A
      Demand Experiment with Bangladeshi Garment Factories. American Economic Review,
      105(5), 300–304. Retrieved from http://ideas.repec.org/a/aea/aecrev/v105y2015i5p300-
      304.html
Mankiw, N. G., Romer, D., & Weil, D. N. (1990). A contribution to the empirics of economic
      growth (No. w3541). National Bureau of Economic Research.
Margolis, J., Elfenbein, H. A., & Walsh, J. P. (2007). Does it pay to be good? A meta-analysis
      and redirection of research on the relationship between corporate social and financial
      performance.
Martin, J. P., & Grubb, D. B. (2001). What works and for whom: a review of OECD countries’
       experiences with active labour market policies. IFAU - Institute for Evaluation of Labour
       Market and Education Policy. Retrieved from
       http://econpapers.repec.org/RePEc:hhs:ifauwp:2001_014
Mayer, T., Melitz, M. J., & Ottaviano, G. I. (2014). Market size, competition, and the product
       mix of exporters. The American Economic Review, 104(2), 495-536.
Melero, E. (2004). Evidence on training and career paths: Human capital, information and
      incentives.
Melitz, M. J. (2003). The impact of trade on intra‐industry reallocations and aggregate industry
        productivity. Econometrica, 71(6), 1695-1725.
Mincer, J. A. (1989). Job Training: Costs, Returns, and Wage Profiles. National Bureau of
      Economic Research, Inc. Retrieved from
      http://econpapers.repec.org/RePEc:nbr:nberwo:3208
Monk, C., Sandefur, J., & Teal, F. J. (2008). Does Doing an Apprenticeship Pay Off? Evidence
      from Ghana. Centre for the Study of African Economies, University of Oxford. Retrieved
      from http://econpapers.repec.org/RePEc:csa:wpaper:2008-08

                                               45
Montenegro, C. E., & Patrinos, H. A. (2014). Comparable estimates of returns to schooling
      around the world. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper Series. Retrieved from
      http://ideas.repec.org/p/wbk/wbrwps/7020.html
More and Better Jobs in South Asia. (2011). World Bank Default Book Series. Retrieved from
      http://elibrary.worldbank.org/doi/abs/10.1596/978-0-8213-8912-6
Morgan, J. (2000). Financing Public Goods by Means of Lotteries. Review of Economic Studies,
      67(4), 761–784. Retrieved from
      http://econpapers.repec.org/RePEc:oup:restud:v:67:y:2000:i:4:p:761-784.
Narula, R., & Zanfei, A. (2005). Globalisation of innovation (pp. 318-345). Oxford: Oxford
       University Press.
OECD. (2004). OECD Employment Outlook 2004. OECD Employment Outlook. OECD
     Publishing. http://doi.org/10.1787/empl_outlook-2004-en
Oosterbeek, H., & Leuven, E. (2001). Firm-Specific Human Capital as a Shared Investment:
       Comment. American Economic Review, 91(1), 342–347. Retrieved from
       http://econpapers.repec.org/RePEc:aea:aecrev:v:91:y:2001:i:1:p:342-347
Pavcnik, N. (2002). Trade liberalization, exit, and productivity improvements: Evidence from
       Chilean plants. The Review of Economic Studies, 69(1), 245-276.
Pasurka, C. A. (2008). Perspectives on Pollution Abatement and Competitiveness: Theory, Data,
       and Analyses. Review of Environmental Economics and Policy, 2(2), 194–218. Retrieved
       from http://econpapers.repec.org/RePEc:oup:renvpo:v:2:y:2008:i:2:p:194-218
Pierre, G., & Scarpetta, S. (2004). Employment Regulations through the Eyes of Employers: Do
        they matter and how do firms respond to them?
Pigou, A. C. (1912). Wealth and welfare. Macmillan and Company, limited.
Poole, J. P. (2013). Knowledge transfers from multinational to domestic firms: Evidence from
        worker mobility. Review of Economics and Statistics, 95(2), 393-406.
Porter, M. E., & van der Linde, C. (1995). Toward a New Conception of the Environment-
        Competitiveness Relationship. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 9(4), 97–118.
        Retrieved from http://econpapers.repec.org/RePEc:aea:jecper:v:9:y:1995:i:4:p:97-118
Ridoutt, L., Dutneall, R., Hummel, K., & Selby Smith, C. (2002). Factors influencing the
       implementation of training and learning in the workplace. Adelaide: National Centre for
       Vocational Education Research.
Rosholm, M., Nielsen, H. S., & Dabalen, A. (2007). Evaluation of training in African
      enterprises. Journal of Development Economics, 84(1), 310–329. Retrieved from
      http://econpapers.repec.org/RePEc:eee:deveco:v:84:y:2007:i:1:p:310-329
Samuelson, P. A. (1954). The Pure Theory of Public Expenditure. Review of Economics and
      Statistics, 36.
Saraf, P. (2014). Developing Practical Skills for Firm Productivity: The How To. Competitive
        Industries Note, World Bank, Washington DC.



                                              46
Saraf, P. (2016). Automotive in South Asia : From Fringe to Global. World Bank, Washington,
        DC. https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/25119
Saraf, P., Mariscal, A. & Velazquez, L.G. (2016). Internal draft – literature review of skills,
        productivity and wages. World Bank mimeo (unpublished).
Schlesinger, M. (1998). Mismeasuring the consequences of Ownership: external influences and
       the comparative performance of public, for-profit, and private non-profit organizations.
       In Powell and E. Clemens (Ed.), Private Action and the Public Good (pp. 85–113). New
       Haven: Yale University Press
Stevens, M. (1994). A Theoretical Model of On-the-Job Training with Imperfect Competition.
       Oxford Economic Papers, 46(4), 537–62. Retrieved from
       http://econpapers.repec.org/RePEc:oup:oxecpp:v:46:y:1994:i:4:p:537-62
Stoyanov, A., & Zubanov, N. (2012). Productivity spillovers across firms through worker
      mobility. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 4(2), 168-198.
Tan, H., & Lopez-Acevedo, G. (2005). Evaluating Training Programs for Small and Medium
       Enterprises: Lessons from Mexico. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper, (3760).
The World Bank. (2016). World Development Report 2016: Digital Dividends. Retrieved from
      http://www.worldbank.org/en/publication/wdr2016
Tirole, J., & Benabou, R. J. (2006). Incentives and Prosocial Behavior. American Economic
        Review, 96(5), 1652–1678. Retrieved from
        http://econpapers.repec.org/RePEc:aea:aecrev:v:96:y:2006:i:5:p:1652-1678
Veum, J. R. (1995). Training wages and the human capital model. [Unpublished] 1995.
      Presented at the Annual Meeting of the Population Association of America San Francisco
      California April 6-8 1995..
Wagner, J. (2007). Exports and productivity: A survey of the evidence from firm‐level data. The
      World Economy, 30(1), 60-82.
Weisbrod, B. (1998). The nonprofit Economy. Cambridge University Press.
Winkelmann, R. (1994). Training, earnings and mobility in Germany (No. 982). CEPR
      Discussion Papers.




                                                 47
Annexes
Annex 1: Annotated Bibliography (key literature on various aspects related to OJT)

                                                                                         Effects
                   Country                                             Other           Training on     Controls
   Name of                      Dependent
                  and Time                         Training         Independent        productivit   Endogeneity
    Study                        Variable
                    Period                                            variables           y and        Training
                                                                                         wages

 Literature looking at impacts of OJT on productivity and wages separately; also Internal Rate of Return

                                                                    Sector
                                                                   dummies.
                                                                   Proportion of       1%
                                                                   male               increase in
                                                                   employees,         the
                                                                   proportion in      proportion     YES, Control
                                                                   occupation,        of workers     for
                                                                   qualification,     trained in     unobserved
                                                                   tenure,            an industry    heterogenei
                                Mean
                                                                   proportion in      is             ty and the
                               change in
 (Dearden,                                                         small firm,        associated     potential
                 United        ln(Sales per
 L., Reed, H.,                                                     average log        with an        endogeneity
                 Kindom//      worker)         Share of trained
 & Van                                                             capital-labor      increase in    of training
                 Panel data    Mean            workers
 Reenen, J.                                                        ratio, avg log     value          using a
                 1983-1996     change in
 (2006))                                                           real value         added per      variety of
                               ln(Average
                                                                   added per          worker of      methods
                               Wage)
                                                                   worker, avg log    about 0.6%     including
                                                                   gross output per   and an         GMM
                                                                   worker, avg log    increase in    system
                                                                   hourly wages,      wages of       estimation.
                                                                   avg hours          about
                                                                   worked, avg        0.3%.
                                                                   R&D spend as a
                                                                   proportion of
                                                                   output
                                                                                      Effective
                                                                                                     YES, Control
                                                                                      labor input
                                                                                                     function
                                                                                      increases
                                                                                                     approach to
                                                                                      by 1.7% to
                                                                                                     estimate
                                                                                      3.2% in
                                                                                                     production
 (Konings, J.,                                                     Capital, type of   response to
                 UK// Firm                                                                           functions.
 &                                             Share of trained    worker,            an increase
                 level panel   Wages,                                                                Wage
 Vanormelin                                    workers at the      proportion of      of 10
                 dataset       productivity                                                          equations at
 gen, S.                                       firm                workers/trained    percentage
                 1997-2006                                                                           the firm
 (2015))                                                           workers.           points in
                                                                                                     level to infer
                                                                                      the fraction
                                                                                                     productivity
                                                                                      of workers
                                                                                                     and wage
                                                                                      who
                                                                                                     premiums of
                                                                                      receive
                                                                                                     training
                                                                                      training,


                                                        48
                                                                                        while the
                                                                                        average
                                                                                        wage
                                                                                        increases
                                                                                        by only 1%
                                                                                        to 1.7%

                                                                     Investment,
                                                                                        Statistically
                                                                     Change in
                                                                                        significant
                                                                     employment,
                                                 Trainees/Employ                        positive
                                                                     personnel
                                                 ees, Training                          effects on
                                                                     Policies,
                                                 Days/Employees                         productivit
                Enterprise                                           Corporate
                                                 , Training                             y are found
(Barret, A.,    surveys,        Proportionat                         Innovation,
                                                 Expenditure/Pay                        both for all
O’Connell,      Ireland//       e change in                          Corporate                          NO
                                                 roll, General                          training
J., (2001))     1993-           productivity                         Restructuring,
                                                 Training Days/                         and for
                1996/7                                               Labor Cost/
                                                 Employees,                             general
                                                                     Employees in
                                                 Specific Training                      training,
                                                                     1993, Number
                                                 Days/ Employees                        but not for
                                                                     of employees in
                                                                                        specific
                                                                     1993. Sector of
                                                                                        training.
                                                                     activity.
                                                                                                        Yes. First
                Portugal                                             Firms location,                    difference
                                                                                        On average
                (Ministry of                                         Sector of                          and
                                                                                        it is -7% for
                Employmen                                            activity, value                    instrumenta
                                Internal rate                                           firms not
                t)// panel of                    Training,           added, number                      l variables
(Almeida,                       of return (r).                                          providing
                1500 firms                       Training hours      of workers,                        (following
R., Carneiro,                                                                           training
                (with more                       above the           capital, average                   the
P. (2009))                                                                              and 24%
                than 100                         median (1,489 h)    workforce age,                     approach by
                                                                                        for those
                employees)                                           yearly number                      Blundell and
                                                                                        providing
                (1995-                                               of hires and                       Bond
                                                                                        training.
                1999)                                                fires,                             (2000)).

                                                                     Tenure,
                                                                     experience at
                                                                     start of job,
                                                                     AFQT,10 years
                                                                     of education,
                                                                                        60%
                                                                     married, part-                     YES: adjust
                US// NLSY       Gap                                                     opportunit
                                                                     time, union,                       for
                data set.       between log                                             y cost of
                                                                     dummies for                        heterogenei
(Frazis and     Harley          wage after       Hours of training                      training,
                                                                     initial                            ty in wage
Loewestein,     Frazis,         two years        on the current                         40% direct
                                                                     occupation in                      growth.
(2005))         Bureau of       and log          job                                    cost of
                                                                     the job, Black,                    Evidence of
                Labor           starting                                                training.
                                                                     Hispanic,                          heterogenei
                Statistics      wage                                                    IRR equal
                                                                     female, enrolled                   ty in returns
                                                                                        to 50%.
                                                                     in school,
                                                                     missing value
                                                                     indicators for
                                                                     AFQT, union,
                                                                     and part-time


                                                         49
               Sample of
               852 small                                                             Profit
                                                                 Variables
               businesses                                                            improveme
                                                                 covering
               in the Cape                    Treatment                              nts in the
(Anderson,                                                       business owner
               Town area                      groups receive                         range of      YES:
S., Chandy,                                                      background,
               of South       Firm profits    marketing or                           41-61         randomized
R., and Zia,                                                     business owner
               Africa                         finance business                       percent       control trial
B., (2016))                                                      exposure,
               through a                      training                               over the
                                                                 business
               randomized                                                            control
                                                                 establishment
               controlled                                                            group
               trial

Literature looking at impact of OJT on worker wages (or using wages as proxy for productivity)

                                                                 Educational
                                                                 attainment,
                                                                 gender, age,
                                                                 tenure,
                                                                 experience,
                                                                 marital status,
                                                                 occupation,
                                                                 union
                                                                 participation,
               Matched
                                                                 computer, bank
               employer-                      Dummy: having                                        Yes,
                                                                 account,            7.7% for
               employee                       received formal                                      Matching
(Almeida R.                                                      internet            Malaysia
               data for       Log hourly      on-the-job                                           Estimators
K. & de                                                          transaction,        and 4.5%
               Malaysia       wage            training since                                       Method
Faria, 2014)                                                     training at a       for
               (2002) and                     having joined                                        (Local Linear
                                                                 previous            Thailand
               Thailand                       the firm                                             Matching)
                                                                 employer, size,
               (2004)
                                                                 foreign capital,
                                                                 exports,
                                                                 education of the
                                                                 work force,
                                                                 education of the
                                                                 manager, new
                                                                 production
                                                                 technologies,
                                                                 industry, region
                                                                                     Organizatio
                                                                                     nal changes
                                                                                                   Industry
                                                                                     (80% Vs
                              Value added                                                          dummy
                                                                                     50% for
               Mexico//       per worker                                                           variables to
                                                                                     control
               Panel data     Log (value                                                           control for
Tan and                                                                              firms).
               from CIMO      added)                             Wages, set of                     industry
Lopez-                                        Participation in                       Adoption of
               program in     Log                                industry dummy                    effects.
Acevedo                                       CIMO                                   quality
               Mexico         (production                        variables,                        Indicator
(2005)                                                                               control
               (1991-         value –                                                              variable to
                                                                                     systems
               1993)          materials                                                            control for
                                                                                     (23%
                              cost)                                                                ec.
                                                                                     more).
                                                                                                   downtown
                                                                                     Increased
                                                                                     investment

                                                       50
                                                                                     in worker
                                                                                     training



                                                                  Employee           Positive
                                                                  development        and
                                                                                                     YES: Control
                                                                  training, vector   significant
                                                                                                     for selection
              US//                                                Z: years of        effect
                                                                                                     bias in
              Personnel       Wages, job      Training            education, years   on both
(Bartel,                                                                                             training
              records of a    performanc      received in 12      of company         wage
(1995))                                                                                              programs. 2
              large           e               months              service, source    growth and
                                                                                                     step
              company                                             of                 the change
                                                                                                     estimation
                                                                  hire and type of   in job
                                                                                                     method.
                                                                  occupation.        performanc
                                                                  Relative salary.   e scores
                                                                                                     Yes,
                                                                                                     Excluded
                                                                                                     instruments
                                                                  Age, marital                       (selection
              Worker                                              status,                            model):
              Level Data                                          nationality,                       having a
                                              Dummy: having                          20%-30%
(Chung,       for             Log hourly                          schooling,                         bank
                                              ever participated                      (for
2000)         Malaysia        wage                                dummies for                        account,
                                              in training                            women)
              (1976,                                              employers and                      level of
              1988)                                               unpaid family                      education in
                                                                  workers                            1976, and
                                                                                                     parent
                                                                                                     occupationa
                                                                                                     l status
                                                                                                     Yes,
                                                                                                     selection
                                                                                     Not
                                                                                                     equation
                                                                                     statistically
                                                                                                     with
                                                                                     different
              Worker                                                                                 instruments:
                                              Dummy: having       Gender,            from zero
              Level Data                                                                             father's
(Frazer,                      Log hourly      participated in     potential          for the
              for Ghana                                                                              education
2006)                         wage            an                  experience,        whole
              (1991-                                                                                 and
                                              apprenticeship      schooling          sample but
              1999)                                                                                  occupation,
                                                                                     17% for
                                                                                                     as well as
                                                                                     self-
                                                                                                     total
                                                                                     employed
                                                                                                     household
                                                                                                     assets.
              Different       Wage                                                   Returns to
              datasets        returns,                                               training are
              from            internal                                               higher if it    Partially.
              different IEs   employabilit                        Worker             is              Some
                                              Training,
Hansson, B.   (Switzerlan     y and job-                          characteristics    employer-       studies do
                                              Employer-
(2009)        d, EU, UK,      security.                           (age, education,   financed.       control for
                                              financed training
              USA,            External:                           gender),           Returns to      endogeneity
              Netherland      labour                                                 training do     .
              s, Italy,       participation                                          not vary
              France,         rates,                                                 with age,

                                                      51
                            unemploym                                           education
                            ent.                                                or gender,
                                                                                but tend to
                                                                                be
                                                                                unequally
                                                                                distributed
                                                                                among
                                                                                firm.
              Employer                                                          Positive
                                                             Intercept,
              Opportunit                                                        and
                                                             education,
              y Pilot                                                           statistically
                                                             gender, union,                     Partially: set
Loewenstei    Project                                                           significant
                            Log (wage)                       temporary or                       of individual
n and         (EOPP)                      On-the-job                            impact of
                            after two                        seasonal                           and job
Spletzer      survey                      training                              training on
                            years                            employment,                        characteristi
(1999)         and the                                                          wages.
                                                             firm size,                         cs.
              National                                                          General
                                                              industry, and
              Longitudina                                                       nature of
                                                             oc
              l Su                                                              OJT.
                                                             Age, ethnicity,
                                                             experience,
                                                             gender,
                                                             occupation,
                                                             schooling,
                                                             tenure, union
                                                             participation
              Matched                                        and familiar       2.3% for
                                                                                                Yes,
              employer-                   Dummy: having      relations within   Kenya and
                                                                                                Matching
              employee                    participated in    the owners of      not
(Rosholm et                 Log monthly                                                         Estimators
              data for                    training in the    the firm,          statistically
al., 2007))                 wage                                                                Method
              Kenya and                   previous 12        ownership,         different
                                                                                                (Local Linear
              Zambia                      months             industry,          from zero
                                                                                                Matching)
              (1995)                                         location, size,    for Zambia
                                                             financial
                                                             situation, skill
                                                             demand,
                                                             turnover,
                                                             unionization,
                                                             training annual
                                                             expenses
                                                                                Cognitive
                                                                                skills have
                                                                                powerful
                                                             Gender,            effects on      Alternative
              Data on                     Years of           potential          individual      estimation
                            Log annual
Hanushek &    school                      schooling,         experience,        earnings,       methods,
                            earnings,
Woessmann     attainment                  quality of         living in rural    on the          and
                            economic
, (2008)      across                      schooling.         areas, test        distribution    samples.
                            growth
              countries                   Cognitive skills   score,             of income,      control
                                                             openness.          and on          variables.
                                                                                economic
                                                                                growth.
                                                                                The current


                                                   52
                                                                                     situation in
                                                                                     developing
                                                                                     countries is
                                                                                     much
                                                                                     worse than
                                                                                     generally
                                                                                     pictured on
                                                                                     the basis
                                                                                     just of
                                                                                     school
                                                                                     enrollment
                                                                                     and
                                                                                     attainment
                                                                                     as it
                                                                                     doesn’t
                                                                                     factor in
                                                                                     schooling
                                                                                     quality.


Literature looking at gains in future employer using various methods including MNC spillovers


                                                                 Worker’s
                                                                 identification
                                                                 code,4 annual
                                                                 real wages in
                                                                 reais,5 job
                                                                 tenure in
                                                                 months, type of
                                                                 job separation,
                                                                 age, educational
                                                                                     Positive
                                                                 attainment,
                Matched                                                              multination
                              Log            Multinational       occupational
                establishme                                                          al wage        Control for
(Poole, J. P.                 individual     spillovers though   classification,
                nt-worker                                                            spillovers     omitted
(2013))                       annual         skilled worker      the tax number
                database                                                             through        variables.
                              wages          mobility.           of the worker’s
                from Brazil                                                          worker
                                                                 establishment,
                                                                                     mobility
                                                                 and the
                                                                 industrial
                                                                 classification of
                                                                 the worker’s
                                                                 establishment.
                                                                 Dummy worker
                                                                 works at a
                                                                 foreign-owned
                                                                 establishment.
                                                                                     Firms
                Ghana//                                          Years of
                                                                                     which are
Gorg and        Fim-level                    Training/           schooling, set of                  Partially:
                                                                                     run by
Strobl          data from     TFP            experience in       sector and time                    GLS-AR(1)
                                                                                     owners
(2005)          manufactur                   foreign firm        dummy                              estimator
                                                                                     that
                ing firms                                        variables
                                                                                     worked for

                                                      53
                                                                                   multination
                                                                                   als, same
                                                                                   industry
                                                                                   prior to
                                                                                   opening up
                                                                                   their own
                                                                                   firm have
                                                                                   higher
                                                                                   productivit
                                                                                   y growth
                                                                                   than other
                                                                                   domestic
                                                                                   firms.
                                                                Real wage,
                                                                Tenure,
                                                                Experience,
                                                                Age, Years of                      YES,
                                                                schooling, Plant                   Controlling
                                                                                   MNE
                                                                size, Labor                        for
               Norway//                                                            experience
                                                                productivity,                      differences
               Annual                                                              increases
(Balsvik, R.                 Worker’s                           Skill share,                       in
               Norwegian                    MNE experience                         productivit
(2011))                      productivity                       Female share,                      unobservabl
               statistics                                                          y by 20%.
                                                                Worker/plant                       e worker
               1990-2000                                                           Positive
                                                                observations.                      and plant
                                                                                   correlation.
                                                                Year and                           characteristi
                                                                industry                           cs
                                                                dummies: Plant,
                                                                worker
                                                                characteristics.
                                                                                   Total
                                                                                   output gain
                                                                                   from SPs is
                                                                Age, gender,       0.11% per
                                                                education, skill   year. At
               Employer-
                                                                group,             least two-
               employee
                                                                experience,        thirds
(Stoyanov      data from
                             Output and                         worker coming      – is            Yes, use of
and            Danish                       Workers from
                             worker                             from productive    retained by     instrumenta
Zubanov,       manufactur                   growing firms
                             wage                               firm, human        the hiring      l variables
(2012))        ing for the
                                                                capital            firms,
               period
                                                                estimated,         whereas
               1995-2007
                                                                number of job      the SPs
                                                                transitions.       themselves
                                                                                   receive a
                                                                                   trivial 6% at
                                                                                   most
               EU// Panel                                       Set of dummy       Both            YES: control
                                            Training
               data from     Forms of                           variables:         current and     for
(Booth and                                  incidence, 1 if
               the           output and                         gender, age        future firm     unobserved
Bryan                                       the individual
               European      worker                             group, type of     benefit,        heterogenei
(2005))                                     started training,
               Community     wages                              contract, part-    with the        ty; Control
                                            0 otherwise
               Household                                        time, full time,   future firm     for industry,


                                                     54
               Panel,                                          education level,   benefiting      occupation,
               1994-1999                                       private/ public    more than       firm-size.
                                                               sector worker      the current     Uses
                                                                                  firm            random
                                                                                                  effects
                                                                                                  probit
                                                                                                  model.


Literature connecting OJT to firm management and technology adoption


                                                                                                  YES, RCT.
                                                                                                  Instrumenta
                                                                                                  l variables:
(Bloom, N.,
                              Productivity                                                        instrument
Eifert, B.,                                                    Male family        TFP: 11%;
                              - Quality (log                                                      the
Mahajan,       India//                                         members, post      Profits:
                              QDI),                                                               managemen
A.,            Experiment                      Management,     treatment, plant   330.000
                              inventory                                                           t practice
McKenzie,      al data, RCT                    Intervention.   manager            annually.
                              (log tons),                                                         score with
D., &          large firms                                     related, plant     Statistically
                              output (log                                                         log(1+weeks
Roberts, J.                                                    manager tenure     significant.
                              picks).                                                             since the
(2013))
                                                                                                  implementa
                                                                                                  tion phase
                                                                                                  began)
                                                                                  Lack of
                                                                                  adoption is
                                                                                  a
                                                                                  misalignme
                                                                                  nt of
                                                                                  incentives
                                                                                  within
                                                                                  firms:
                                                                                  Fearing
                                                                Output/month,
                                                                                  reductions
                                                               employment,
(Atkin, D.,                                                                       in their
                                                               employment
Chaudhry,                                                                         effective
                                                               (cutters)
A., Chaudry,                                                                      wage,
               Pakistan/                                       Rs/Ball, size,
S.,                           Technology       A new cutting                      employees
               Jan-Apr                                         promotional,                       Yes, RCT
Khandelwal,                   adoption         technique                          resist
               2012, (RCT)                                     age of firm, CEO
A. K., &                                                                          adoption
                                                               experience,
Verhoogen,                                                                        and
                                                               cutter
E. (2015))                                                                        misinform
                                                               experience,
                                                                                  owners.
                                                               cutter tenure.
                                                                                  Introducing
                                                                                  incentives
                                                                                  positive
                                                                                  effect on
                                                                                  adoption.
                                                                                  The results
                                                                                  are
                                                                                  supportive
                                                                                  of the

                                                       55
                                                                                     hypothesis
                                                                                     that
                                                                                     misalignme
                                                                                     nt of
                                                                                     incentives
                                                                                     within
                                                                                     firms is an
                                                                                     important
                                                                                     barrier to
                                                                                     technology
                                                                                     adoption.
                                                                                                   Yes,
                 Portugal//
                                                                                     One           structural
                 Firm-level
                                                                                     manageme      productivity
                 balance
                                                                                     nt layer,     estimation.
                 sheet data                                      Value added,
                                                                                     quantity      Instrumenta
                 set, and a                                      hours, and wage
(Caliendo,                                                                           based         l variables
                 firm-                                           Quantity,
L., Mion, G.,                                                                        productivit   for
                 product-                                        revenue,
Opromolla,                     Log revenue    Number of                              y increases   endogenous
                 level data                                      demand shocks
L. D., &                       labor          management                             by about      variables,
                 set                                             and markups at
Rossi-                         productivity   layers                                 4%, while     methodolog
                 containing                                      time t-1; capital
Hansberg, E.                                                                         revenue-      y of
                 information                                     at time t; and
(2015))                                                                              based         Wooldridge
                 on the                                          productivity at
                                                                                     productivit   (2009) to
                 production                                      time t – 2.
                                                                                     y drops by    deal with
                 of
                                                                                     more than     the
                 manufactur
                                                                                     4%.           endogeneity
                 ed goods.
                                                                                                   in input use.


Literature on evolution of curriculum in ALMPs


                                                                                     Net impact
                                                                                     evaluations
                                                                                     greater in
                                                                 Exogenous
                                                                                     OECD
                                                                 variables:
                                                                                     countries
                                                                 training type,
                                                                                     followed by
                                                                 specific
                                                                                     ECA and
                                                                 characteristics
                 90                                                                  LAC. In-
                               Probability                       of the program,                   Partially.
                 countries//                                                         classroom
(Fares, J. , &                 of positive                       economic/workf                    Some
                 set of 345                   Type of training                       and
Puerto, O.                     labor                             orce and                          studies do
                 studies of                   program                                workplace
(2009))                        market                            institutional                     control for
                 training                                                            training
                               effect                            country context,                  endogeneity
                 programs                                                            combined
                                                                 characteristics
                                                                                     with other
                                                                 of the labor
                                                                                     services
                                                                 supply. Dummy
                                                                                     increases
                                                                 variables for
                                                                                     probability
                                                                 control groups.
                                                                                     of positive
                                                                                     labor
                                                                                     market

                                                      56
     outcomes,
     compared
     to in-
     classroom
     training up
     to 20%.




57
Annex 2: Survey instrument to measure quality of management in a firm
Source: Bloom, N., and J. Van Reenen. (2007) “Measuring and Explaining Management Practices Across
Firms and Countries,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 122(4), 1341-1408.


 The Management Practice Dimensions - Categories Score from 1–5
 Categories                  Score from 1-5 based on:

 1) Introduction of modern   What aspects of manufacturing have been formally introduced, including
 manufacturing techniques     just-in-time delivery from suppliers, autonomation, flexible manpower,
                              support systems, attitudes, and behavior?
 2) Rationale for            Were modern manufacturing techniques adopted just because others were
 introduction of              using them, or are they linked to meeting business objectives like
 modern manufacturing         reducing costs and improving quality?
 techniques
 3) Process problem          Are process improvements made only when problems arise, or are they
 documentation                 actively sought out for continuous improvement as part of a normal
                               business process?
 4) Performance tracking     Is tracking ad hoc and incomplete, or is performance continually tracked
                               and communicated to all staff?
 5) Performance review       Is performance reviewed infrequently and only on a success/failure scale,
                               or is performance reviewed continually with an expectation of
                               continuous improvement?
 6) Performance dialogue     In review/performance conversations, to what extent is the purpose, data,
                               agenda, and follow-up steps (like coaching) clear to all parties?
 7) Consequence              To what extent does failure to achieve agreed objectives carry
 management                   consequences, which can include retraining or reassignment to other
                              jobs?
 8) Target balance           Are the goals exclusively financial, or is there a balance of financial and
                              nonfinancial targets?
 9) Target interconnection   Are goals based on accounting value, or are they based on shareholder
                              value in a way that works through business units and ultimately is
                              connected to individual performance expectations?
 10) Target time horizon     Does top management focus mainly on the short term, or does it visualize
                              short-term targets as a “staircase” toward the main focus on long-term
                              goals?
 11) Targets                 Are goals too easy to achieve, especially for some “sacred cows” areas of
                              the firm, or are goals demanding but attainable for all parts of the firm?
 12) Performance clarity     Are performance measures ill-defined, poorly understood, and private, or
                              are they well-defined, clearly communicated, and made public?
 13) Managing human          To what extent are senior managers evaluated and held accountable for
 capital                      attracting, retaining, and developing talent throughout the
                              organization?
 14) Rewarding high          To what extent are people in the firm rewarded equally irrespective of
 performance                  performance level, or are rewards related to performance and effort?


                                                  58
15) Removing poor      Are poor performers rarely removed, or are they retrained and/or moved
performers              into different roles or out of the company as soon as the weakness is
                        identified?
16) Promoting high     Are people promoted mainly on the basis of tenure, or does the firm
performers              actively identify, develop, and promote its top performers?
17) Attracting human   Do competitors offer stronger reasons for talented people to join their
capital                 companies, or does a fi rm provide a wide range of reasons to
                        encourage talented people to join?
18) Retaining human    Does the firm do relatively little to retain top talent or do whatever it
capital                 takes to retain top talent when they look likely to leave?




                                            59
