                                                           WPS8229


Policy Research Working Paper                             8229




   What Are the Effects of Expanding a Social
    Pension Program on Extreme Poverty
              and Labor Supply?
   Evidence from Mexico’s Pension Program for the Elderly

                           Authors Clemente Avila-Parra
                            David Escamilla-Guerrero




Social Protection and Labor Global Practice Group
October 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 8229


  Abstract
  In 2013, Mexico’s Social Pension Program for the Elderly                           gap, and the extreme poverty severity indexes of the elderly
  was expanded by changing its eligibility threshold from                            population. These effects on extreme poverty are gener-
  age 70 to age 65. Using pooled cross-sectional data from                           alizable to all individuals of the treated household. The
  Mexico’s National Household Income and Expenditure                                 results suggest that the expansion of the Social Pension
  Survey, the exogenous variation around eligibility age was                         Program for the Elderly did not have short-term effects
  exploited to uncover the causal effects of this expansion                          on the labor force participation of the elderly. Accord-
  on extreme poverty and labor supply of the newly eligible                          ingly, the analysis does not find that the program reduced
  population, and to explore potential transmission mecha-                           labor income. In contrast with other impact evaluations
  nisms. Applying quasi-experimental methods, results show                           of similar programs, the analysis does not find that the
  that the expansion of Mexico’s Social Pension Program for                          expansion of Mexico’s program had a crowding out effect
  the Elderly not only reduced the probability of the elderly                        on domestic or international private transfers to the elderly.
  being extreme poor, but it also reduced the extreme poverty




  This paper is a product of the Social Protection and Labor Global Practice Group. It is part of a larger effort by the World
  Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions around the world.
  Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The authors may be contacted
  at cavilaparra@worldbank.org and D.Escamilla-Guerrero@lse.ac.uk.




          The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
          issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
          names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
          of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
          its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                        Produced by the Research Support Team
 What Are the Effects of Expanding a Social Pension Program
        on Extreme Poverty and Labor Supply? Evidence from
                      Mexico’s Pension Program for the Elderly


                                              Clemente Avila-Parra†
                                                        The World Bank
                                          David Escamilla-Guerrero‡
                                                London School of Economics




Keywords: Non-contributory pensions, poverty, labor supply, elderly
(JEL I38, J2, O15)




   * We are grateful to Margaret Grosh for her guidance in our research and analytical approach. We are thankful to William Wiseman,

Concha Steta, and Francesca Lamanna for their helpful comments on early discussions of this paper, and for their encouragement and
support. We are particularly grateful to Pablo Gottret, Rafael Rofman, Gonzalo Reyes, Carolina Romero, and Ignacio Apella for their
thoughtful comments and suggestions for improvements. The ﬁndings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are
entirely those of the authors. They do not necessarily reﬂect the views of The World Bank, its Board of Executive Directors, or the
governments they represent. The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work.
   † Social Protection and Jobs Global Practice, Av. Insurgentes Sur 1605 - Floor 24, Mexico City, 03900. (Tel: +52(55)54804274. e-mail:

cavilaparra@worldbank.org).
   ‡ Economic History Department, Houghton Street, London, WC2A 2AE. (Tel:                 +44(0)7477456964.      e-mail: D.Escamilla-
Guerrero@lse.ac.uk).
In this paper, we estimate the impact of the expansion of an Old-Age Social Pension Program –Pen-
sion Program for the Elderly or Programa Pension para Adultos Mayores (PAM)– on extreme poverty
and labor supply of the elderly in Mexico, and explore potential underlying transmission mechanisms.

The expansion of PAM in 2013 in Mexico was a major policy decision. By 2014, PAM had become the
second largest cash transfer program in Mexico, just below the well-known Conditional Cash Transfer
Program PROSPERA (previously known as PROGRESA and as Oportunidades). Between 2012 and
2014, PAM almost doubled its budget reaching 36.5 billion pesos1 in 2014 which represented 0.21%
of the Gross Domestic Product (GDP) of that year and reached 5.5 million beneﬁciaries, 60% of the
population of 65 years of age or older (CONEVAL, 2010-2014).

PAM’s objective is to increase social security coverage and to ensure a basic income for the elderly
who are poor or vulnerable and who do not receive any contributory pension or retirement income.
While the majority of development economics literature that studies cash transfers shows that this
type of program, and social pension programs in particular, have attributable effects on a wide range
of welfare indicators, one cannot take these effects for granted. There are many factors that could be
preventing programs from achieving their welfare improvement objectives such as reducing old-age
poverty. The success of a social program depends greatly on both its design and its implementation.
Some of the reasons why social pension programs may not achieve the objective of reducing extreme
poverty are: inadequacy of beneﬁt level; deﬁcient targeting, that is, programs being too narrowly
targeted or programs not reaching the poorest old age individuals; reduction in labor income through
disincentives to work; and crowd out effects on other important sources of income such as private
transfers from other households. Understanding the effects of expanding Mexico’s PAM on extreme
poverty and labor supply has important policy implications.

In Mexico, as in many other countries in Latin America and the Caribbean, most of the elderly2 do
not qualify for a contributory pension (Rofman, Apella and Vezza, 2015). This leaves the elderly
population at risk of old-age poverty, with extremely limited choices (if any) but to keep working
and/or to depend heavily on public and private transfers including social programs and aid from
informal safety nets such as family members.

Data from the Socioeconomic Conditions Module of the Household Income and Expenditure National
Survey (ENIGH-MCS) of 2012 and 2014, show that the elderly’s income was more likely to fall below
the ofﬁcial extreme poverty line than the non-elderly’s income in Mexico. In 2012 and 2014, we
estimate that the extreme poverty headcount index was about one percentage point higher for the
elderly than for the non-elderly population and statistically different from zero. However, when
we subtract PAM income from current per capita income, this difference is substantially higher: in
2012, the extreme poverty headcount index was about 8 percentage points higher for the elderly
than for the non-elderly, and in 2014 it was 9 percentage points higher. While we acknowledge that
in the absence of PAM, individuals are likely to modify their behavior, these differences give us
a measure of the relative importance of social pensions as a source of income for the elderly in Mexico.

PAM in Mexico is relevant not only because the population ages 65 years or older has dramatically
increased in the last two decades, but also because it will continue to increase in such a way in the
1 In   2014, the average exchange rate was roughly 14 pesos per U.S. dollar.
2 For   the purpose of this study, we deﬁne elderly as any person of 65 years of age or older.


                                                                      2
following years. Data from Mexico’s National Population Council (CONAPO, for its acronym in
Spanish) show that the population ages 65 years or older was 3.7 million in 1990 and it doubled
by 2012. Projections from CONAPO show that the population ages 65 years or older will nearly
double again by 2030 reaching almost 14 million people, 10.3% of the total projected population.
Given that most of the adults that will reach 65 years of age in the coming years will not qualify for a
contributory pension, PAM will face increased demand. Also, given the limited public resources,
policy makers might be interested in knowing whether PAM is achieving its objective of reducing
old age poverty or not and may want to better understand the effects of PAM on other important
factors such as labor supply of the elderly.

Using the ENIGH-MCS of 2010, 2012 and 2014, we exploit the fact that the program’s main eligibility
feature is age. When PAM started in 2007, it only beneﬁted adults of 70 years of age or older.
However, in 2013 the program expanded its target population allowing the enrollment of adults
from 65 years of age or older. We compare the average changes in outcomes for the group that
became eligible with the expansion of the eligibility threshold with the group that is immediately
below that age, before and after the intervention. While these two groups of individuals are not
radically different from each other, we acknowledge that it would be inadequate to assume that
their pre-treatment characteristics are identical at that life stage. Therefore, we used a regression
discontinuity approach combined with a difference-in-differences strategy to improve statistical
precision of the intention to treat effects. We also estimated the treatment on the treated effects using
an instrumental variable methodology (IV).

Additionally, we investigate the potential transmission channels of the effects of the expansion of
the social pensions program on extreme poverty and on labor supply, or lack thereof. Many of
the beneﬁciaries of Mexico’s social pension program are poor. Receiving this income shock, ceteris
paribus, reduces poverty. However, other things may not be equal. Consumer choice theory and the
labor-leisure standard model suggest that considering that leisure is a normal good and given that
the consumer has a ﬁnite amount of time and rational preferences in the relevant preference range,
an increase in income may cause an increase in leisure consumption and a decline of the amount of
labor supplied. Hence, if the wage (or labor income) per hour remains constant, a reduction in the
number of hours worked decreases total labor income. Therefore, whether the expansion of PAM
decreases labor income and labor supply of the old age population, or not, remains an empirical
question.

Moreover, we examine whether the expansion of the social pension program has a statistically
signiﬁcant effect on domestic private transfers from other households or on remittances. This can
partially explain the effects of the program on poverty reduction and labor supply.

This paper aims to uncover the short term causal effects of the expansion of PAM on extreme poverty
and labor supply of the elderly in Mexico. In Section I, we broadly describe the evolution and trends
of pension systems with an emphasis on Mexico. Section II presents the focused literature review on
the effects of social pension programs on consumption, poverty, labor supply, and private transfers
from other households, among others. Section III describes the Pension Program for the Elderly
over time and its expansion in 2013. In this section, we explain the characteristics of the data we
used and of the elderly population in general, and we discuss the empirical strategy implemented


                                                   3
to estimate the causal effects. In Section III we also present and interpret the estimated results and
the robustness checks performed using falsiﬁcation tests. We will show that the expansion of PAM
had a poverty reducing effect while it did not affect the labor supply of the elderly. We will also
show the effects of the expansion of the program on time spent in activities other than work, and the
crowding-out effects of the expansion of the program on private transfers from other households.
Section IV discusses the policy implications of the intervention, the agenda for future research, and
concludes.



                                        1. Background

In the last century, pension systems worldwide were mainly contributory plans that commonly have
a minimum eligibility requirement of hours or weeks worked. In many countries, these pension
schemes leave out people that either did not work or did not work “enough” in formal jobs.

Those contributory pension systems had “pay-as-you-go” models, whereby active workers paid
contributions into the social security system fund and some of those resources were used to pay
pensioners then. In many countries, the ﬁscal sustainability of such systems became questionable
in the 1980s and 1990s due to demographic changes (i.e. increased life expectancy and lower ratio
of people working relative to retirees). As a result, governments undertook wide-ranging reforms
to improve the ﬁscal sustainability of their pension schemes mostly changing from pay-as-you-go
models to deﬁned contribution pension systems. However, at that time, issues such as pension
coverage were often left aside in said reforms (Rofman, Apella, and Vezza, 2015).

Mexico also undertook major reforms to improve the ﬁscal sustainability of its contributory pension
system at the end of the twentieth and beginning of the twenty-ﬁrst centuries. The ﬁrst major
reform was approved in 1995 for the Mexican Social Security Institute (IMSS, for its acronym in
Spanish) and became effective in July 1997. The main change in this reform was that the IMSS
pension program changed from a pay-as-you-go deﬁned beneﬁt program to a fully funded deﬁned
contribution program with individual accounts. The second major reform was approved in 2007
for the Institute for Security and Social Services for State Workers (ISSSTE), and this reform was
similar to the one approved for IMSS in 1995. These reforms implemented by the two major social
security institutions in Mexico improved the ﬁscal sustainability of the pension system (Villagomez
and Dario-Ramirez, 2015).

However, the contributory pension coverage rate in Mexico remained low in absolute and relative
terms (Rofman, Apella and Vezza, 2015). In absolute terms, less than 40% of the economically active
population contribute to the pension system and even lower than the percentage of contributors is the
percentage of people of 65 years of age or older who receive a contributory pension. In relative terms,
Rofman, Apella and Vezza (2015) shows that these rates in Mexico have been below the regional
average since the 1990s and the contributory coverage rate in Mexico is low relative to conventional
comparison countries in the region such as Argentina, Brazil, and Chile. This rate has remained
below 40% more than two decades later and the trend does not suggest that a signiﬁcant change is
taking place.



                                                  4
Additionally, contributory pension coverage is usually biased towards the high-income old-age
population (Rofman, Apella, and Vezza, 2015). This is because coverage under the contributory
scheme is based on formal work history. Since formal jobs get higher average labor income than
informal jobs, the share of the elderly getting beneﬁts from contributory pensions is greater in higher
deciles of the income distribution.

While the contributory pension coverage of the elderly in Mexico is biased towards the high-income
population, even for the top deciles the contributory coverage rate is under 60%. The higher the
income decile, the higher the contributory pension coverage rate of the elderly, consistently for 2010,
2012 and 2014. Figure 1 shows the pensions coverage rate by income deciles for 2010, 2012 and 2014.

In the beginning of the twenty-ﬁrst century, the problem of low or incomplete coverage of the pension
systems in many countries gained attention from policy makers spurring the implementation of
noncontributory pension schemes to close the coverage gap. Social pensions rapidly became the most
politically popular choice and the preferred instrument to do so. While social pensions have existed
for decades, it was not until recently that they gained momentum (Rofman, Apella, and Vezza, 2015).
In addition to addressing the coverage gap, governments may want to implement social pension
programs for different reasons that are not mutually exclusive with the coverage gap concern. Other
reasons for the implementation of social pension programs include: 1. To address old age poverty;
2. To provide social protection to a population who may face higher vulnerability to sickness and
disability; and, 3. To comply with the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and International
Labor Organization Conventions, among others (Rofman, Apella and Vezza, 2015; Robalino and
Holzmann, 2009).


                   Figure 1: Pensions Coverage Rate in Mexico by Income Decile (2010 - 2014)




Source: Based on authors’ calculations with the ENIGH-MCS 2010, 2012, and 2014.




                                                               5
To close the coverage gap of the pension system, to improve the life conditions of the elderly, and to
prevent old-age poverty, in 2007, the Federal Government of Mexico through the Ministry of Social
Development (SEDESOL) established a non-contributory pension program called Pension Program
for the Elderly (PAM), previously known as 70 y mas targeting adults of 70 years of age or older. This
program arose during the 2007 budget negotiations in Congress (Villagomez and Dario-Ramirez,
2015) and in its ﬁrst year of operation it executed $6 billion pesos, which represented 0.05% of GDP,
and had 1.03 million beneﬁciaries that represented 16.2% of the 65 years of age or older population.
Since then, PAM has been growing to date in terms of nominal executed budget and number of
beneﬁciaries, becoming a ﬂagship program of social protection policy in Mexico.

As shown in Figure 1, PAM has helped to close the pension coverage gap for the population in all
income deciles, but has done so most notably in the lower income deciles. While signiﬁcant progress
has been made in closing the coverage gap, especially with the expansion of the program in 2013, the
coverage gap remains substantial. This is particularly worrisome for the population at the bottom
of the income distribution. As we will see, some state governments have implemented their own
social pension programs, but many of these programs are very limited in the number of beneﬁciaries
and/or size of the beneﬁt offered with perhaps the only exceptions being the programs in Mexico
City and in the state of Chiapas.

While PAM has existed since 2007, it was not the ﬁrst non-contributory pension program in Mexico.
There are three major programs that may have inﬂuenced the original design and establishment of
PAM: the federal program Care for the Elderly in Rural Areas (which ended in 2006); the PROSPERA
Elderly Component, added in 2006; and the Nutritional Pension Program for the Elderly imple-
mented by the Government of Mexico City since 2001. A brief description of these programs follows.

The program Care for the Elderly in Rural Areas (Programa de Atención a Adultos Mayores en
Zonas Rurales) is the predecessor of 70 y mas (PAM). Care for the Elderly in Rural Areas started
in September 2003 as part of the National Accord for the Countryside (Acuerdo Nacional para el
Campo). This program started giving $700 pesos per person per month (about 25% of the monthly
current per capita income of that year) in the last three months of 2003. In 2004, it was adjusted to
$2,100 pesos annually (75% of one month’s current per capita income of 2004) paid out in at least
three payments. Care for the Elderly targeted people 60 years old or older who suffered from food
poverty and who lived in highly or very highly marginalized rural villages. The year before PAM
was launched (2006), the program Care for the Elderly in Rural Areas had a budget of $300 million
pesos or less than 0.01% of GDP and a little over 127,000 beneﬁciaries that represented 2.1% of the
population aged 65 years old or older, this was signiﬁcantly less in terms of budget and number
of beneﬁciaries than PAM had even during PAM’s ﬁrst year of operation (CONEVAL, 2004-2015;
Sagarnaga, 2008).

In 2006, PROSPERA incorporated a new beneﬁt called the Elderly Component. To be eligible for this
component, PROSPERA beneﬁciary households must have at least one member who is 70 years old
or older. In 2006, the beneﬁt consisted of a grant in the amount of $250 pesos per elderly person
per month (close to 8% of the monthly current per capita income of 2006). PROSPERA Elderly
Component still operates, however, since PAM was established, PROSPERA has been migrating
people that receive this component to PAM. PROSPERA Elderly Component is considered a remedial


                                                  6
measure that mainly operates in localities not currently reached by PAM.3

The Nutritional Pension Program for the Elderly in Mexico City was launched in 2001 to serve adults
70 years of age or older by providing $600 pesos per month (approximately 22% of the current per
capita income of that year). The beneﬁt consists of a monthly stipend, and access to prescription
medicines free of charge. In its ﬁrst year of operation, the program’s coverage was 250,000 people
that represented 45% of the population 65 years old or older of Mexico City and its budget was $1.21
billion pesos that represented 0.27% of Mexico City Government’s total expenditure (IAAMDF, 2015).
Since 2001, the beneﬁciaries have been increasing and the amount given has been annually adjusted.
In 2008, the eligibility criteria were modiﬁed to include in the program people of 68 years of age or
older, down from the original eligibility age of 70. In 2016 the program beneﬁted 520,000 people,
62.5% of Mexico City’s population aged 65 years old or older (IAAMDF, 2016).4 These beneﬁciaries
received a stipend of $1,075 pesos per month equivalent to 20% of Mexico City’s average per capita
income of 2014 (IAAMDF, 2016).

Since 2010, other state governments have implemented non-contributory pension programs to secure
the well-being of their elderly population. Appendix A summarizes the main state-level programs
and their characteristics.

                    2. Literature Review on Social Pension Programs

Previous research has shown that non-contributory pension programs have positive effects on con-
sumption and result in poverty reduction. Using information from a survey collected by Mexico’s
National Institute of Public Health to evaluate PAM (previously known as 70 y mas), Galiani, Gertler
and Bando (2016), and Galiani and Gertler (2009) ﬁnd that the 70 y mas program had a positive effect
on consumption. These studies also ﬁnd that 70 y mas had a positive effect on mental health of rural
adults between 70 and 74 years of age.

Barrientos (2006) points out that “subtracting pension income of old age social pension programs
from beneﬁciary households would raise indigence levels roughly by one sixth in Argentina, seven
times in Chile, and by one third in Brazil.” Bertranou, Ginneken, and Solorio (2002) argues that
non-contributory pensions in Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Costa Rica, and Uruguay have largely been
an effective tool in poverty and indigence reduction. Barrientos (2006), and Bertranou, Ginneken,
and Solorio (2002) state that non-contributory pension programs generally have a positive impact
diminishing poverty. Other studies such as Asher (2009) and Kidd and Whitehouse (2009) afﬁrm that
social pension programs have been effective in reducing poverty among the elderly.



3 PAM  and PROSPERA request a proof of life as many programs targeted to the elderly population usually do. One of the main differences
  between these two programs though, is the way that the proof of life is certiﬁed. The proof of life for PAM beneﬁciaries is obtained
  through attendance to a designated place by the program and certiﬁed by program staff, while for PROSPERA the proof of life is certiﬁed
  by health professionals when the elderly attend their regular health check-ups (once per semester), which are a requirement to receive
  the PROSPERA elderly component beneﬁt. This difference raises questions with relevant public policy implications such as whether
  checking the proof of life at a health clinic by nurses or doctors could have a signiﬁcant positive effect on health outcomes vis-à-vis
  checking the proof of life in a place different than a health clinic and by program staff without health professional credentials. While it is
  undeniably worth looking for answers to such questions, these questions cannot be answered with the publicly available data and are not
 within the scope of this study.
4 The number of beneﬁciaries correspond to April 2016.




                                                                       7
Some of the above-mentioned studies and others have also focused on the effects of social pension
programs on labor supply. Galiani, Gertler and Bando (2016) ﬁnd that the proportion of treated
individuals doing paid work is reduced and most of these individuals switch to work in family
businesses. Using data from Mexico’s 2010 national census, Juarez and Pfutze (2015) ﬁnds that the
70 y mas pension program had a negative effect on labor force participation of male beneﬁciaries,
insigniﬁcant effects on female beneﬁciaries, and a negative effect on the same outcome variable for
poor young adolescents. This study captured the effect for adults that are 70 years old or older who
lived in villages with fewer than 30,000 inhabitants.

Other well-known studies also focused on labor supply, including intra-household effects. Using
cross sectional data, Bertrand, Mullainathan, and Miller (2003) ﬁnds that the South African social
pension program caused a reduction in the hours worked of prime-aged individuals living with an
elderly in extended families. In contrast, Ardington, Case, and Hosegood (2009) uses longitudinal
data and ﬁnds that the same South African social pension program has a small positive effect in the
employment of prime-aged adults mainly because these prime-aged adults are signiﬁcantly more
likely to be labor migrants. Edmonds (2006) ﬁnds that social pensions in South Africa increased
schooling attendance and reduced child labor.

Amuedo-Dorantes and Juarez (2015) ﬁnds that 70 y mas had crowding out effects on private transfers
from other households of rural beneﬁciaries, and concludes that the non-labor income of beneﬁciaries
increases but not as much as the amount of the social pension cash transfer.

In sum, the literature reviewed for social pension programs and numerous other studies on the
effects of cash transfer programs on poverty (e.g. Grosh et al, 2008; Fiszbein et al, 2009) suggest that
it is likely that the expansion of the federal social pension program PAM in Mexico has attributable
effects in reducing (old-age) poverty. Undoubtedly, social pensions can reduce poverty, although
whether they actually reduce it and by how much remains an empirical question. Our contribution
is answering the question of what are the effects of expanding PAM on extreme poverty and labor
supply of old age individuals of 66 to 69 years of age.



                      3. Effects of PAM on Poverty and Labor Supply

3.1 The Pension Program for the Elderly – PAM

The Pension Program for the Elderly (PAM) started in 2007 providing a cash transfer of $500 pesos
per month per beneﬁciary paid every two months,5 with the objective to improve the life conditions
of people 70 years old or older in rural villages. Since then, eligibility rules and other characteristics
of the program have changed over time. In the next paragraphs, we brieﬂy recount the evolution of
the program’s main characteristics and the interaction of PAM with other relevant social protection
programs.6 Appendix B also shows a summary of the changes to PAM over time.
5 The Operating Rules also mentioned that in the villages where accessibility is an issue or paying the cash transfer every two months has
  a very high cost, the delivery of the cash transfer could be done every four months. The beneﬁt of 500 pesos per month was 16% of the
  average monthly current per capita income of 2007.
6 The speciﬁcs on the changes in the program’s characteristics were obtained from the respective publication of the updated Program’s

  Rules of Operation in the Ofﬁcial Federal Gazette.


                                                                    8
In 2007 PAM was designed (only implicitly) for the elderly poor, using geographical targeting,
e.g. elderly in rural villages of up to 2,500 inhabitants, where contributory pensions are extremely
limited.7 In 2008, changes were made to indicate that while priority was still given to the rural
villages of up to 2,500 inhabitants, the program could extend its coverage to other villages of up
to 10,000 inhabitants and, if budget allowed, the program could expand to villages of up to 20,000
inhabitants prioritizing those villages with higher marginality. In 2009, the program expanded its
coverage to localities of up to 30,000 inhabitants. As we will see and as part of the important reform
of 2013, the program’s coverage was extended to the national level.

Regarding the deﬁnition of PAM’s target population, it was until 2012 that the program included
explicitly the exclusion of adults that received contributory pensions or retirement payments. Since
2014, the program modiﬁed its operating rules to allow people with a contributory pension to receive
the program if their contributory pension is equal to or less than $1,092 pesos per month. This
contributory pension threshold is equivalent to 31.5% of the average current per capita income of 2014.

From its initial implementation to date, the Operating Rules of PAM have clearly stated that the
program cannot be combined with the elderly’s Component of PROSPERA or any other federal
program “similar” to PAM. According to ENIGH 2014, only about 8.4% of PAM beneﬁciaries are
also members of a household that is a beneﬁciary of PROSPERA. However, even though there are
multiple state-level social pension programs that coexist with the federal social pension program
PAM, the Government of Mexico does not have an explicit policy on the eligibility of the elderly to
receive more than one social pension program from different government levels.8

The average PAM beneﬁt level from 2007 to 2014 was around 15% of the average monthly current
per capita income of 2014. From 2007 to 2012, the beneﬁt level of PAM was maintained at $500 pesos
per beneﬁciary per month. In 2013, the beneﬁt level was revised and increased to $525 pesos per
beneﬁciary per month, and in 2014, the beneﬁt changed to $580 pesos per beneﬁciary per month
which is the current beneﬁt level. In 2010, the program added a lump-sum payment of $1,000 pesos
to be paid to another beneﬁciary of the program chosen by each beneﬁciary as their representative
when they die.9

Finally, regarding the program’s objective, in 2008 the program included in its speciﬁc objectives to
support the personal development of the elderly and their incorporation to the family and community
life through actions of promotion and social participation. In 2011, the program included in its
objectives to ameliorate the deterioration of the elderly’s mental and physical health. It is worth
noting that it was only until 2015, that the program’s objective was changed to explicitly include that

7 In 2010, only 8.5% of the population 65 years old or older living in rural villages had a contributory pension, and less than 5% of elderly
 women did.
8 One of the main reasons why we argue this is the case, is that there is a lack of evidence about the most effective and efﬁcient policy

  choice for the interaction of federal and state level programs. Even though, the same could be argued for the interaction between PAM
  and the PROSPERA Elderly Component, the operation rules of both programs clearly establish that they cannot be combined. The lack
  of empirical evidence can partially be attributed to the limited data from federal and state-level governments on potential and actual
  beneﬁciaries. SEDESOL is currently developing the Integrated Social Information System (SIS), which may allow further research to
  soon be conducted in order to gauge what is the most effective and efﬁcient policy choice for different government level programs
  coordination.
9 Currently, the beneﬁt level is not indexed to inﬂation. Thus, it has decreased in real terms during periods when its nominal level has

  remained constant.


                                                                     9
PAM is a poverty targeted (or deprived-from-social-rights-targeted) program.


3.2 The Expansion of PAM

On December 1st, 2012 Enrique Peña Nieto took ofﬁce as President of Mexico and that very same
day he announced that he would aim to expand the social pension program and change its eligibility
criteria from 70 years old and older to 65 years old and older. On February 26th, 2013, the Operating
Rules of PAM reﬂected these changes. The coverage was expanded to the national level, by eliminat-
ing the village’s size in terms of inhabitants as a restriction, and it also expanded its eligibility age to
include adults from 65 years of age and older who did not receive a contributory pension. Thus,
the program became an intervention aiming to reduce the coverage gap of the contributory pension
system.

The expansion of PAM was remarkably fast. At the beginning of 2013, according to SEDESOL
registry of beneﬁciaries’ data there was virtually no one below 70 years old receiving PAM. Four
months after the new operating rules were published in the Federal Ofﬁcial Gazette, there were
already over half a million beneﬁciaries of ages under 70 and, before the end of 2013, there were
already over one million beneﬁciaries between 65 and 69 years old. This rapid expansion was
possible because the program was already operating in the 32 states of Mexico and serving 3 million
beneﬁciaries. The expansion was still very fast, but possible because the program already had a major
operational structure, institutional capacity, and the eligibility criteria at the time of the expansion
was easy to verify, among others factors. According to ENIGH, by 2014, about 1 out of 3 people of
65 to 69 years of age were already PAM beneﬁciaries and about 1 out of 4 program beneﬁciaries
were 65 to 69 years old.10 In 2014, the number of program beneﬁciaries between 65 and 69 years
of age had reached 1.5 million (SEDESOL, 2017), more than the whole population of each of the
states of Baja California Sur, Colima, Campeche, Nayarit, Tlaxcala, and Aguascalientes, among others.

In order to identify the effects of the expansion of PAM on extreme poverty and labor supply, the
testable hypotheses for our study are:

HYPOTHESIS 1: The expansion of PAM reduced extreme poverty for adults who became eligible after the
expansion of the program, that is the group between 66 and 69 years of age.

HYPOTHESIS 2: The expansion of PAM reduced the labor supply of adults who became eligible after the
expansion of the program, that is the group between 66 and 69 years of age.


3.3 The Data

The data used in this study to analyze the effects of the expansion of PAM on poverty and labor
supply come from the Socioeconomic Conditions Module of the Household Income and Expenditure
National Survey (ENIGH-MCS). The ENIGH-MCS has national, state, and urban-rural level repre-

10 The
     data from SEDESOL’s beneﬁciary registry differ moderately from the self-reported information of Mexico’s Household Income
 and Expenditure National Survey from the Instituto Nacional de Estadística y Geografía (INEGI). It is usually the case that people
 underreport their income and its sources in the National surveys. This is most likely where the difference between these two data
 sources is coming from. For instance, in ENIGH 2014 data there are 1.1 million self-reported PAM beneﬁciaries below 70 years old,
 while SEDESOL’s beneﬁciary registry reported for the same period 1.4 million beneﬁciaries.


                                                               10
sentativeness. It is collected every two years from August to November. We used ENIGH-MCS for
2010, 2012, and 2014 to construct a pooled cross-section dataset. The survey includes a wide variety
of socioeconomic variables at the household and individual level such as: sex, housing conditions,
years of education, marital status, income, hours worked in the previous week, indigenous language
spoken if any, and disability condition, among others. ENIGH-MCS data has been collected since
2008, allowing the estimation of time-trends for all its variables. The publicly available data from
ENIGH do not include the exact village size, although it includes a village size range.

The ENIGH-MCS also identiﬁes individuals receiving a cash transfer from PAM and other important
social programs that might impact poverty and labor supply, such as PROSPERA and PROCAMPO.
It also captures “other” non-contributory pension cash transfers received besides PAM. This is partic-
ularly important since some state level social pension programs, could complicate the identiﬁcation
of PAM’s effects. Studies that do not consider the existence of similar state-level non-contributory
pension programs could produce biased estimations. These state-level noncontributory programs
are usually not very large, except in a few cases. To avoid potentially biased estimations, and after
performing a quantitative and qualitative analysis we concluded that data from Chiapas and Mexico
City had to be excluded from this study.

The noncontributory pension programs in Mexico City and Chiapas started in 2001 and 2009, re-
spectively; they target the population in the treatment and/or control groups of our study; and both
programs are relatively large considering both budget size and number of beneﬁciaries. In 2014, both
programs had a budget of over 1 billion pesos and over 100,000 beneﬁciaries each.11

While in-kind social programs for the elderly could have similar consequences in the estimations,
in-kind social programs identiﬁed are relatively small in comparison to larger cash transfer programs.
Additionally, the information to identify when an in-kind transfer program comes from a social
program is not available.12


3.4 Characteristics of Mexico’s Elderly Population

PAM aims to improve life conditions of older adults that are 65 years old and older who do not
receive contributory pensions. In 2014, 64.6% of the elderly in Mexico reported that they had
never contributed to a social security institution. Out of the 35.4% of the elderly who reported to
have contributed to social security, they reported to have contributed 24.3 years, on average. Not
surprisingly, those who reported to have contributed to a social security institution had signiﬁcantly
more years of schooling than those who reported that they had not contributed with 7.7 and 3.1
years of schooling, respectively.

Only 28.8% of the elderly reported in 2014 that they were receiving a contributory pension or
retirement payment. However, 82.2% of the elderly have access to social security as deﬁned in the
multidimensional poverty indicator.13 This can be partially explained by the fact that by receiving

11 For the Government of Chiapas, the budget of its social pension program represented about 0.4% of GDP and beneﬁted 45.2% of the
   population 65 years old or older in 2014. For the Government of Mexico City, the budget of its social pension program represented 2.1
   percent of its GDP and beneﬁted 61.2% percent of the population 65 years old or older in the same year.
12 A detailed description of the methodology used to select what states to exclude is shown in Appendix C.
13 The ofﬁcial poverty measurement methodology identiﬁes the population with access to social security based on the following four




                                                                  11
PAM, beneﬁciaries are considered to have access to social security in the ofﬁcial poverty measurement
indicator.

In terms of income, the composition of the total current per capita income is different between the
total population and the 65 years old and older subgroup in the 2010-2014 period. While labor income
is the single most important source of income for both groups, there is a huge difference in the
proportion of total income that it represents for each group. For the total population, labor income
represents around 80% of their total income while it represents only about 50% of total income for
older adults. Income from transfers is much more important for the latter group, representing about
40%, while for the total population it only represents about 13%. Table 1 describes the poverty and
labor participation characteristics of the population 65 years of age and older in Mexico. Table 2
describes other relevant demographic characteristics of the elderly in Mexico. Appendix D shows
more sociodemographic and economic conditions data of the older adults.


   Table 1: Poverty and Labor Characteristics of Mexican Population 65 Years Old and Older (2010-2014)

                                                             2010                     2012                    2014
                                                       Millions          %      Millions         %      Millions         %

                   Extreme Poverty Measures
                     Multidimentional Poverty HC          0.9           11.0      0.8            9.7      0.8            8.5
                     Head Count Ratio                     1.5           19.1      1.9           21.5      1.9           21.2
                     Poverty Gap Index                          0.071                   0.078                   0.071
                     Poverty Severity Index                     0.039                   0.042                   0.035

                                                       Millions          %      Millions         %      Millions         %

                   Labor Condition
                     Labor Force                          2.2           27.6      2.6           29.9      2.6           28.5
                       Employed                           2.1           95.9      2.5           95.4      2.5           96.5
                       Unemployed                         0.1            4.1      0.1            4.6      0.1            3.5
                     Non Labor Force                      5.6           72.4      6.1           70.1      6.5           71.5
                     Total                                7.8           100.0     8.6           100.0     9.1           100.0

                                                        Hours            %      Hours            %      Hours            %

                   Use of Time
                    Work                                  11            17.5      11            19.2      11            18.2
                    Care-giving without pay                8            12.1       3             5.3       3             5.2
                    Housekeeping                          16            24.0      14            24.2      15            25.0
                    Leisure                               27            42.0      27            47.3      28            47.4
                    Others                                 3             4.4       2             4.0       2             4.2
                    Total                                 65            100.0     58            100.0     58            100.0


Source: Based on authors’ calculations with the ENIGH-MCS 2010, 2012, and 2014.




 criteria: 1. Out of the salaried economically active population, those who receive the beneﬁts established by the Social Security Law; 2.
 Out of the independent or non-salaried economically active population, those who have access to medical services as a work beneﬁt or
 by voluntarily participating in a social security program from a social security institution such as IMSS; 3. Any person who receives
 retirement or pension beneﬁts, or who is related to someone who has access to social security; and 4. Any person of 65 years of age or
 older who receives a social pension (CONEVAL, 2014).


                                                                    12
       Table 2: Sociodemographic Characteristics of Mexican Population 65 Years Old and Older (2014)

                                                                                               2014

                                                                                       Millions         %
                                  Females                                                4.9           54.5
                                  Urban                                                  6.8           74.9
                                  Indigenous Language Speakers                           0.8           9.1
                                  Single household                                       1.2           13.1
                                  Household head                                         4.6           50.4
                                  Without Access to Basic Services in the Dwelling       2.0           21.8
                                  Illiterate                                             2.2           24.1
                                  Educational Gap                                        5.5           60.7
                                  Without Access to Food                                 1.8           20.0
                                  Without Access to Health Services                      1.2           13.1
                                  With a Disability                                      3.3          36.15
                                Access to health services, by institution
                                  Seguro Popular                                         3.5          44.4
                                  IMSS                                                   3.1          39.6
                                  ISSSTE                                                 0.9          11.5
                                  Other*                                                 0.5           4.5
                                  Total elderly with access to health services           7.9          100.0
                                Total adults of 65 years of age and older                9.1          100.0


Source: Based on authors’ calculations with the ENIGH-MCS 2014.
* Include health services provided by Pemex, Defensa, Marina, other health services via social security and private health insurance.
Note: The mean years of schooling in the period was the following: 2014 (4.7).



3.5 Empirical strategy

This paper aims to uncover the Intention-To-Treat effects (ITT) and the Treatment-on the-Treated
effects (TOT) of the expansion of PAM on extreme poverty and labor supply of the elderly. The
outcome variables of interest in our study are: extreme poverty headcount index, extreme poverty
gap index, extreme poverty severity index, multidimensional extreme poverty index, labor force
participation, and use of time including work.

To evaluate the impact of the expansion of PAM on the outcomes of interest, having a randomized
controlled trial with a sufﬁciently large sample would allow us to directly estimate the causal effects
of the intervention and to minimize bias. However, the actual expansion-of-PAM treatment was not
randomly assigned. Even though ENIGH-MCS identiﬁes the self-reported PAM beneﬁciaries, using
this data directly in a regression to estimate the effects of the expansion of PAM on extreme poverty
and on labor supply would yield biased estimations due to endogeneity. The endogeneity of the
treatment may be a result of the targeting strategy, the prioritizing operational mechanisms of PAM,
or the self-selection of beneﬁciaries. Therefore, we used a quasi-experimental design to evaluate the
effects of the expansion of PAM on extreme poverty and labor supply.

The eligible-for-treatment group (from now on the treatment group) are the adults between 66 and
69 years old that were not receiving contributory pensions or retirement payments before and after
the change in PAM’s eligibility criteria, and the control group are the non-elderly individuals aged 61
to 64 who are not receiving pensions or retirement payments and who are not eligible to participate
in PAM.



                                                                  13
Adults of 65 years of age are excluded from the analysis because even though at the time of the
collection of the survey in 2014 these individuals were eligible for treatment; we do not know exactly
when these individuals became eligible. Moreover, even if we could identify when these individuals
became eligible, we could argue that these individuals did not have “enough” exposure to the
eligibility-for-treatment to be taken into consideration for this analysis.

Adults receiving contributory pensions were not eligible to receive PAM in 2013, for this reason
people who received a contributory pension were excluded from the analysis. The share of people
receiving contributory pensions or retirement payments in the treatment group is 27.9, 26.9 and
29.1% for 2010, 2012 and 2014, respectively; and in the control group these numbers are 23.2, 23.1
and 22.8 for 2010, 2012 and 2014, respectively.

Using ENIGH – MCS, CONEVAL ﬁrst estimates income at the household level, and then assigns
income to individuals adjusting by household composition using an adult-equivalent scale. Hence,
all members of the same household have the same income level. For this reason, we excluded from
the sample those households with cohabitants from both treatment arms. This could also suggest
that the effects of PAM on the beneﬁciary’s income and poverty condition could be generalizable to
all members of the beneﬁciary’s household.

The expansion of the program was announced after the collection of the ENIGH-MCS in 2012. Thus,
we do not presume anticipation effects. While President Peña Nieto was already elected president
of Mexico by the time that the survey was being collected in 2012, it is unlikely that people would
have modiﬁed their behavior based on his political campaign proposed initiatives without actual
knowledge or information on future treatment. The campaign proposal was to establish a universal
pension for the population 65 years old or older, however, it did not mention a speciﬁc beneﬁt level or
additional eligibility criteria such as wealth or income level conditions, disability status, and others.
It is therefore hard to assume that people would have modiﬁed their behavior based on the limited
information available, so we assume the data collected in the 2012 survey does not reﬂect anticipation
effects.

We ﬁrst estimate the ITT effects using a difference-in-differences estimation and then we estimate the
TOT using an Instrumental Variable methodology with Two Stages Least Squares (2SLS).


3.5.1 Intention-to-treat Effects (ITT)

The identiﬁcation strategy consists of a difference-in-differences estimation (DD) with a discontinuity
framework. We used the exogenous variation in the program’s eligibility criteria at the beginning of
2013, that is the change in minimum eligibility age from 70 years of age and older to 65 years of age
and older, as the intervention that allowed us to deﬁne treatment and control groups.

While the treatment and comparison groups may not have identical levels in their pre-intervention
observed characteristics, their pre-intervention trends over time are similar. Thus, we assume that, in
the absence of PAM, the average change in the outcomes would have been the same for the treatment
and control groups. This is the well-known parallel trends assumption. While this assumption is
untestable, Figure 2 shows that the treatment and control groups are moving in fact in parallel before
the intervention took place and right after the intervention there is a sharp change in most of the


                                                   14
outcome variables for the treatment group. Note that by using the parallel trends assumption, the
identiﬁcation assumption for this model is weaker than it would be if we used the assumption that
the two groups are non-different in all pre-treatment characteristics and that the only difference
at the time of the intervention is the intervention itself. We will also rely on the assumption that
the individuals cannot precisely control the assignment variable, which is the reported age with
supporting documents, near the known cutoff eligibility age. Taking advantage of the cross-sectional
structure of the data we controlled for unobserved characteristics.

         Figure 2: Parallel Trends Assumption Evidence from Extreme Poverty Measures (2010-2014)




                (a) Poverty Headcount Index                               (b) Multidimensional Poverty Headcount Index




                    (c) Poverty Gap Index                                              (d) Poverty Severity Index


Source: Based on authors’ calculations with the ENIGH-MCS 2010, 2012, and 2014.



In our general model, the outcome variable of interest is deﬁned as:

Y = extreme poverty or labor supply.

The binary variable indicating treatment status is treat,14 where:



14 Wealso deﬁne treath , where treath = 1 for members of a household with at least one individual eligible for treatment, that is someone
 belonging to the age group between 66-69 years old who do not receive contributory pensions, and treath = 0 for members of a
 household with individuals who are not eligible to receive treatment, belonging to the group between 61 and 64 years old who do not
 receive contributory pensions. In this way, we also estimate our model including all members of the household in the treatment and
 control groups to test whether the effects of PAM are generalizable to all members of the household.


                                                                  15
           
           
           
            1 if the individual is eligible for treatment, belonging to the group between 66-69
           
               years old that do not receive contributory pensions.
           
   treat =
           
           
           
            0 if the individual is not eligible for treatment, belonging to the group between 61
           
               and 64 years old that do not receive contributory pensions.

The binary variable indicating the time dimension is year2014, where:
              
              1    if the observation year is 2014, after the program expansion was implemented.
 year2014 =
              0    if the observation year is 2012, before the program expansion was implemented.

The empirical difference-in-differences model (DD) we estimate is:


                          Y = β 0 + β 1 treat + β 2 year2014 + β 3 treat ∗ year2014 + e.                          (1)


The β 1 coefﬁcient captures the differences between the treatment and control groups prior to the
program expansion; β 2 coefﬁcient captures aggregate factors or secular changes that would cause
changes in the average outcome Y even in the absence of the expansion of the program. The
coefﬁcient of interest is β 3 , which is the interaction term between treat and year2014:

         β 3 = (Y treat=1,year2014=1 − Y treat=1,year2014=0 ) − (Y treat=0,year2014=1 − Y treat=0,year2014=0 ).   (2)


The β 3 coefﬁcient is the average change in the outcome variable for the treatment group from the
period before to the period after the expansion of the program and nets out the change in means for
the control group in the same time period.

To prove that the estimation is robust to different functional forms, we used three binary response
methods to estimate the coefﬁcients of interest. The linear probability model (LPM), and the index
models for binary response: Probit and Logit. The LPM estimates marginal effects directly, thus
the interpretation of the results is straightforward. However, this model is often criticized since
the estimated probabilities could be below zero or above one, which would not make sense, and it
assumes that the response probability is linear in its estimators. In contrast, the index models ﬁt
response probabilities between zero and one, but the marginal effects are a function of the estimated
coefﬁcient and the value of all the explanatory variables, making the interpretation of results difﬁcult.
For the non-linear models, we calculated the marginal effects for every observation and then averaged
them, these are known as Average Marginal Effects (AME) and can be compared with the LPM results.

With these three methods, we estimated the DD model as speciﬁed above, and then we added a set
of controls or covariates including a wide variety of factors at the individual and household levels
that might inﬂuence our extreme poverty measures. In addition, we interacted the covariates with
the time dummy variable to control for compositional changes of treatment and control groups. In
all regressions, the standard errors are computed robustly and clustered at the primary sampling




                                                          16
unit level.15

For the cases of the continous variables, we estimated the DD model through Ordinary Least Squares.
The OLS regressions were estimated with and without controls as well.

Finally, we performed ﬁve robustness checks to conﬁrm the validity of the obtained results. First, we
ran the same models, but for a previous period (2010-2012) to verify that these groups were actually
moving in non-different (parallel) trends before the treatment. If the placebo difference-in-differences
estimation for the period prior to the intervention is nonzero, the trustworthiness of the estimates
comparing 2012 and 2014 would be low and it would be an indication that the estimates could
be biased. Second, we implemented a placebo test for outcome variables that are ex-ante thought
not to be affected by the program such as disability condition and access to drinking water. If the
estimated effects for variables not supposed to be affected by the program is nonzero, this could
also indicate that the obtained estimated effects might be biased. Third, we used adults 56-59 years
old who do not receive contributory pensions as an alternative control group. We then looked for
differences between the results obtained with the original control group and with the alternative
control group, to check if results were sensitive to changes in the control group which could also
affect the credibility of the estimated effects. As a fourth robustness check, we ran the same models
without excluding the contributory pension receivers from the treatment and control groups to check
if excluding this population explained the estimated effects. Lastly, we included the data from the
states of Chiapas and Mexico City and used dummy variables in our model for each of these states
to check if including these populations affected our estimated effects.


3.5.2 Treatment-on-the-treated Effects (TOT)

As explained before, directly regressing the ENIGH-MCS variable that captures the self-reported
PAM beneﬁciaries on extreme poverty would result in biased estimations due to endogeneity. In
fact, the states and municipalities with higher poverty rates also have higher PAM enrollment rates.
This is the case because the Ministry of Social Development selected localities with high poverty and
high social deprivation rates as strategic locations to provide information and promote enrollment
into the program. Thus, the mechanism to “encourage” eligible population to apply for enrollment
was not random. While we could control for a wide variety of socioeconomic characteristics, results
would not be convincing evidence of the causal effects of the program.

We deﬁne the binary variable that indicates whether an individual reported being a beneﬁciary of
the program as p_pam, where:
            
            1 when the individual reported being a beneﬁciary of PAM.
   p_ pam =
            0 when the individual reported not being a beneﬁciary of PAM.


Using the equation:

                                                 Y = α + β 1 p_ pam + ... + u.                                                       (3)
15 Theprimary sampling units are formed by groups of houses with differentiated characteristics depending on the area to which they
 belong. Primary sampling units can be formed by groups of houses in one locality or in neighboring localities that have the same village
 size range.


                                                                  17
Where Y = extreme poverty, would yield biased and inconsistent estimators due to endogeneity.

To overcome this endogeneity problem, in addition to estimating ITT using DD, we also used an
Instrumental Variable methodology with Two-Stages Least-Squares, in which the interaction term
treat*year2014 is the instrument.

An instrument is a variable that must satisfy two properties. The ﬁrst property is that the instrument
must be correlated with the variable it is instrumenting for, that is, the covariance between the binary
variables PAM beneﬁciary ( p_ pam) and the interaction term of the eligible-for-treatment group and
year 2014 (treat ∗ year2014) is different from zero i.e. Cov( p_ pam, treat ∗ year2014) = 0. Second, the in-
strument must not be correlated with the error term in the equation (3), i.e. Cov(treat ∗ year2014, u) =
0. We checked whether these two properties are met in our model or not, as follows:


   1. The ﬁrst property: the instrument must be correlated with the variable it is instrumenting for.
      In this case, the strong correlation between the instrument treat*year2014 and p_pam emerges
      from the eligibility rules of the program. We test that the instrument satisﬁes this property
      with the equation:

              p_ pam = α0 + α1 treat ∗ year2014 + α2 treat + α3 year2014 + α4 X1 + ... + αn Xn + v.     (4)

      Where α1 coefﬁcient will show the correlation between the instrument variable and the actual
      treatment variable. This estimate is similar to PAM’s participation rate. This equation is also
      the First Stage in the 2SLS methodology, from which we collect the predicted values of p_pam
      ( p_ pam).

   2. The second property: the instrument must not be correlated with the error term. This property
      cannot be tested empirically because the error term is unobserved (Wooldrige, 2012). However,
      we argue that the instrument does not suffer from the same endogeneity issue that the original
      predicting variable p_pam did. The instrument cannot affect the outcome variable directly;
      rather, it can only affect it through the variable it is instrumenting for. That is, treat*year2014
      cannot affect extreme poverty or labor supply of the elderly directly; rather, it can only affect
      them through p_pam. The fact that a person could be between 66 and 69 years old in 2014
      is not correlated with their poverty condition or with their preferences in allocating time to
      work. However, being this year and age range the new eligibility for treatment, it is hence
      only through the treatment that the age and year can be correlated with the poverty and labor
      supply outcomes.

Equation 5 is the Second-stage and estimates the TOT effects with IV:


                   Y = β 0 + β 1 p_ pam + β 2 treat + β 3 year2014 + β 4 X1 + ... + β n Xn + e.         (5)


Where Y is the outcome variable -extreme poverty or labor supply-; and p_ pam is the predicted value
of p_pam in the ﬁrst stage. β 1 is the coefﬁcient of interest and captures the effect of the participation
in PAM on the outcome variable.



                                                       18
We then tested statistically whether p_pam is indeed an exogenous variable for the extreme poverty
measures and labor supply variables of interest using a Wooldrige’s robust regression based test.16

3.6 Results

3.6.1 Intention-to-treat Effects (ITT)

Results tables below show the three main variables: the interaction term of the treatment group
dummy variable and the time dummy variable, which captures the treatment effect of the inter-
vention (i.e. ITT); the treatment group dummy variable, which captures the potential differences
between treatment and control groups prior to the expansion of the program; and the time dummy
variable, which captures the aggregate factors or secular changes that would have happened even in
the absence of the expansion of the program.

Results estimated using the LPM with the extreme poverty headcount index as the outcome variable,
suggest that the expansion of the program reduced the probability of a person in the eligible-for-
treatment group being poor by 5.4 percentage points. The difference-in-differences estimates for the
effects of the expansion of the program on the poverty headcount index are similar in magnitude
and consistent when calculated using the three methods: LPM, AME of the Probit model, and AME
of the logit model, all with and without covariates to control for differences across treatment and
control groups. Table 3 shows the estimates of the treatment effects of the expansion of PAM on
extreme monetary poverty.

Results suggest that the income shock from the expansion of the program also reduced the poverty
gap and the poverty severity indexes on the eligible-for-treatment group. The estimated effect of
the expansion of PAM on the poverty gap index using the LPM is a reduction of 3.2 percentage
points without covariates and of 3.5 percentage points with covariates. These results are statistically
signiﬁcant at the 5% level. Similarly, the estimated effect on the poverty severity index is a reduction
of 2.5 percentage points without covariates and 2.6 percentage points with covariates. Table 4 shows
the estimates of the treatment effects of the expansion of PAM on the extreme monetary poverty gap
and the extreme poverty severity indexes.

We estimated the effects of the expansion of the program on the ofﬁcial multi-dimensional extreme
poverty measure and found that the expansion of PAM also had a statistically signiﬁcant reduction on
this wellbeing indicator. The estimates obtained using the LPM and the AMEs of the Probit and Logit
models with covariates, show that the expansion of PAM reduces de probability of multidimensional
extreme poverty in 3.8 to 5.8 percentage points. Table 5 shows the estimates of the treatment effects
of the expansion of PAM on the multidimensional extreme poverty index.

Results are consistent when we included all members of the household in both the treatment and
control groups, showing that these ﬁndings are generalizable to all members of the treated household
(Appendix E).

We also estimated the attributable effects of the expansion of PAM on social rights deprivation

16 After a 2SLS estimation with robust clustered standard errors, a regression-based test can be implemented under the null-hypothesis
  that the variable under consideration is exogenous (Wooldridge, 1995). If the null-hypothesis cannot be rejected, then the OLS estimator
  is more efﬁcient than the IV estimator.


                                                                   19
indicators. The six social rights indicators are: access to social security, access to health care services,
access to food (food security), quality and spaces of the dwelling, access to basic services in the
dwelling, and educational gap. The program has an effect on the access to social security indicator,
which considers that a person who receives PAM, by receiving it has access to social security. Our
results suggest that the expansion of the program reduced the probability of being social security
deprived by 30.6 percentage points using the LPM estimates with controlling variables, which are
the most conservative estimates from the three speciﬁcations used with and without controls. Panel
A of Table 6 shows the estimated treatment effects of the expansion of PAM on the access to social
security deprivation indicator.

We also tested whether the program had a positive short term effect on the reduction of other social
rights deprivations such as access to food (food security) and access to health care services, but
found no direct short-term effects. The indicators used to develop the multi-dimensional extreme
poverty measure such as educational gap and access to basic services in the dwelling did not show
effects, which can also be considered a robustness check for our models because these outcome
variables are ex-ante thought not to be affected by the program in the short term. Further research
could provide valuable information on the medium and long term effects of the program on the
dimensions mentioned above.

Our results also suggest that the expansion of PAM did not have a statistically signiﬁcant effect on
the elderly’s decision to continue working or to leave the labor force and we did not ﬁnd an effect on
the number of hours spent working (excluding domestic work). The main reason why we think that
the expansion of PAM did not have a signiﬁcant effect on the labor force participation of the elderly
is because the cash transfer amount is relatively small. For instance, in 2014 it only represented 16.7%
of the average current per capita income. Other reasons why the expansion of PAM may not have
had a signiﬁcant effect on labor force participation is because the expansion of the program was
relatively recent, which could have made beneﬁciaries unsure of whether the beneﬁt was going to
last or not, postponing retirement. This may not be the case in the future, when the perception of
beneﬁciaries is that the beneﬁt is well-established. In statistical terms, the heterogeneity of labor force
participation of men and women, and of urban and rural localities is making the variance larger.
Thus, an effect was not identiﬁed.

One of our ﬁndings suggests that the treated individuals increased the time spent on activities that
they enjoy such as chatting with their neighbors, hanging out with their friends, and resting, among
others by about 2 hours per week. We also ﬁnd that the program had a negative effect of about 16
minutes in the time spent carrying water or ﬁrewood per week.

Our results do not provide sufﬁcient information to understand where the reallocation of time to
enjoyable activities comes from. Our intuition is that the results are consistent with the previous
Gertler et al. studies (2009, 2016), where researchers ﬁnd that beneﬁciaries of 70 y mas did not
reduce the number of hours worked, but rather that there is a substitution between time spent doing
paid work, and time spent working for family businesses. Spending more time working in family
businesses can potentially have an effect in other aspects of the beneﬁciaries’ use of time such as
transportation and the amount of time spent with relatives. Tables 7 and 8 show the effects of PAM
on the labor force participation and on the use of time including work, accordingly.


                                                    20
                       Table 3: Program Effects on Extreme Poverty Headcount Index ( FGT0 )

                                                             No controls                            Controls

                                                    LPM        Probit       Logit         LPM         Probit       Logit
                      Treat * year 2014           -0.046**    -0.043**     -0.042**    -0.054***    -0.051***    -0.051***
                                                  [-0.021]     [-0.02]     [-0.019]     [-0.020]     [-0.019]     [-0.018]
                      Treat                       0.056***    0.054***     0.054***     0.034**      0.034**      0.033**
                                                  [-0.016]    [-0.016]     [-0.016]     [-0.015]     [-0.016]     [-0.015]
                      Year 2014                    -0.006      -0.006       -0.006       -0.029       -0.038       -0.034
                                                  [-0.016]    [-0.016]     [-0.016]     [-0.083]     [-0.087]     [-0.088]
                      Observations                 13,120      13,120       13,120       13,120       13,120       13,120




Table 4: Program Effects on Extreme Poverty Gap Index ( FGT1 ) and Extreme Poverty Severity Index ( FGT2 )
                                                        (Ordinary Least Squares)

                                                             Poverty Gap Index          Poverty Severity Index

                                                        No controls        Controls     No controls      Controls
                              Treat * year 2014          -0.032***         -0.035***     -0.025***       -0.026***
                                                          [-0.010]          [-0.010]      [-0.007]        [-0.007]
                              Treat                       0.029***          0.018**       0.019***        0.012**
                                                          [-0.008]          [-0.008]      [-0.006]        [-0.005]
                              Year 2014                    -0.005             0.007        -0.005          -0.011
                                                          [-0.007]          [-0.039]      [-0.005]        [-0.030]
                              Observations                 13,120            13,120        13,120          13,120




                Table 5: Program Effects on Multi-dimensional Extreme Poverty Headcount Index

                                                             No controls                             Controls

                                                LPM             Probit       Logit         LPM         Probit       Logit
                     Treat * year 2014       -0.054***        -0.052***    -0.051***    -0.058***    -0.043***    -0.038***
                                              [-0.016]         [-0.013]     [-0.013]     [-0.015]     [-0.009]     [-0.008]
                     Treat                      0.021            0.018        0.018        0.006        0.002        0.002
                                              [-0.013]         [-0.012]     [-0.011]     [-0.012]     [-0.008]     [-0.007]
                     Year 2014                -0.023*          -0.022*      -0.022*        0.014       -0.006       -0.014
                                              [-0.013]         [-0.013]     [-0.013]     [-0.069]     [-0.051]     [-0.045]
                     Observations              13,120           13,120       13,120       13,120       13,094       13,094


Note: Estimates signiﬁcance level *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. We report standard errors in brackets. Standard errors heteroscedasticity-
robust and clustered at the primary sampling unit level, which takes into consideration the sampling design of the survey. Income
variables used were adjusted to per adult-equivalent at August 2014 prices. The column titled "controls" shows the results of estimations in
which the following conditioning variables were used: village size range, years of schooling, literacy, household size, dwelling’s ownership
status, sex, indigenouos language speaker status, disability condition, household structure, marital status, employment condition, access
to Seguro Popular, income from Conditional Cash Transfer Program - PROSPERA, income from PROCAMPO, overcrowding, access to
drinking water, access to sewage, access to electricity, and a full set of the preceding covariates interacted with the time dummy.




                                                                           21
                       Table 6: Program Effects on Social Rights Deprivations

                                            No controls                           Controls

                                   LPM        Probit       Logit        LPM        Probit      Logit


              Panel A: Effects on access to social security
            Treat * year 2014     -0.321***  -0.320*** -0.320***      -0.306***   -0.346***   -0.365***
                                   [-0.026]   [-0.024]  [-0.024]       [-0.025]    [-0.028]    [-0.028]
            Treat                    0.002      0.002     0.002         -0.026      -0.036      -0.033
                                   [-0.019]   [-0.020]  [-0.020]       [-0.017]    [-0.023]    [-0.024]
            Year 2014                0.010      0.011     0.011          0.018       0.017       0.004
                                   [-0.018]   [-0.019]  [-0.019]       [-0.095]    [-0.119]    [-0.129]
            Observations            13,120     13,120    13,120         13,120      13,120      13,120


              Panel B: Effects on access to health care services
            Treat * year 2014      -0.013     -0.014    -0.014          -0.020      -0.020     -0.019
                                  [-0.021]   [-0.020]  [-0.020]        [-0.020]    [-0.019]   [-0.018]
            Treat                  -0.003     -0.003    -0.003          -0.002      -0.002     -0.001
                                  [-0.015]   [-0.015]  [-0.014]        [-0.015]    [-0.014]   [-0.014]
            Year 2014             -0.028**   -0.028**  -0.028**         -0.038      -0.018     -0.020
                                  [-0.014]   [-0.014]  [-0.014]        [-0.090]    [-0.074]   [-0.070]
            Observations           13,120     13,120    13,120          13,120      13,120     13,120


              Panel C: Effects on access to food (food security)
            Treat * year 2014      -0.015     -0.015     -0.015         -0.011      -0.009     -0.011
                                  [-0.021]    [-0.02]    [-0.02]       [-0.021]    [-0.021]   [-0.020]
            Treat                   0.020      0.020      0.020         -0.001      -0.003     -0.001
                                  [-0.015]   [-0.016]   [-0.016]       [-0.015]    [-0.015]   [-0.015]
            Year 2014               0.010      0.010      0.010          0.006      -0.016     -0.016
                                  [-0.014]   [-0.014]   [-0.014]       [-0.089]    [-0.083]   [-0.082]
            Observations           13,120     13,120     13,120         13,120      13,120     13,120


              Panel D: Effects on quality and spaces of the dwelling
            Treat * year 2014      -0.001     0.000       0.000        0.000        -0.003      0.000
                                  [-0.014]  [-0.014]    [-0.014]     [-0.014]      [-0.011]   [-0.010]
            Treat                   0.005     0.005       0.005        0.004         0.002      0.001
                                  [-0.010]  [-0.010]    [-0.010]     [-0.010]      [-0.008]   [-0.007]
            Year 2014              -0.010    -0.010      -0.010        0.014        -0.006     -0.001
                                  [-0.010]  [-0.010]    [-0.010]     [-0.051]      [-0.042]   [-0.039]
            Observations           13,120    13,120      13,120       13,120        13,112     13,112


              Panel E: Effects on access to basic services in the dwelling
            Treat * year 2014       0.005      0.006       0.006       -0.002        0.001      0.001
                                  [-0.021]   [-0.021]    [-0.021]     [-0.016]     [-0.019]   [-0.016]
            Treat                   0.016      0.015       0.015       -0.008       -0.014     -0.013
                                  [-0.016]   [-0.016]    [-0.016]     [-0.012]     [-0.013]   [-0.012]
            Year 2014              -0.033*    -0.034*    -0.034*       -0.006       -0.041     -0.038
                                  [-0.019]   [-0.019]    [-0.019]     [-0.059]     [-0.074]   [-0.070]
            Observations           13,120     13,120      13,120       13,120       13,120     13,120


Continued




                                                          22
                                                                No controls                                  Controls

                                                     LPM              Probit         Logit         LPM        Probit       Logit


                         Panel F: Effects on educational gap
                       Treat * year 2014      -0.009   -0.011                      -0.011         -0.011      -0.023       -0.022
                                             [-0.026] [-0.027]                    [-0.027]       [-0.024]    [-0.028]     [-0.029]
                       Treat                 0.125*** 0.126***                    0.126***       0.103***    0.126***     0.127***
                                             [-0.020] [-0.020]                    [-0.020]       [-0.018]    [-0.021]     [-0.021]
                       Year 2014              -0.023   -0.023                      -0.023          0.089       0.103        0.105
                                             [-0.019] [-0.018]                    [-0.018]       [-0.081]    [-0.093]     [-0.095]
                       Observations           13,120   13,120                      13,120         13,120      13,120       13,120


Note: Estimates signiﬁcance level *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. We report the standard errors in brackets. The standard errors are
heteroscedasticity-robust and clustered at the primary sampling unit level. The column titled "controls" shows the results of estimations in
which the following conditioning variables were used: village size range, years of schooling, literacy, household size, dwelling’s ownership
status, sex, indigenous language speaker status, disability condition, household structure, marital status, employment condition, income
from Conditional Cash Transfer Program - PROSPERA, income from PROCAMPO, and a full set of interactions between the preceding
covariates and the time dummy. In Panel F the estimations with controls exclude years of schooling, literary variables, and their respective
time dummy interactions.

                                    Table 7: Program Effects on Labor Force Participation

                                                                No Controls                                  Controls

                                                      LPM          Probit           Logit           LPM        Probit      Logit
                        Treat*year 2014               -0.02         -0.02            -0.02          0.00        0.00        0.01
                                                    [-0.025]      [-0.025]         [-0.025]       [-0.018]    [-0.032]    [-0.035]
                        Treat                      -0.088***     -0.088***        -0.088***        -0.030      -0.061      -0.063
                                                    [-0.018]      [-0.018]         [-0.018]       [-0.024]    [-0.043]    [-0.048]
                        Year2014                     -0.005        -0.005           -0.005         -0.025      -0.078      -0.077
                                                    [-0.016]      [-0.016]         [-0.016]       [-0.065]    [-0.108]    [-0.119]
                        Observations                 13,120        13,120           13,120         13,120      13,113      13,113


Note: Estimates signiﬁcance level *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. We report the standard errors in brackets. The standard errors are
heteroscedasticity-robust and clustered at the primary sampling unit level. The column titled "controls" show the results of estimations in
which the following conditioning variables were used: age, age-squared, relationship with the head of household, number of income
earners in the household, number of employed persons in the household, village size range, years of schooling, literacy, household size,
dwelling’s ownership status, sex, indigenous language speaker status, disability condition, household structure, marital status, and a full
set of interactions between the preceding covariates and the time dummy.


                                 Table 8: Program Effects on the Use of Time Including Work

                                 Work                                 Study                      Community Service             Care-giving without pay

                     No Controls        Controls       No Controls             Controls       No Controls     Controls        No Controls         Controls
  Treat*year2014        -76.13           -19.73            0.743                0.373            -3.189         -3.961               39.2              40.31
                       [-77.46]         [-62.92]           [-4.96]              [-5.4]          [-10.24]       [-11.89]            [-40.78]           [-37.56]
  Observations          12,330           12,330            12,327               12,327           12,325         12,325             12,325             12,325

                      Dwelling Maintenance                      Housekeeping                  Carrying water or ﬁrewood                     Leisure

                     No Controls        Controls       No Controls             Controls       No Controls     Controls        No Controls         Controls
  Treat*year 2014        1.12            11.71                 83.5             27.97            -13.95        -15.95*             122.8**            119.1**
                       [-13.02]         [-12.97]          [-53.88]             [-44.27]          [-9.91]        [-9.68]            [-49.46]           [-49.17]
  Observations          12,324           12,324            12,320               12,320           12,329         12,329             12,297              12,29

Note: Estimates signiﬁcance level *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. We report the standard errors in brackets. The standard errors are
heteroscedasticity-robust and clustered at the primary sampling unit level. The column titled "controls" show the results of estimations in
which the following conditioning variables were used: age, age-squared, relationship with the head of household, number of income
earners in the household, number of employed persons in the household, village size range, years of schooling, literacy, household size,
dwelling’s ownership status, sex, indigenous language speaker status, disability condition, household structure, marital status, and a full
set of interactions between the preceding covariates and the time dummy.


                                                                                23
While Amuedo-Dorantes (2015) shows that 70 y mas crowded out domestic private gifts by 37%
for the rural elderly of 70 years of age or older between 2006 and 2008, we did not ﬁnd an effect
statistically different from zero for the elderly between 66 and 69 years old living in rural and urban
localities between 2012 and 2014. We conclude that PAM did not have crowding out effects on
international or domestic remittances received by the elderly 66 to 69 years old. Table 9 shows these
results.

             Table 9: Program Effects on Private Transfers from Other Households and Remittances

                                                        Private Transfers                Remittances

                                                    No controls     Controls       No controls     Controls
                             Treat*year 2014          0.228*         0.167           -0.074         -0.263
                                                     [-0.133]       [-0.110]        [-0.201]       [-0.180]
                             Treat                     0.021         -0.017          0.0752          0.156
                                                     [-0.081]        -0.073          [-0.15]        [-0.13]
                             Year2014                0.657***        0.437            0.055         -0.580
                                                     [-0.098]       [-0.507]        [-0.161]       [-0.991]
                             Observations              5,553         5,553            1,163          1,163


Note: We report the standard errors in brackets. The standard errors are heteroscedasticity-robust and clustered at the primary sampling
unit level. The column titled "controls" show the results of estimations in which the following conditioning variables were used:
employment status, village size range, years of schooling, literacy, household size, dwelling’s ownership status, sex, indigenous language
speaker status, disability condition, household structure, marital status, income from the Conditional Cash Transfer Program - PROSPERA
and a full set of interactions between the preceding covariates and the time dummy.

3.6.2 Robustness Checks for ITT

As a ﬁrst robustness check, we implemented the difference-in-differences model with the treatment
and control groups using data from a previous period, that is, instead of using 2012 and 2014,
we used 2010 and 2012 data. We ran this robustness check for the extreme poverty headcount,
the extreme poverty gap, the extreme poverty severity, and the multidimensional extreme poverty
indexes. The results show that the estimates are not statistically different from zero. Similarly,
we ran the robustness check to test whether the placebo intervention had an effect on social right
deprivations from 2010 to 2012 and did not ﬁnd any effects. These results are shown in Appendix
F, Table F.1 through F.4. We show that not only did the intervention have an effect where it was
expected to have one, but also, we show that a placebo intervention does not have an effect where one
is not expected. Similarly, Tables F.5 to F.7 show no intervention effects on labor force participation,
use of time and private transfers.

The second robustness check we implemented was to replace our outcome variables (e. g. FGT
measures) with outcome variables that are not supposed to be affected by the program in the short
term. We ran the difference-in-differences model with the LPM, Probit, and Logit models with
and without controlling variables and found no effects on variables such as disability condition,
indigenous language speaker condition, access to drinking water, or access to sewage. Table F.8 in
Appendix F show these results.

As a third robustness check, we estimated the short term program effects on the eligible-for-treatment
group aged 66 to 69 years old who do not receive contributory pensions but instead of comparing
the average change of this group to the average change of the non-elderly individuals aged 61 to 64


                                                                   24
who do not receive contributory pensions, we compared them to the average change of an alternative
control group, that is, we compared the treatment group to the average change on the group of
adults 56 to 59 years old.

The estimated effects of the expansion of PAM on the extreme poverty headcount index using the
alternative control group are slightly smaller than with the original control group with an estimated
reduction in the probability of being extreme poor of 3.4 percentage points compared to a 5.4 with
the original control group. The results, however, are consistent, of similar magnitude, and statistically
signiﬁcant at the 5% level. These results are shown in Table F.9 in Appendix F.

The estimated effects on the extreme poverty gap index and on the extreme poverty severity index
are somewhat larger when using the alternative control group, but still in the same direction and
statistically signiﬁcant at the 1% level (Table F.10). The results obtained of the effects of the program’s
expansion on multi-dimensional extreme poverty using the alternative control group are similar
to the ones obtained when using the original control group. The estimation using the alternative
control group showed a reduction of 4.4 percentage points on the probability of being extreme
poor according to the multidimensional extreme poverty index, while the results obtained with the
primary control group showed a reduction of 5.8 percentage points. Table F.11 in Appendix F shows
these results.

In addition, when we ran the same model without excluding, from the treatment and control groups,
those adults who receive contributory pensions, the estimated effects remained consistent with those
obtained when contributory pensioners were excluded. Similarly, we ran the same models without
excluding Chiapas and Mexico City data; instead, we used dummy variables to indicate whether
an observation was from either one of these states. The results obtained using this approach were
consistent with our main results.


3.6.3 Treatment-on-the-Treated Effects (TOT)

Table 10 shows the ﬁrst-stage result of the estimation of the TOT effects using 2SLS. These results
conﬁrm that the instrument is effectively correlated with the variable it is instrumenting for, that
is, the interaction term treat*year2014 is correlated with the binary variable that indicates program
participation, p_pam, and is statistically signiﬁcant at the one 1% level.

The second-stage results of the 2SLS suggest that the expansion of PAM reduced extreme poverty.
The results show poverty reducing effects on the treated population between 6.1 and 13.2 percent-
age points, depending on the poverty measure considered. Table 11 shows that the program had
reducing effects of 11.5 percentage points on the probability of being extreme poor as measured
by the headcount index, 7.9 percentage points on the poverty gap index, 6.1 percentage points on
the poverty severity index, and 13.2 percentage points on the probability of being extreme poor as
measured by the multidimensional poverty headcount index. These results are statistically signiﬁcant
at conventional conﬁdence levels.

Previously, we explained our assumption that p_ pam is endogenously correlated with the error term
of the simple linear regression of p_ pam on extreme poverty or labor supply variables. This could


                                                    25
be a result of the targeting strategy, the enrollment prioritizing mechanisms of the Program, or the
self-selection of beneﬁciaries. Using the Wooldrige robust regression-based test we conclude that
p_ pam is indeed an endogenous variable for the extreme poverty headcount, the extreme poverty
gap, and the extreme poverty severity indexes at least at the 5% signiﬁcance level, and at the 10%
level for the multidimensional extreme poverty headcount index.

The same procedure was followed with the labor supply variables, including labor force participation
and hours worked in the previous week. In this case, the Wooldrige test suggests that the individual’s
labor supply decisions and expectations are exogenous.

Using OLS and equation (3) with Y = labor supply, we estimate the effects of the expansion of PAM
on labor supply variables. OLS results suggest that the expansion of PAM did not have an effect on
labor supply, consistent with what we found in the ITT estimations. Even though OLS estimates are
more efﬁcient than the IV estimates in this case, results from OLS by themselves should be taken
with caution. The OLS estimates of the expansion of the program on labor supply is hardly rigorous
evidence that the program did or did not have an effect on labor supply of the treatment group
because we are not controlling for unobserved characteristics, which in this case may be a concern
(e.g. self-selection bias).

                                              Table 10: IV First-Stage Regression

                                                                             p_pam
                                                       Treat*year 2014     0.451***
                                                                            [-0.014]
                                                       Year 2014           -0.116***
                                                                            [-0.042]
                                                       Treat                0.007**
                                                                            [-0.003]
                                                       Observations          13,120

                                                       F (63, 13056) = 29.4
                                                       Prob > F = 0.00




                    Table 11: Treatment-on-the-Treated (TOT) Effect of PAM on Extreme Poverty
                                                   IV Second-Stage Regression

                                                                      Poverty Measures

                                              Head Count Index         FGT1        FGT2      Multi-dimensional
                         p_pam                    -0.115**           -0.079***   -0.061***        -0.132***
                                                   [-0.045]           [-0.022]    [-0.016]         [-0.033]
                         year2014                   -0.053              0.000      -0.013            0.005
                                                   [-0.082]           [-0.038]    [-0.029]         [-0.067]
                         treat                     0.039**           0.021***    0.015***            0.009
                                                   [-0.016]           [-0.008]    [-0.006]         [-0.012]
                         Observations               13,120             13,120      13,120           13,120


Note: Estimates signiﬁcance level *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. We report standard errors in brackets. Standard errors heteroscedasticity-
robust and clustered at the primary sampling unit level, which takes into consideration the sampling design of the survey. Income
variables used were adjusted to per adult-equivalent at August 2014 prices. The following conditioning variables were used: village size
range, years of schooling, literacy, household size, dwelling’s ownership status, sex, indigenouos language speaker status, disability
condition, household structure, marital status, access to Seguro Popular, income from Conditional Cash Transfer Program - PROSPERA,
income from PROCAMPO, overcrowding, access to drinking water, access to sewage, access to electricity, and a full set of the preceding
covariates interacted with the time dummy.



                                                                    26
                                        4. Conclusions

In 2013 the Pension Program for the Elderly (PAM) became quasi-universal, excluding only those
individuals with contributory pensions. In 2015 the Program became poverty-targeted and pensions-
tested, explicitly targeting the elderly poor. We evaluate whether the expansion of the program
reduced the probability of being extreme poor or not, and its effects on labor force participation of
people of 66 to 69 years of age and by how much.

Applying a difference-in-differences estimation of the intention-to-treat (ITT) effects around two
eligibility thresholds, beneﬁciary’s age and year of program expansion, we ﬁnd that the expansion of
the program to the sub-population group of ages between 66 and 69 years old not currently receiving
contributory pensions not only reduced the probability of this population being extreme poor under
various poverty measures, but it also reduced the poverty gap, and the poverty severity indexes.
Our results suggest that the expansion of PAM did not have any statistically signiﬁcant effects on
the labor force participation of the elderly. Accordingly, we did not ﬁnd that the program reduced
labor income. The PAM cash transfer amount was $580 pesos in 2014, or about 16.7% of the average
current per capita income. Not surprisingly, the cash transfer did not signiﬁcantly affect the labor
supply of the elderly population.

The Treatment-on-the-Treated (TOT) effects were estimated using an instrumental variables method-
ology obtaining the same general conclusions of the effects of the expansion of PAM on extreme
poverty and on labor supply. The TOT results on extreme poverty are stronger than the ITT results
because TOT effects are not diluted among the entire eligible population which includes the group
of eligible individuals that were not actually treated. Our results for both the ITT and TOT are
robust and consistent. In Mexico, the per capita income variable, which is used in the ofﬁcial poverty
measurement, is constructed with an equal income sharing assumption using an adult-equivalent
scale. Thus, each person in a household has the same income and the same monetary poverty
condition. Similarly, the income of all the individuals in the household, including the income from
PAM is divided by the number of adjusted-adults in the household and then imputed to each
individual. This methodology would suggest that the effect of the expansion of PAM on extreme
poverty is generalizable to all individuals of the treated household, which was also shown in our
results.

There is an ongoing debate of whether social pension programs should be separate or part of the
broader safety net interventions such as PROSPERA that focus on the poorest households regardless
of age or participation in social security. This discussion, however, exceeds the scope of this paper.
Decision makers could have political reasons for not including all cash transfer programs in one
single program, although we recognize that there is a potential efﬁciency loss by operating separate
initiatives with similar objectives.

Jensen (2004), Juarez (2009), and Amuedo-Dorantes and Juarez (2015) ﬁnd that social pension pro-
grams crowd out private transfers. Thus, concluding that social pension programs indirectly beneﬁt
the private transfer sender. In contrast, our results suggest that the expansion of the program did not
affect the private transfers that the elderly received from other households (domestic remittances)
nor the international remittances received, although the sample used to estimate the impact of the

                                                  27
program on received international remittances is relatively small.

Further research in at least four areas is a priority. First, the effects of PAM might also have heteroge-
neous effects on different population sub-groups. Understanding whether there are differentiated
effects for different population sub-groups and their underlying causes can help policy makers
understand where the impact is stronger and make informed policy decisions. Second, it is relevant
for policy makers to understand the effects of PAM and its expansion on relevant outcome variables
for other members of the household. Evidence shows that there usually is some extent of income
sharing within households. Our work focuses on the causal effects of the expansion of the program
on different outcomes for the elderly, however, to understand the impacts of the program or its
expansion on individual outcomes for other members of the household further research should be
conducted. Third, the stagnantly low coverage of contributory pension systems, the persistent high
informality, the growing old-age population, and the relatively large size of Mexico’s PAM, makes the
question of PAM’s ﬁscal sustainability increasingly important and one that should be revised often
as updated data become available. Fourth, taking into consideration the above mentioned context,
the incentives and interactions of contributory and noncontributory pension programs become also a
critical area where further research is needed to understand how the design of social pensions may
affect participation in contributory pension schemes or more generally in formal work.




                                                   28
                                            References

Amuedo-Dorantes, C. and Juarez, L. (2015). Old-Age Government Transfers and the Crowding Out
of Private Gifts: The 70 and Above Program for the Rural Elderly in Mexico. Southern Economic
Journal, 81(3), 782-802.

Ardington, C., Case, A., and Hosegood, V. (2009). Labor Supply Responses to Large Social Transfers:
Longitudinal Evidence from South Africa. American Economic Journal. Applied Economics, 1(1), 22-48.

Asher, M. (2009). Social Pensions in Four Middle-Income Countries In Holzmann, R., Robalino, D.
and Takayama, N. (Ed.), Closing the Coverage Gap: The role of social pensions and other retirement income
transfers (pp. 85-98). Washington, DC: World Bank.

Barrientos, A. (2006). Poverty Reduction: The Missing Piece of Pension Reform in Latin America.
Social Policy and Administration, Vol. 40, No. 4, pp. 369-84.

Bertrand, J., Mullainathan, S. and Duﬂo, E. (2004). How much should we trust Difference-in-
Differences Estimates? Quarterly Journal of Economics 119, No. 1, pp. 249-75.

Bertrand, J., Mullainathan, S. and Miller, D. (2003). Public Policy and Extended Families: Evidence
from Pensions in South Africa. The World Bank Economic Review, 17(1), 27-50.

Bertranou, F., Ginneken, W. and Solorio, C. (2002). Pensiones no contributivas y asistenciales: Argentina,
Brasil, Chile, Costa Rica y Uruguay. Oﬁcina Internacional del Trabajo.

CONAPO (2017). Estimaciones y Proyecciones de la Población 1990-2010.

CONAPO (2017). Estimaciones y Proyecciones de la Población 2010-2030.

CONEVAL. (2012). Informe de Pobreza en México 2010: el país, los estados y sus municipios. Mexico City:
CONEVAL.

CONEVAL. (2013). Informe de pobreza en México, 2012. Mexico City: CONEVAL.

CONEVAL (2014). Metodología para la medición multidimensional de la pobreza en México. México, DF:
CONEVAL.

CONEVAL, (2010-2014). Inventario CONEVAL de Programas y Acciones Estatales de Desarrollo So-
cial. Retrieved on January 19, 2017 from http://www.coneval.org.mx/Evaluacion/IPE/
Paginas/historico.aspx

CONEVAL, (2004-2015). Inventario CONEVAL de Programas y Acciones Federales de Desarrollo So-
cial. Retrieved on January 19, 2017 from http://www.coneval.org.mx/Evaluacion/IPFE/
Paginas/historico.aspx

Diario Oﬁcial de la Federación (2007-2016). Reglas de Operación del Programa Pensión para Adultos
Mayores.

Diario Oﬁcial de la Federación (2006-2016). Reglas de Operación de PROSPERA Programa de
Inclusión Social.


                                                   29
Edmonds, E. V. (2006). Child Labor and Schooling Responses to Anticipated Income in South Africa,
Journal of Development Economics 81, No. 2, pp. 386-414.

Fiszbein, A. and Schady, N.R. (2009). Conditional Cash Transfers: Reducing Present and Future Poverty.
World Bank Policy Research Report. Washington, D.C.: World Bank.

Galiani, S. and Gertler, P. (2009). Informe Final sobre los Cambios del Programa 70 y mas. Mexico City:
SEDESOL, Instituto Nacional de Salud Publica.

Galiani, S. Gertler, P. and Bando, R. (2016). Non-contributory pensions, Labour Economics, 38, pp.
47-58.

Grosh, M. et al. (2008). For protection and promotion: The design and implementation of effective safety nets.
Washington, D.C.: World Bank.

Holzmann, R., Robalino, D. and Takayama, N. (2009). Closing the coverage gap: The role of social
pensions and other retirement income transfers. Washington, DC: World Bank.

Holzmann, R. and Robalino, D. (2009). Overview and Preliminary Policy Guidance. In Holzmann,
R., Robalino, D. and Takayama, N. (Ed.), Closing the Coverage Gap: The role of social pensions and other
retirement income transfers (pp. 41-56 ). Washington, DC: World Bank.

INEGI (2017). Sistema de Cuentas Nacionales, Producto Interno Bruto Trimestral 1993-2017.

Instituto para la Atención del Adulto Mayor en la Ciudad de México - IAAMDF (2015). Evaluación
Interna 2015 del Programa: Pensión Alimentaria para Adultos Mayores de 68 Años, Residentes en el Distrito
Federal. Mexico City: IAAMDF.

Instituto para la Atención del Adulto Mayor en la Ciudad de México - IAAMDF (2016). Evaluación
Interna 2016 del Programa: Pensión Alimentaria para Adultos Mayores de 68 Años, Residentes en el Distrito
Federal. Mexico City: IAAMDF.

Jensen, R. (2004). Do private transfers ‘displace’ the beneﬁts of public transfers? Evidence from South
Africa. Journal of Public Economics, 88(1), 89-112.

Juarez, L. (2009). Crowding out of private support to the elderly: Evidence from a demogrant in
Mexico. Journal of Public Economics, 93(3), 454-463.

Juarez, L., and Futze, T. (2015). The Effects of a Non-Contributory Pension Program on Labor Force
Participation: The Case of 70 y Mas in Mexico. Economic Development and Cultural Change, Vol. 63,
No. 4 (July 2015), pp. 685-713.

Kidd, S. and Whitehouse, E. (2009). Pensions and Old-Age Poverty. In Holzmann, R., Robalino, D.
and Takayama, N. (Ed.), Closing the Coverage Gap: The role of social pensions and other retirement income
transfers (pp. 41-56 ). Washington, DC: World Bank.

Malani, A. and Reif, J. (2015). Interpreting pre-trends as anticipation: Impact on estimated treatment
effects from tort reform. Journal of Public Economics 124, pp. 1-17.

Rofman, R., Apella, I. and Vezza, E. (2015). Beyond contributory pensions : Fourteen experiences with


                                                      30
coverage expansion in Latin America. Human Development Unit. Washington, D.C.: World Bank.

Rofman, R. and Oliveri, M. (2012). Pension Coverage in Latin America. Trends and Determinants. World
Bank Social Research & Labor Discussion Paper No. 1217. Washington, D.C.: World Bank.

Sagarnaga, M. (2008). Informe Final de la Evaluacion de Consistencia y Resultados 2007 del Programa de
Atencion a Adultos Mayores en Zonas Rurales. Texcoco, Estado de México: Universidad Autonoma de
Chapingo.

Villagomez, A. and Ramírez, G. (2009). Mexico. In Rofman, R., Apella, I. and Vezza, E. (Ed.), Beyond
contributory pensions : Fourteen experiences with coverage expansion in Latin America (pp. 259-292 ).
Human Development Unit. Washington, D.C.: World Bank.

Wooldridge, J. (1995). Score diagnostics for linear models estimated by two stage least squares. In
Maddala, G., Phillips, P. and Srinivasan, T. (Ed.), Advances in Econometrics and Quantitative Economics:
Essays in Honor of Professor C. R. Rao (pp. 66–87). Oxford: Blackwell.

Wooldrige, J. (2012). Introductory Econometrics: A Modern Approach. Ohio, USA: Cengaged Learning.




                                                  31
     Appendix A

                                                                      Table A.1: State Programs to Support the Elderly (2014)


                                                            Objective                  Eligibility   Payment    Payment                     Share in         Budget        Share in
             State                Name                                                                                     Benefeciaries
                                                                                     (minimum age)   Amount    Frequency                   Elderly (%)   (million pesos)   GDP (%)


                                                 Secure the physical, mental and
                                                  social well-being of the elderly
                                Atencion al                                                                                                                                 0.003
             Aguascalientes                          population, and promote              60           n.a.       n.a.        6,000            8.5             5
                               Adulto Mayor
                                                  outdoors physical activities to
                                                   improve their quality of life.


             Chiapas             Amanecer                      n.a.                       64           550     Monthly       122,535          45.2            1,044         0.357


                                                  Guarantee an income for the
             Guerrero         Pension Guerrero   elderly population without any           65           800     Bimonthly      n.a.            n.a.             42           0.017
                                                         pension scheme.




32
                                                 Improve the well-being of the
                               Atencion a los    elderly population that do not                                                                                             0.038
             Jalisco                                                                      65          1,009    Bimonthly     32,364            6.1            400
                              Adultos Mayores     receive any income under a
                                                 contributory pension scheme.

                                                    Increase the income and
                              Apoyo Directo al      well-being of the elderly                                                                                               0.042
             Nuevo Leon                                                                   70           700     Monthly       59,747           18.2            503
                               Adulto Mayor         population experiencing
                                                            poverty.

                                                   Improve the well-being and
                                  Pension         health needs of the elderly in
             Mexico City      Alimentaria para   marginalized areas. The stipend          68          1,009    Monthly       480,000          61.2           57,629         2.141
                              Adultos Mayores      aims to secure the access to
                                                              food.


     Continued
                                                               Objective                  Eligibility       Payment        Payment                        Share in         Budget           Share in
              State                   Name                                                                                               Benefeciaries
                                                                                        (minimum age)       Amount        Frequency                      Elderly (%)   (million pesos)      GDP (%)


                                  Bienestar del                                                                                                                                               0.000
              Coahuila                                             n.a                        60              292           Yearly         <1,000           n.a.              1
                                  Adulto Mayor

                                                     Secure the access to food and
                                 Chihuahua Vive a                                                                                                                                             0.029
              Chihuahua                               basic needs for the elderly             65              1,009        Monthly          20,000           8.6             132
                                     Plenitud
                                                              population.

                                                      Provide a food basket to the
              Estado de Mex-                                                                                 Staple                                                                           n.a.
                                  Gente Grande      elderly population experiencing           60                           Monthly         300,000          32.1             n.a.
              ico                                                                                            goods
                                                       multidemintional poverty.

                                                      Improve the well-being of the
                                 Apoyo a Adultos     elderly population through an                                                                                                            n.a.
              Sonora                                                                          65              1,000         Yearly          26,078          14.0             n.a.
                                    Mayores          integral scheme to satisfy basic
                                                                  needs.




33
                                    Asistencia
                                                    Guarantee the access to food for                                                                                                          n.a.
              Veracruz           Alimentaria para                                             65              n.a.         Monthly           n.a.           n.a.             n.a.
                                                       the elderly population.
                                 el Adulto Mayor

                                  Sumando a los                                                                                                                                               0.005
              Zacatecas                                            n.a                        70              400          Quarterly        2,000            1.3              9
                                    Abuelos


     Source: Based on Inventario CONEV  AL de Programas y Acciones Estatales de Desarrollo Social (2012, 2013 y 2014), Catalogo de Programas y Acciones Federales y Estatales para el Desarrollo Social
     http://www.programassociales.mx/ and information from the state governments. Income per capita data comes from the ENIGH-MCS 2014, and state GDP data comes from INEGI.
     Note: The programs Pensión Alimentaria para Adultos de 70 y más años (Oaxaca), 70 y mas urbano (Puebla), and Abuelito estoy contigo (Quintana Roo) were discontinued in 2013. The average exchange
     rate in 2014 was roughly 14 pesos per U.S. Dollar. The average current per capita income in 2014 was $3,459 pesos per month. Elderly refers to population 65 years of age and older.
     Appendix B

                                                                  Table B.1: Pension Program for Older Adults - PAM

                                                                                                                                                                  Executed
                                             Monthly   Share in     Lump-sum       Eligibility                                                       Share in      budget
          Year          Objective                                                                  Village size (inhabitants)        Beneﬁciaries                            Share in
                                             amount    Income        for death   (minimum age)                                                      Elderly (%)   (million
                                                                                                                                                                             GDP (%)
                                                                                                                                                                   pesos)

                   To improve the life
                   conditions of older                                                            Only villages of up to 2,500
          2007                                 500       16.1           0             70                                              1,031,005        16.0        6,001       0.05
                   adults through cash                                                                    inhabitants.
                        transfers

                                                                                                  Priority given to older adults
                    To improve the life                                                          living in rural villages of up to
                    conditions of older                                                           2,500 inhabitants. Afterwards,
                   adults through cash                                                           priority given to villages of up
          2008   transfers and to support      500       16.3           0             70         to 10,000 inhabitants. If budget     1,863,945        28.1        9,537       0.08
                        its personal                                                              allows, extending coverage to




34
                  development through                                                                 villages of up to 20,000
                    social participation                                                           inhabitants prioritizing from
                                                                                                 greater to less marginalization.

                                                                                                 Priority given to villages of up
                    To improve the life
                                                                                                 to 30,000 inhabitants. If budget
                 conditions through cash
          2009                                 500       16.7           0             70            allows, the program could         2,050,626        29.9        12,407      0.10
                 transfers and to increase
                                                                                                  gradually increase coverage to
                     social protection.
                                                                                                         larger localities.

                                                                                                 Priority given to villages of up
                    To improve the life
                                                                                                 to 30,000 inhabitants. If budget
                 conditions through cash
          2010                                 500       17.2          1000           70            allows, the program could         2,105,306        29.8        12,923      0.10
                 transfers and to increase
                                                                                                  gradually increase coverage to
                     social protection.
                                                                                                         larger localities.

     Continued
                                                                                                                                                                Executed
                                            Monthly   Share in   Lump-sum       Eligibility                                                        Share in      budget
          Year          Objective                                                                Village size (inhabitants)        Beneﬁciaries                            Share in
                                            amount    Income      for death   (minimum age)                                                       Elderly (%)   (million
                                                                                                                                                                           GDP(%)
                                                                                                                                                                 pesos)

                    To increase social
                                                                                              Priority given to villages of up
                 protection and income,
                                                                                              to 30,000 inhabitants. If budget
                 and to reduce physical
          2011                                500       16.4       1000            70            allows, the program could          2,149,024        29.5        12,972      0.09
                   and mental health
                                                                                               gradually increase coverage to
                  deterioration of older
                                                                                                      larger localities.
                          adults

                    To increase social                                                         Priority given to villages of up
                 protection and income,                                                        to 30,000 inhabitants. Program
                 and to reduce physical                                                         expansion to localities larger
          2012                                500       15.7       1000            70                                               3,056,816        40.7        17,693      0.11
                   and mental health                                                          than 30,000 will be prioritized in
                  deterioration of older                                                       the neighborhoods with higher
                          adults                                                                      poverty incidence.

                     To increase social
                 protection and income,




35
                       and to reduce
                    vulnerabilities and
          2013     physical and mental        525       15.8       1050            65                National coverage              4,851,025        62.7        24,324      0.15
                  health deterioration of
                 older adults that do not
                   receive pensions or
                    retirement income.

                     To increase social
                 security coverage and to
                  ensure a basic income
                 for older adults that do
          2014                                580       16.8       1160            65                National coverage              5,487,664        68.7        36,478      0.21
                 not receive pensions or
                    retirement income
                   (greater than $1,092
                    pesos per month).

     Continued
                                                                                                                                                                                  Executed
                                                Monthly        Share in      Lump-sum         Eligibility                                                          Share in        budget
          Year            Objective                                                                               Village size (inhabitants)      Beneﬁciaries                                   Share in
                                                amount         Income         for death     (minimum age)                                                         Elderly (%)     (million
                                                                                                                                                                                                 GDP (%)
                                                                                                                                                                                   pesos)

                       To increase social
                   security coverage and to
                    ensure a basic income
                   for older adults that are
                   poor or vulnerable, and
          2015                                     580            15.9           1160              65                 National coverage             5,701,662         69.1          39,707          0.22
                      that do not receive
                    pensions or retirement
                     income (greater than
                       $1,092 pesos per
                            month).

                       To increase social
                   security coverage and to
                    ensure a basic income
                   for older adults that are




36
                   poor or vulnerable, and
          2016                                     580            15.2           1160              65                 National coverage                n.a.           n.a.           n.a.           n.a.
                      that do not receive
                    pensions or retirement
                     income (greater than
                       $1,092 pesos per
                            month).

     Source: Authors’ elaboration based on the Program Operating Rules, published in the Federal Ofﬁcial Gazzette (Diario Oﬁcial de la Federacion - DOF), 2007-2016. Population projections come from CONAPO,
     and national GDP data come from INEGI.
     Note: Frequency of the payment is every 2 months. Since 2012, the program has been “banking” (adding electronic card payments as a payment method) or promoting bancarization of its beneﬁciaries. Since
     2014, the program eligibility requirements include being a Mexican national or foreigner with at least 25 years of residence in Mexico. While the program has never approved the coincidence with PROSPERA’s
     Component for Older Adults, since 2010 it has been promoting access of its beneﬁciaries to other social programs such as INAPAM and Seguro Popular. Elderly refers to population 65 years of age and older.
Appendix C
In Mexico, PAM is not the only non-contributory pension program. To accurately estimate the
effects of PAM’s expansion, we eliminate from the sample some of the states where large similar
social pension programs were implemented or still operate. Similar programs might impact both
the poverty rates and the labor supply of the treatment and control groups. Therefore, by including
states with large similar operating programs, results might be biased. We identify the states with
other social pension programs using a methodology that involved two approaches.

First, with the ENIGH-MCS we estimated, at a state level, the mean value of the transfers received
from any social pension program other than PAM. This estimate identiﬁes the relative signiﬁcance
of these transfers across states. In the states with values above zero, we looked at the estimates’
distribution to identify extreme values or outliers distorting the mean.17 Finally, with a weighted
scatter plot we examined the coverage of the transfers in each state.

Second, we checked the 2011 to 2014 national inventory of programs and actions for social develop-
ment executed by public agencies at a federal, state, and local levels. This inventory is developed
by the National Council for the Evaluation of the Social Development Policy (CONEVAL), and in
principle registers any existing social pension programs. We complemented the previous information
with the Catálogo de Programas y Acciones Federales y Estatales para el Desarrollo Social, a catalogue that
collects the main characteristics of all the social programs implemented in Mexico since 2009.18 Fi-
nally, the governments of the states of Zacatecas and Coahuila were contacted directly to corroborate
that no social pension program was implemented over the period of analysis.

In the state of Chiapas and Distrito Federal (Mexico City) the mean value from other social pension
programs were signiﬁcantly different from zero, with an important coverage, and were registered
in both inventories in all the years covered by this research (2010-2014). Thus, these were the only
states eliminated from the sample. The elimination of other states might be debatable from different
perspectives, and might generate the loss of statistical power for the research. In other words, to
minimize any rule-out mistake, we used the intersection of the results from both approaches.




17 We  use the Nick Cox’s “extremes” STATA command. This command lists ﬁve lowest and ﬁve highest extreme values of a numeric variable.
   Detailed information about the command is available at: https://ideas.repec.org/c/boc/bocode/s430801.html
18 Information available at: http://www.programassociales.mx/




                                                                 37
Appendix D

   Table D.1: Sociodemographic Characteristics of Mexican Population 65 Years and Older (2010-2014)

                                                               2010                 2012                 2014
                                                         Millions      %      Millions      %      Millions      %

            Sex
              Males                                        3.6        46.1      3.9        45.7      4.1        45.5
              Females                                      4.2        53.9      4.7        54.3      4.9        54.5
            Social Context
              Urban                                        5.8        74.5      6.4        73.6      6.8        74.9
              Rural                                        2.0        25.5      2.3        26.4      2.3        25.1
            Indigenous Language Speaker
              Yes                                          0.8        10.3      0.8         9.4      0.8         9.1
              No                                           7.0        89.7      7.8        90.6      8.2        90.9
            Age Cohorts
              65-69                                        2.7        34.3      2.9        34.0      3.1        34.5
              70-74                                        2.1        26.8      2.3        26.4      2.4        26.3
              75-79                                        1.3        17.1      1.6        18.1      1.6        18.1
              80+                                          1.7        21.8      1.9        21.5      1.9        21.1
              Total                                        7.8        100.0     8.6        100.0     9.1        100.0
            Household Structure
              Single household                             1.0        12.5      1.1        12.8      1.2        13.1
              Nuclear                                      3.3        42.5      3.8        43.5      4.0        44.2
              Extended                                     3.4        43.7      3.7        42.3      3.8        41.6
              Compound                                     0.1         1.1      0.1         1.2      0.1         1.0
              Correspondent                                0.0         0.2      0.0         0.2      0.0         0.1
              Total                                        7.8        100.0     8.6        100.0     9.1        100.0
            Relationship with the household head
              Household head                               3.9        50.1      4.4        50.6      4.6        50.4
              Single household                             1.0        12.5      1.1        12.8      1.2        13.1
              Partnership                                  1.6        20.4      1.8        20.9      1.9        21.3
              Parenthood                                   0.8         9.7      0.7         8.1      0.7         7.6
              Sibling                                      0.1         1.7      0.1         1.4      0.2         1.7
              Father/Mother in Law                         0.3         3.6      0.3         3.6      0.3         3.4
              Other                                        0.2         2.0      0.2         2.4      0.2         2.4
              Total                                        7.8        100.0     8.6        100.0     9.1        100.0
            Dwelling Deprivations
              Quality and spaces of the dwelling
                 Yes                                       0.8        10.4      0.7         8.3      0.7         7.7
                 No                                        7.0        89.6      7.9        91.8      8.4        92.3
              Access to basic services in the dwelling
                 Yes                                       1.8        23.7      1.9        22.3      2.0        21.8
                 No                                        5.9        76.3      6.7        77.7      7.1        78.2
            Schooling
              Illiterate                                   2.1        27.6      2.2        25.7      2.2        24.1
              Educational Gap                              5.2        66.2      5.4        63.1      5.5        60.7
            Access to Food Deprivation
              Yes                                          1.7        21.4      1.7        19.9      1.8        20.0
              No                                           6.1        46.8      6.1        77.9      6.0        76.8
            Access to Health Services Deprivation
              No                                           6.0        77.2      7.3        84.3      7.9        86.9
              Yes                                          1.8        22.8      1.4        15.7      1.2        13.1


Continued




                                                             38
                                                                       2010                 2012                 2014
                                                                 Millions      %      Millions      %      Millions      %

               Access to health services, by institution
                Seguro Popular                                     2.0        33.2      3.0        40.6      3.5        44.4
                IMSS                                               2.7        45.3      3.0        41.6      3.1        39.6
                ISSSTE                                             0.8        12.7      0.9        11.7      0.9        11.5
                Pemex, Defensa o Marina                            0.1         2.1      0.1         1.6      0.1         1.5
                Otros health services via social security          0.3         4.2      0.1         1.3      0.1         0.9
                Private health insurance                           0.0         0.8      0.1         0.7      0.1         0.9
                Other                                              0.1         1.7      0.2         2.5      0.1         1.2
                Total elderly with access to health services       6.0        100.0     7.3        100.0     7.9        100.0


Source: Based on authors’ calculations with the ENIGH-MCS 2010, 2012 and 2014.
Note: The mean years of schooling in the period were the following: 2010 (4.2), 2012 (4.5) and 2014 (4.7).




                                                                   39
Appendix E

Table E.1: Program Effects on Extreme Poverty Headcount Index ( FGT0 ) (All Household Members Included)

                                                              No controls                           Controls

                                                     LPM         Probit       Logit       LPM         Probit       Logit
                       Treat * year 2014           -0.060**     -0.055**    -0.054**    -0.055**    -0.051***    -0.049***
                                                   [-0.025]     [-0.022]    [-0.021]    [-0.021]     [-0.018]     [-0.017]
                       Treat                        0.049**      0.047**     0.047**     0.029*       0.028*       0.028*
                                                   [-0.020]     [-0.019]    [-0.019]    [-0.017]     [-0.016]     [-0.016]
                       Year 2014                     0.003        0.003       0.003      -0.020       -0.018       -0.016
                                                   [-0.016]     [-0.016]    [-0.016]    [-0.057]     [-0.061]     [-0.059]
                       Observations                 44,158       44,158      44,158      36,592       36,592       36,592



Table E.2: Program Effects on Poverty Gap Index ( FGT1 ) and Poverty Severity Index ( FGT2 ) (All Household
                                                              Members Included)

                                                              Poverty Gap Index         Poverty Severity Index

                                                         No controls        Controls    No controls      Controls
                               Treat * year 2014          -0.024***         -0.022***    -0.017***       -0.016***
                                                           [-0.009]          [-0.008]     [-0.006]        [-0.005]
                               Treat                       0.017**            0.009       0.011**          0.006
                                                           [-0.008]          [-0.007]     [-0.005]        [-0.005]
                               Year 2014                    -0.006             0.001       -0.004          -0.007
                                                           [-0.006]           -0.025      [-0.004]        [-0.018]
                               Observations                 44,158            36,592       44,158          36,592



Table E.3: Program Effects on Multi-dimensional Extreme Poverty Headcount Index (All Household Members
                                                                     Included)

                                                              No controls                           Controls

                                                 LPM            Probit        Logit        LPM         Probit       Logit
                     Treat * year 2014         -0.046**       -0.041***     -0.040***   -0.042***    -0.026***    -0.024***
                                               [-0.018]        [-0.014]      [-0.013]    [-0.015]     [-0.007]     [-0.006]
                     Treat                       0.025           0.023         0.022       0.012        0.008        0.008
                                               [-0.016]        [-0.015]      [-0.014]    [-0.013]     [-0.008]     [-0.007]
                     Year 2014                  -0.007          -0.007        -0.007      -0.006       0.001        -0.004
                                               [-0.011]        [-0.011]      [-0.011]    [-0.043]     [-0.029]     [-0.026]
                     Observations               44,158          44,158        44,158      36,592       36,518       36,518


Note: Estimates signiﬁcance level *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. We report standard errors in brackets. Standard errors heteroscedasticity-
robust and clustered at the primary sampling unit level. Income variables used were adjusted to per adult-equivalent at August 2014
prices. The column titled "controls" show the results of estimations in which the following conditioning variables were used: village
size range, years of schooling, literacy, household size, dwelling’s ownership status, sex, indigenouos language speaker status, disability
condition, household structure, marital status, employment condition, access to Seguro Popular, income from Conditional Cash Transfer
Program - PROSPERA, income from PROCAMPO, overcrowding, access to drinking water, access to sewage, access to electricity, and a
full set of the preceding covariates interacted with the time dummy.




                                                                            40
Appendix F

   Table F.1: Placebo test - Absence of Program Effects on Poverty Headcount Index ( FGT0 ) (2010-2012)

                                                             No controls                          Controls

                                                   LPM         Probit        Logit       LPM        Probit       Logit
                        Treat * year 2012          0.032        0.031         0.030      0.033       0.034        0.034
                                                 [-0.022]     [-0.023]      [-0.023]   [-0.021]    [-0.023]     [-0.023]
                        Treat                      0.024        0.024         0.024      0.001       0.000        0.000
                                                 [-0.015]     [-0.016]      [-0.016]   [-0.014]    [-0.015]     [-0.015]
                        Year 2012                 0.010        0.011         0.011      0.159*      0.169*       0.165*
                                                 [-0.017]     [-0.018]      [-0.018]   [-0.085]     [-0.09]     [-0.091]
                        Observations              13,122       13,122        13,122     13,094      13,094       13,094



Table F.2: Placebo test - Absence of Program Effects on Poverty Gap Index ( FGT1 ) and Poverty Severity Index
                                         ( FGT2 ) (2010-2012). Ordinary Least Squares

                                                            Poverty Gap Index          Poverty Severity Index

                                                     No controls           Controls    No controls      Controls
                             Treat * year 2012          0.011                0.011        0.007           0.006
                                                      [-0.010]             [-0.001]     [-0.007]        [-0.007]
                             Treat                     0.017**              0.007        0.011**         0.005
                                                      [-0.008]             [-0.007]     [-0.005]        [-0.005]
                             Year 2012                  0.067               -0.040        0.007          0.050
                                                      [-0.007]             [-0.041]     [-0.005]        [-0.031]
                             Observations              13,122               13,094       13,122          13,094



Table F.3: Placebo test - Absence of Program Effects on Multi-dimensional Extreme Poverty Headcount Index
                                                                (2010-2012)

                                                             No controls                          Controls

                                                   LPM         Probit        Logit       LPM        Probit        Logit
                        Treat * year 2012         -0.001       -0.001        -0.001      0.009       0.005        0.008
                                                 [-0.019]     [-0.019]      [-0.019]   [-0.017]    [-0.016]     [-0.014]
                        Treat                      0.022        0.022         0.022     -0.002      -0.002       -0.003
                                                 [-0.013]     [-0.013]      [-0.013]   [-0.013]    [-0.011]      [-0.01]
                        Year 2012                 -0.005       -0.005        -0.005      0.074       0.066        0.072
                                                 [-0.015]     [-0.016]      [-0.016]   [-0.076]    [-0.067]     [-0.061]
                        Observations              13,121       13,121        13,121     13,093      13,075       13,075


Note: Estimates signiﬁcance level *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. We report standard errors in brackets. Standard errors heteroscedasticity-
robust and clustered at the primary sampling unit level. Income variables used were adjusted to per adult-equivalent at August 2014
prices. The column titled "controls" show the results of estimations in which the following conditioning variables were used: village
size range, years of schooling, literacy, household size, dwelling’s ownership status, sex, indigenouos language speaker status, disability
condition, household structure, marital status, employment condition, access to Seguro Popular, income from Conditional Cash Transfer
Program - PROSPERA, income from PROCAMPO, overcrowding, access to drinking water, access to sewage, access to electricity, and a
full set of the preceding covariates interacted with the time dummy.




                                                                         41
      Table F.4: Placebo test - Absence of Program Effects on Social Rights Deprivations (2010-2012)

                                                 No controls                           Controls

                                        LPM        Probit        Logit       LPM        Probit      Logit


                   Panel A: Effects on access to social security
                 Treat * year 2012      -0.023     -0.023     -0.023         -0.011      -0.015     -0.016
                                       [-0.027]   [-0.027]   [-0.027]       [-0.023]    [-0.031]   [-0.033]
                 Treat                   0.025      0.025      0.024         -0.009      -0.016     -0.013
                                       [-0.018]   [-0.018]   [-0.018]       [-0.016]    [-0.021]   [-0.022]
                 Year 2012               0.020      0.019      0.019          0.013      -0.019      0.007
                                       [-0.019]   [-0.019]   [-0.019]         [-0.1]    [-0.129]   [-0.133]
                 Observations           13,122     13,122     13,122         13,066      13,066     13,066


                   Panel B: Effects on access to health care services
                 Treat * year 2012       -0.033    -0.030     -0.029         -0.025      -0.026     -0.023
                                        [-0.022]  [-0.022]   [-0.021]       [-0.022]    [-0.022]   [-0.022]
                 Treat                   0.030*    0.027*     0.026*          0.024       0.024      0.022
                                        [-0.017]  [-0.015]   [-0.015]       [-0.016]    [-0.015]   [-0.015]
                 Year 2012             -0.069*** -0.070***  -0.070***        -0.029      -0.029     -0.029
                                        [-0.016]  [-0.016]   [-0.016]       [-0.097]    [-0.088]   [-0.085]
                 Observations            13,122    13,122     13,122         13,094      13,094     13,094


                   Panel C: Effects on access to food (food security)
                 Treat * year 2012       0.005      0.005      0.005          0.008       0.007      0.010
                                       [-0.022]   [-0.022]   [-0.022]       [-0.022]    [-0.022]   [-0.022]
                 Treat                   0.015      0.015      0.015         -0.008      -0.010     -0.011
                                       [-0.016]   [-0.016]   [-0.016]       [-0.016]    [-0.016]   [-0.016]
                 Year 2012              -0.007     -0.007     -0.007          0.000       0.012      0.013
                                       [-0.015]   [-0.016]   [-0.016]       [-0.099]    [-0.093]   [-0.091]
                 Observations           13,122     13,122     13,122         13,094      13,094     13,094


                   Panel D: Effects on quality and spaces of the dwelling
                 Treat * year 2012      -0.015    -0.013      -0.012       -0.004        -0.001     -0.003
                                       [-0.015]  [-0.014]    [-0.013]     [-0.014]      [-0.011]    [-0.01]
                 Treat                  0.020*    0.019*      0.018*        0.008         0.004      0.003
                                        [-0.01]   [-0.01]     [-0.01]      [-0.01]      [-0.008]   [-0.007]
                 Year 2012              -0.010    -0.010      -0.010       -0.057        -0.013     -0.011
                                       [-0.011]  [-0.012]    [-0.012]     [-0.056]      [-0.046]   [-0.044]
                 Observations           13,121    13,121      13,121       13,093        13,093     13,093


                   Panel E: Effects on access to basic services in the dwelling
                 Treat * year 2012     -0.046**   -0.045**    -0.045**      -0.023       -0.028     -0.027
                                       [-0.023]   [-0.022]    [-0.021]     [-0.018]      [-0.02]   [-0.018]
                 Treat                 0.062***   0.062***    0.062***       0.016       0.0144     0.0139
                                       [-0.016]   [-0.016]    [-0.016]     [-0.013]     [-0.016]   [-0.014]
                 Year 2012               0.021      0.022       0.022       -0.029       -0.055     -0.045
                                        [-0.02]   [-0.021]    [-0.021]     [-0.074]     [-0.104]   [-0.109]
                 Observations           13,122     13,122      13,122       13,094       13,094     13,094


Continued




                                                            42
                                                                No controls                                Controls

                                                      LPM            Probit         Logit        LPM        Probit         Logit


                         Panel F: Effects on educational gap
                       Treat * year 2012      0.018     0.014                      0.013         0.032        0.037         0.036
                                             [-0.027] [-0.027]                   [-0.027]      [-0.024]     [-0.027]      [-0.028]
                       Treat                 0.107*** 0.109***                   0.110***      0.072***     0.087***      0.088***
                                             [-0.017] [-0.018]                   [-0.018]      [-0.016]     [-0.018]      [-0.019]
                       Year 2012             -0.049** -0.048**                   -0.047**      -0.197**     -0.228**      -0.222**
                                             [-0.019] [-0.019]                   [-0.018]      [-0.088]     [-0.095]      [-0.097]
                       Observations           13,122   13,122                     13,122        13,094       13,094        13,094

Note: Estimates signiﬁcance level *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. We report the standard errors in brackets. The standard errors are
heteroscedasticity-robust and clustered at the primary sampling unit level. The column titled "controls" show the results of estimations in
which the following conditioning variables were used: village size range, years of schooling, literacy, household size, dwelling’s ownership
status, sex, indigenous language speaker status, disability condition, household structure, marital status, employment condition, income
from Conditional Cash Transfer Program - PROSPERA, income from PROCAMPO, and a full set of interactions between the preceding
covariates and the time dummy. In Panel F the estimations with controls exclude years of schooling, literary variables, and its respective
time dummy interactions.


         Table F.5: Placebo test - Absence of Program Effects on Labor Force Participation (2010-2012)

                                                              No controls                                 Controls

                                                    LPM          Probit          Logit          LPM        Probit        Logit
                        Treat*year 2012            -0.012        -0.012          -0.012         0.000       0.006         0.005
                                                  [-0.024]      [-0.024]        [-0.024]      [-0.018]    [-0.032]      [-0.036]
                        Treat                    -0.075***     -0.076***       -0.076***       -0.038      -0.058        -0.057
                                                  [-0.017]      [-0.017]        [-0.017]      [-0.025]    [-0.043]      [-0.049]
                        Year 2012                 0.055***      0.055***        0.055***        0.021       0.072         0.053
                                                  [-0.017]      [-0.017]        [-0.017]      [-0.072]    [-0.116]      [-0.129]
                        Observations               13,122        13,122          13,122        13,094      13,090        13,090

Note: Estimates signiﬁcance level *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. We report the standard errors in brackets. The standard errors are
heteroscedasticity-robust and clustered at the primary sampling unit level. The column titled "controls" show the results of estimations in
which the following conditioning variables were used: age, age-squared, relationship with the head of household, number of income
earners in the household, number of employed persons in the household, village size range, years of schooling, literacy, household size,
dwelling’s ownership status, sex, indigenous language speaker status, disability condition, household structure, marital status, and a full
set of interactions between the preceding covariates and the time dummy.


     Table F.6: Placebo test - Absence of Program Effects on the Use of Time Including Work (2010-2012)

                                 Work                                 Study                    Community Service               Care-giving without pay

                     No Controls        Controls        No Controls           Controls      No Controls     Controls           No Controls         Controls
  Treat*year 2012      -177.8**         -123.3*               -8.89            -7.73           9.081          8.878                -21.71           -39.69
                       [-77.06]         [-63.02]             [-9.738]         [-9.469]        [-10.43]       [-11.84]              [-44.01]        [-40.33]
  Observations          12,352           12,326              12,350            12,324          12,349         12,323               12,349          12,323


                      Dwelling Maintenance                      Housekeeping                Carrying water or ﬁrewood                    Leisure

                     No Controls        Controls        No Controls           Controls      No Controls     Controls           No Controls     Controls
  Treat*year 2012       28.31*           23.51                 5.3             7.912           -16.06         -8.068                 31.87          7.073
                       [-14.53]         [-14.38]             [-54.16]         [-44.72]        [-13.13]       [-14.21]              [-50.75]        [-49.69]
  Observations          12,348           12,322               12,344           12,318          12,350         12,324                12,293          12,267

Note: Estimates signiﬁcance level *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. We report the standard errors in brackets. The standard errors are
heteroscedasticity-robust and clustered at the primary sampling unit level. The column titled "controls" show the results of estimations in
which the following conditioning variables were used: age, age-squared, relationship with the head of household, number of income
earners in the household, number of employed persons in the household, village size range, years of schooling, literacy, household size,
dwelling’s ownership status, sex, indigenous language speaker status, disability condition, household structure, marital status, and a full
set of interactions between the preceding covariates and the time dummy.


                                                                               43
     Table F.7: Placebo test - Absence of Program Effects on Private Transfers from Other Households and
                                                     Remittances (2010-2012)

                                                        Private Transfers                Remittances

                                                    No controls     Controls        No controls    Controls
                              Treat*year 2012          -0.105         -0.079           0.098         0.211
                                                      [-0.149]       [-0.119]        [-0.202]      [-0.161]
                              Treat                    0.126          0.057           -0.023         -0.070
                                                      [-0.128]       [-0.096]        [-0.136]      [-0.118]
                              Year 2012              -1.080***      -1.724***         -0.247        -0.0401
                                                      [-0.112]       [-0.434]        [-0.174]      [-0.882]
                              Observations             5,640          5,634            1,196         1,195


Note: Estimates signiﬁcance level *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. We report the standard errors in brackets. The standard errors are
heteroscedasticity-robust and clustered at the primary sampling unit level. The column titled "controls" show the results of estimations in
which the following conditioning variables were used: employment status, village size range, years of schooling, literacy, household size,
dwelling’s ownership status, sex, indigenous language speaker status, disability condition, household structure, marital status, income
from the Conditional Cash Transfer Program - PROSPERA and a full set of interactions between the preceding covariates and the time
dummy.




                                                                   44
Table F.8: Robustness check - Absence of Effects on “Outcomes” not Supposed to be Impacted by the Program

                                                       No controls                           Controls

                                               LPM       Probit        Logit       LPM        Probit      Logit

                        Panel A: Effects on disability condition
                      Treat * year 2014      -0.011     -0.013   -0.013            -0.022     -0.024      -0.022
                                            [-0.020]   [-0.019] [-0.019]          [-0.020]   [-0.018]    [-0.018]
                      Treat                 0.056*** 0.058***   0.058***          0.038***   0.039***    0.038***
                                            [-0.015]   [-0.015] [-0.015]          [-0.014]   [-0.014]    [-0.014]
                      Year 2014              0.022*     0.024*   0.024*            0.046      0.022       0.028
                                            [-0.013]   [-0.014] [-0.014]          [-0.075]   [-0.074]    [-0.072]
                      Observations           13,120     13,120   13,120            13,120     13,120      13,120

                        Panel B: Effects on indigenous language speaker condition
                      Treat * year 2014      0.015     0.016     0.016       0.011              0.010      0.006
                                            [-0.015] [-0.016]  [-0.016]    [-0.014]           [-0.012]   [-0.011]
                      Treat                  -0.006   -0.006    -0.006      -0.013            -0.014*     -0.011
                                            [-0.011] [-0.011]  [-0.011]    [-0.011]           [-0.008]   [-0.007]
                      Year 2014              -0.011   -0.011    -0.011      -0.035             -0.025     -0.022
                                            [-0.014] [-0.014]  [-0.014]    [-0.064]           [-0.056]   [-0.053]
                      Observations           13,120   13,120    13,120      13,120             13,120     13,120

                        Panel C: Effects on access to drinking water
                      Treat * year 2014      0.010      0.009     0.009             0.008       0.006      0.004
                                            [-0.014]  [-0.014]  [-0.015]          [-0.014]    [-0.011]   [-0.009]
                      Treat                  -0.008    -0.007    -0.007           -0.018*     -0.013*    -0.010*
                                            [-0.011]   [-0.01]   [-0.01]           [-0.01]    [-0.007]   [-0.006]
                      Year 2014             -0.025*   -0.025*   -0.025*            -0.061      -0.042     -0.031
                                            [-0.014]  [-0.014]  [-0.014]          [-0.051]    [-0.041]   [-0.039]
                      Observations           13,120    13,120    13,120            13,120      13,112     13,112

                        Panel D: Effects on access to sewage
                      Treat * year 2014      -0.009    -0.008         -0.008       -0.008      -0.004     -0.003
                                            [-0.015]  [-0.014]       [-0.014]     [-0.014]    [-0.008]   [-0.006]
                      Treat                   0.012     0.012          0.012       -0.001      -0.002     -0.002
                                            [-0.011]  [-0.011]       [-0.011]     [-0.011]    [-0.006]   [-0.005]
                      Year 2014              -0.007    -0.007         -0.007       -0.006      -0.035     -0.040
                                            [-0.012]  [-0.012]       [-0.013]     [-0.047]    [-0.047]   [-0.045]
                      Observations           13,120    13,120         13,120       13,120      13,120     13,120


Note: Estimates signiﬁcance level *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. We report the standard errors in brackets. The standard errors are
heteroscedasticity-robust and clustered at the primary sampling unit level. Income variables used were adjusted to per adult-equivalent
at August 2014 prices. The column titled "controls" show the results of estimations in which the following conditioning variables were
used: village size range, years of schooling, literacy, household size, dwelling’s ownership status, sex, household structure, marital
status, employment condition, access to Seguro Popular, income from Conditional Cash Transfer Program - PROSPERA, income from
PROCAMPO, overcrowding and a full set of interactions between the preceding covariates and the time dummy.




                                                                  45
Table F.9: Robustness check - Program Effects on Poverty Headcount Index ( FGT0 ) with Alternative Control
                                                        Group (56 to 59 years old)

                                                                No controls                           Controls

                                                      LPM         Probit        Logit       LPM         Probit      Logit
                        Treat * year 2014           -0.034**     -0.030**      -0.029*    -0.034**     -0.031**    -0.032**
                                                    [-0.017]     [-0.015]      [-0.015]   [-0.016]     [-0.014]    [-0.013]
                        Treat                       0.046***     0.045***      0.045***     0.015        0.012       0.012
                                                    [-0.013]     [-0.012]      [-0.012]   [-0.012]     [-0.012]    [-0.011]
                        Year 2014                    -0.006       -0.007        -0.007     -0.043       -0.062      -0.051
                                                    [-0.011]     [-0.012]      [-0.012]   [-0.068]     [-0.062]    [-0.061]
                        Observations                 20,273       20,273        20,273     20,273       20,273      20,273



 Table F.10: Robustness check - Program Effects on Poverty Gap Index ( FGT1 ) and Poverty Severity Index
              ( FGT2 ) with Alternative Control Group (56 to 59 years old). Ordinary Least Squares

                                                               Poverty Gap Index          Poverty Severity Index

                                                         No controls          Controls    No controls      Controls
                                Treat * year 2014         -0.026***           -0.026***    -0.022***       -0.021***
                                                           [-0.007]            [-0.007]     [-0.005]        [-0.005]
                                Treat                      0.025***            0.012**      0.017***        0.009**
                                                           [-0.006]            [-0.006]     [-0.004]        [-0.004]
                                Year 2014                   -0.001               0.115       -0.002          -0.003
                                                           [-0.005]            [-0.027]     [-0.003]        [-0.020]
                                Observations                20,273              20,273       20,273          20,273



Table F.11: Robustness check - Program Effects on Multi-dimensional Extreme Poverty Headcount Index with
                                            Alternative Control Group (56 to 59 years old)

                                                               No controls                             Controls

                                                   LPM            Probit        Logit        LPM         Probit       Logit
                     Treat * year 2014          -0.050***       -0.045***     -0.044***   -0.044***    -0.027***    -0.022***
                                                 [-0.012]        [-0.009]      [-0.009]    [-0.013]     [-0.006]     [-0.005]
                     Treat                       0.025**         0.022**       0.022**       0.000       -0.003       -0.003
                                                  [-0.01]        [-0.009]      [-0.009]     [-0.01]     [-0.006]     [-0.004]
                     Year 2014                    -0.008          -0.008        -0.008      -0.005       -0.001       -0.004
                                                 [-0.009]        [-0.009]      [-0.009]    [-0.057]     [-0.032]     [-0.028]
                     Observations                 20,272          20,272        20,272      20,272       20,272       20,272


Note: Estimates signiﬁcance level *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. We report standard errors in brackets. Standard errors heteroscedasticity-
robust and clustered at the primary sampling unit level. Income variables used were adjusted to per adult-equivalent at August 2014
prices. The column titled "controls" show the results of estimations in which the following conditioning variables were used: village
size range, years of schooling, literacy, household size, dwelling’s ownership status, sex, indigenouos language speaker status, disability
condition, household structure, marital status, employment condition, access to Seguro Popular, income from Conditional Cash Transfer
Program - PROSPERA, income from PROCAMPO, overcrowding, access to drinking water, access to sewage, access to electricity, and a
full set of the preceding covariates interacted with the time dummy.




                                                                             46
Table F.12: Robustness check - Program Effects on Social Rights Deprivations with Alternative Control Group
                                                (56 to 59 years old)

                                                No controls                           Controls

                                       LPM        Probit       Logit        LPM        Probit      Logit


                  Panel A: Effects on access to social security
                Treat * year 2014     -0.248***  -0.259*** -0.262***      -0.225***   -0.268***   -0.285***
                                       [-0.022]    [-0.02]   [-0.02]       [-0.021]    [-0.024]    [-0.024]
                Treat                 -0.084***  -0.083*** -0.083***      -0.106***   -0.135***   -0.139***
                                       [-0.018]   [-0.018]  [-0.018]       [-0.016]    [-0.021]    [-0.022]
                Year 2014                0.012      0.012     0.012         -0.008      -0.011      -0.017
                                       [-0.016]   [-0.016]  [-0.016]        [-0.07]    [-0.088]    [-0.094]
                Observations            20,273     20,273    20,273         20,273      20,273      20,273


                  Panel B: Effects on access to health care services
                Treat * year 2014      -0.027*   -0.030*   -0.030**         -0.021      -0.023     -0.021
                                      [-0.016]   [-0.015]  [-0.015]        [-0.017]    [-0.016]   [-0.015]
                Treat                  -0.021*   -0.021*    -0.020*        -0.024*     -0.022*    -0.022*
                                      [-0.013]   [-0.012]  [-0.012]        [-0.014]    [-0.013]   [-0.012]
                Year 2014               -0.007    -0.007     -0.007         -0.045      -0.022     -0.026
                                      [-0.011]   [-0.011]  [-0.011]         [-0.07]    [-0.056]   [-0.053]
                Observations           20,273     20,273    20,273          20,273      20,273     20,273


                  Panel C: Effects on access to food (food security)
                Treat * year 2014      -0.018     -0.017     -0.017         -0.010      -0.010     -0.010
                                      [-0.019]   [-0.019]   [-0.018]       [-0.019]    [-0.018]   [-0.017]
                Treat                   0.011      0.010      0.010         -0.021     -0.024*    -0.024*
                                      [-0.016]   [-0.016]   [-0.016]       [-0.014]    [-0.014]   [-0.013]
                Year 2014               0.002      0.002      0.002         -0.018      -0.026     -0.029
                                      [-0.014]   [-0.014]   [-0.014]       [-0.071]    [-0.063]   [-0.061]
                Observations           20,273     20,273     20,273         20,273      20,273     20,273


                  Panel D: Effects on quality and spaces of the dwelling
                Treat * year 2014       0.002     0.001       0.001        0.014        0.005        0.007
                                      [-0.012]  [-0.012]    [-0.012]     [-0.013]      [-0.01]     [-0.009]
                Treat                  -0.013    -0.012      -0.012      -0.021**     -0.016**    -0.015***
                                      [-0.009]  [-0.009]    [-0.009]      [-0.01]     [-0.007]     [-0.006]
                Year 2014              -0.010    -0.010      -0.010        0.034        0.022        0.020
                                      [-0.009]  [-0.008]    [-0.008]     [-0.046]      [-0.03]     [-0.026]
                Observations           20,273    20,273      20,273       20,273       20,273       20,273


                  Panel E: Effects on access to basic services in the dwelling
                Treat * year 2014      -0.007     -0.006      -0.005       -0.002      -0.001       0.000
                                      [-0.016]   [-0.016]    [-0.016]     [-0.014]    [-0.013]    [-0.011]
                Treat                   0.019      0.019       0.018       -0.014     -0.023**    -0.019**
                                      [-0.013]   [-0.012]    [-0.012]     [-0.011]     [-0.01]    [-0.008]
                Year 2014              -0.019     -0.019      -0.019        0.026       0.017       0.018
                                      [-0.014]   [-0.014]    [-0.014]     [-0.047]     [-0.05]    [-0.045]
                Observations           20,272     20,272      20,272       20,272      20,272      20,272


Continued




                                                              47
                                                             No controls                               Controls

                                                   LPM          Probit           Logit        LPM        Probit         Logit


                         Panel F: Effects on educational gap
                       Treat * year 2014      -0.003    0.000                   0.000         0.000      -0.008         -0.007
                                             [-0.022] [-0.023]                [-0.023]      [-0.021]    [-0.024]       [-0.025]
                       Treat                 0.208*** 0.207***                0.206***      0.190***    0.229***       0.237***
                                             [-0.018] [-0.018]                [-0.018]      [-0.016]    [-0.018]       [-0.019]
                       Year 2014             -0.038** -0.041**                -0.041**       -0.012      -0.018         -0.009
                                             [-0.015] [-0.016]                [-0.016]      [-0.065]    [-0.079]       [-0.084]
                       Observations           20,273   20,273                  20,273        20,273      20,273         20,273

Note: Estimates signiﬁcance level *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. We report the standard errors in brackets. The standard errors are
heteroscedasticity-robust and clustered at the primary sampling unit level. Income variables used were adjusted to per adult-equivalent
at August 2014 prices. The column titled "controls" show the results of estimations in which the following conditioning variables were
used: village size range, years of schooling, literacy, household size, dwelling’s ownership status, sex, indigenous language speaker
status, disability condition, household structure, marital status, employment condition, income from Conditional Cash Transfer Program -
PROSPERA, income from PROCAMPO, and a full set of interactions between the preceding covariates and the time dummy. In Panel F
the estimations with controls exclude years of schooling, literary variables, and its respective time dummy interactions.


Table F.13: Robustness Check - Program Effects on Labor Force Participation Alternative Control Group (56 to
                                                                     59 years old)

                                                           No controls                                 Controls

                                                 LPM          Probit          Logit          LPM        Probit        Logit
                        Treat*year 2014       -0.0442**     -0.0454**       -0.0457**      -0.0222     -0.0324       -0.0375
                                               [-0.021]      [-0.022]        [-0.022]      [-0.017]    [-0.028]      [-0.031]
                        Treat                 -0.193***     -0.193***       -0.193***      -0.0477     -0.0833        -0.096
                                               [-0.016]      [-0.016]        [-0.016]      [-0.039]    [-0.062]      [-0.068]
                        Year 2014              0.00351       0.00366          0.0037       -0.0219     -0.0409       -0.0434
                                               [-0.011]      [-0.013]        [-0.013]      [-0.056]    [-0.088]      [-0.096]
                        Observations            20,273        20,273          20,273        20,273      20,265        20,265

Note: Estimates signiﬁcance level *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. We report the standard errors in brackets. The standard errors are
heteroscedasticity-robust and clustered at the primary sampling unit level. The column titled "controls" show the results of estimations in
which the following conditioning variables were used: age, age-squared, relationship with the head of household, number of income
earners in the household, number of employed persons in the household, village size range, years of schooling, literacy, household size,
dwelling’s ownership status, sex, indigenous language speaker status, disability condition, household structure, marital status, and a full
set of interactions between the preceding covariates and the time dummy.


Table F.14: Robustness check - Program Effects on the Use of Time Including Work with Alternative Control
                                                          Group (56 to 59 years old)

                                 Work                              Study                    Community Service               Care-giving without pay

                     No Controls        Controls     No Controls           Controls      No Controls     Controls          No Controls      Controls
  Treat*year 2014       -99.06           -46.24            7.391            3.342           0.775          0.164                  23.89          5.947
                       [-63.03]         [-57.33]          [-5.726]         [-6.234]        [-8.171]       [-9.822]              [-33.35]        [-32.15]
  Observations          18,915           18,915            18,916           18,916          18,910        18,910                18,904          18,904


                      Dwelling Maintenance                   Housekeeping                Carrying water or ﬁrewood                    Leisure

                     No Controls        Controls     No Controls           Controls      No Controls     Controls          No Controls      Controls
  Treat*year 2014       21.68            25.25*            27.24            4.302           -11.05        -13.19*               98.76**          66.33
                       [-14.17]         [-14.66]          [-42.59]         [-35.69]        [-7.177]       [-7.377]              [-44.59]        [-46.01]
  Observations          18,907           18,907            18,903           18,903          18,916        18,916                18,859          18,859

Note: Estimates signiﬁcance level *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. We report the standard errors in brackets. The standard errors are
heteroscedasticity-robust and clustered at the primary sampling unit level. The column titled "controls" show the results of estimations in
which the following conditioning variables were used: age, age-squared, relationship with the head of household, number of income


                                                                            48
earners in the household, number of employed persons in the household, village size range, years of schooling, literacy, household size,
dwelling’s ownership status, sex, indigenous language speaker status, disability condition, household structure, marital status, and a full
set of interactions between the preceding covariates and the time dummy.


Table F.15: Robustness check - Program Effects on Private Transfers from Other Households and Remittances
                                          with Alternative Control Group (56 to 59)

                                                        Private Transfers                Remittances

                                                    No controls     Controls        No controls    Controls
                              Treat*year 2014          0.071         -0.041            -0.18        -0.127
                                                      [-0.12]       [-0.115]         [-0.184]      [-0.174]
                              Treat                   0.150**         0.080            0.152        -0.046
                                                     [-0.073]       [-0.073]         [-0.133]      [-0.131]
                              Year 2014              0.793***        1.098**           0.167        1.248
                                                     [-0.085]       [-0.427]          [-0.15]      [-0.812]
                              Observations             8,419          8,419            1,272        1,272


Note: Estimates signiﬁcance level *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. We report the standard errors in brackets. The standard errors are
heteroscedasticity-robust and clustered at the primary sampling unit level. The column titled "controls" show the results of estimations in
which the following conditioning variables were used: employment status, village size range, years of schooling, literacy, household size,
dwelling’s ownership status, sex, indigenous language speaker status, disability condition, household structure, marital status, income
from the Conditional Cash Transfer Program - PROSPERA and a full set of interactions between the preceding covariates and the time
dummy.




                                                                   49
