                                             100528




               BANGLADESH

 MORE AND BETTER JOBS TO ACCELERATE SHARED
        GROWTH AND END EXTREME POVERTY



           A Systematic Country Diagnostic
                    Discussion Draft




                     June 29, 2015




South Asia Region
                                      ABBREVIATION

 ADM    Adaptive Delta Management                           IRT               International Road Transport
 ADP    Annual Development Plan                             IWT    Inland Water Transport
 AGPs   Apprenticeship Grants Programs                     KCT     Key Construction Test
   AL   Awami League                                        KM     Kilometer
ALMPs   Active labor market programs                         kW    Kilowatt
 ASA    Association for Social Advancement                 LDC     Least Developed Countries
 BAU    Business as usual                                   LFS    Labor Force Survey
 BBS    Bangladesh Bureau of Statistics                   LGED     Local Government Engineering Department
 BDT    Bangladesh Taka)                                   LNG     Liquefied Natural Gas
BEPZA   Bangladesh Export Processing Zones Authority         LPI   Logistics Performance Index
BERC    Bangladesh Energy Regulatory Commission            LSCI    Liner Shipping Connectivity Index
BIWTA   Bangladesh Inland Water Transport Authority        NBR     National Board of Revenue
 BNP    Bangladesh Nationalist Party                       NGO     Non-governmental organizations
BMET    Bureau of Manpower, Employment and Training         NFP    National Food Policy
BPDB    Bangladesh Power Development Board                NMCT     New Moorings Container Terminal
   BR   Bangladesh Railways                                MCF     Million Cubic Feet
BRAC    Bangladesh Rural Advancement Committee             MDG     Millennium Development Goals
 BST    Bulk Supply Tariff                                 M&E     Monitoring and Evaluation
 CCT    Chittagong Container Terminal                      MOC     Ministry of Commerce
  CIP   Country Investment Plan                           MoEF     Ministry of Environment and Forests
COEL    Center of Excellence for Leather Skill             MOU     Memorandum of Understanding
 CPA    Chittagong Port Authority                           MIC    Middle-income Country
 CPIA   Country Performance & Institutional Assessment     MICS    Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey
DNCC    Dhaka North City Corporation                      MRAs     Mutual Recognition Agreements
 DPT    Diphtheria-Pertussis-Tetanus                      MTIR     Mid-Term Implementation Review
DSCC    Dhaka South City Corporation                        MW     Megawatt
 EPB    Export Promotion Bureau                            PCU     Passenger Car Units
 ERD    Economic Relation Division                         PFM     Public Financial Management
 ETPs   Exchange Traded Products                           POA     Price On Application
   EU   European Union                                      PPP    Purchasing Power Parity
  FDI   Foreign Direct Investment                          PPPs    Public-Private Partnerships
   FP   Family Planning                                    PPRC    Power and Participation Research Centre
 FTA    Free Trade Agreement                               PWC     Pricewaterhouse Coopers
   FY   Fiscal Year                                         RCP    Representative Concentration Pathway
 FYP    Five-Year Plan                                     RMG     Ready Made Garments
 GBM    Ganges-Brahmaputra-Meghna                           RTI    Right to Information
 GDP    Gross Domestic Product                             SCD     Systematic Country Diagnostic
 GDW    Greater Dhaka Watershed                            SFYP    Second Five-Year Plan
 GED    General Economic Division                            TB    Tuberculosis
 GOB    Government of Bangladesh                           TEUs    Twenty-Foot Equivalent Units
 GON    Government of the Netherlands                       TFP    Total Factor Productivity
 GNI    Gross National Income                             TVET     Tech. & Vocational Education and Training
 GSP    Generalized System of Preferences                  TWH     Terawatt hour
 GTZ    German Agency for Technical Cooperation              UN    United Nations
 GWH    Gigawatt Hour                                     UNDP     United Nations Development Programme
HDRO    Human Development Report Office                  UNCTAD    UN Conference on Trade and Development
 HIES   Household Income and Expenditure Survey           UNIDO    UN Industrial Development Organization
  ICD   Inland Clearance Depot                             UAE     United Arab Emirates
 IDA    International Development Association                UK    United Kingdom
  IGC   Intergovernmental Committee                        USA     United States Of America
  IFC   International Finance Corporation                  USD     US dollar
 IMF    International Monetary Fund                        VAT     Value Added Tax
   IT   Information Technology                             WDI     World Development Indicators
 IOCs   International Oil Companies                        WBG     World Bank Group
 IPPs   Independent Power Producers                        WTO     World Trade Organization


                                                   ii
        Vice Presidents   : Annette Dixon (IDA)
                            Karen Finkelston (IFC)
       Country Director   : Johannes Zutt
 Country Manager (IFC)      Kyle Kelhofer
  Co-Task Leader (IDA)    : Salman Zaidi
  Co-Task Leader (IFC)    : M. Masrur Reaz
Co-Task Leader (MIGA)     : Paul Barbour




                    iii
                                             EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
1. Situated in a fertile low-lying river delta, Bangladesh combines high vulnerability to floods, tropical
cyclones, earthquakes, and climate change with one of the world’s highest population densities, with around
159 million people living in less than 150,000 sq. km. With the world’s second lowest per capita income in
1975, it was labeled “the test case for development” in view of the formidable deve lopment challenges it
faced. Nevertheless, Bangladesh has proven to be remarkably resilient and developed well beyond initial
expectations. GNI per capita has grown from around US$100 in 1972 to US$1,314 in 2015, and the country
crossed the World Bank threshold for the lower-middle-income group in 2015. Five striking achievements
of Bangladesh since its independence merit special mention:
   Impressive achievements of a pro-active family planning program, which helped lower total fertility
    from over 6 children per woman in the 1970s to 2.1 in 2011: Even though Bangladesh’s population
    increased by about 15 percent between 2000 and 2010, the working age population expanded even more
    rapidly, by 25 percent. This “demographic dividend” offers a promising, albeit short and one-time,
    window of opportunity for Bangladesh to enact policies and promote investments to raise human capital
    and productivity of these citizens entering the workforce.
   Improved food availability: Thanks to the uptake of high-yield varieties, improved availability of
    fertilizer and other key inputs, and better irrigation, domestic rice production (the main food crop) has
    risen from around 12.3m metric tons in the 1980s to 37.6m metric tons in 2014.
   Stronger disaster-coping mechanisms, as evidenced by reduced impact of recent storms, cyclones, and
    floods: The government, with active community participation, has devised effective strategies to
    mitigate the damage of natural disasters, including early warning and response systems and countless
    cyclone shelters in coastal areas across the country.
   Development of the extensive rural road network built in the 1980s by the Local Government
    Engineering Department: This network blurred the rural-urban divide and helped develop a continuum
    linking Dhaka, Chittagong, other secondary cities, towns, market centers, and villages.
   Special initiatives taken to tackle gender inequality and promote women’s empowerment :1 This
    included a schooling system that expanded girls’ education, mobilization of women by NGOs, and—
    more recently—their proactive recruitment by the readymade garments (RMG) industry.

GOOD JOBS: KEY DRIVERS OF PROGRESS IN THE POST-2000 PERIOD
2. Annual GDP growth in Bangladesh averaged about 6 percent over 2005 to 2015, notwithstanding the
adverse impacts of the global recession, oil price rise, unrest in the Middle East (an important destination
for Bangladeshi migrants) and local natural disasters. Several factors explain the resilience of the economy
to global shocks, including strong macroeconomic fundamentals at the onset of the crisis, strong growth of
exports and remittances, and relatively under-developed and insulated financial markets. The pace of
poverty reduction also picked up considerably since 2000, and Bangladesh is amongst the select group of
countries which have experienced a modest decline in inequality in the post-2000 period. The main drivers
of faster GDP growth and poverty reduction observed between 2000 and 2010 have included (i) the ongoing
demographic transition that has led to an increased share of working-age population, (ii) key structural
shifts in the economy, including better wage and salaried employment opportunities for workers in the

1 Amartya Sen has attributed Bangladesh’s success in this particular regard to the “general determination in post -independence
Bangladesh to target the elimination of female disadvantage”. What's happening in Bangladesh?
http://www.thelancet.com/journals/lancet/article/PIIS0140-6736(13)62162-5/fulltext

                                                              4
manufacturing and services sectors, (iii) higher agricultural incomes, and (iv) higher remittances. Key
factors behind these remarkable improvements include not just economic reforms and good macroeconomic
management, but also special attention to gender equality, education, health outcomes, and family planning.
                                                                Main Drivers of Progress Since 2000
 Demographic Dividend: lower population growth has led                                                                          Most new jobs added recently have been in the
       to a higher working-age population share                                                                                      manufacturing and services sectors
                                                                                                                                           Net new employment
                                         Population aged 15-64 years (left)
                                         Population Growth (right)                                                                          (2002/03 - 2013)
                          66                                                      2.0                                              Services                           Agri-




                                                                                        Annual Growth rate %
                                  1.8                                                                                               33%                              culture
  % of Total Population




                          64                                                                                                                                          24%
                                            1.6                                   1.5
                          62
                                                                            1.2
                          60                                                      1.0

                          58
                                                                                  0.5
                          56                                                                                                                                        Manu-
                                                                                                                                    Other                          facturing
                          54                                                      0.0                                              industry                          37%
                               2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012                                                                    6%

                                 Contribution to increased output per worker:                                              16,000
                                  2000-2010 (sum of all components =100)
                                                                                                                           14,000
                          Industry                                                35%
                                                                                                                           12,000
                                                                                                               USD (million)




 Inter-sectoral                                                                                                            10,000
                                                                  24%
      shift
                                                                                                                               8,000
                                                                                                                               6,000
                          Services                               23%
                                                                                                                               4,000

          Agriculture                                      18%                                                                 2,000
                                                                                                                                  0
                                     0         10         20           30           40                                                 FY01 FY03 FY05 FY07 FY09 FY11 FY13

             Agriculture contributed nearly one-fifth of the higher                                            Remittance inflows from overseas workers have recorded
                      output per worker in 2010 vs. 2000                                                               double-digit annual growth since 2000

3. The economy has undergone important structural shifts. The manufacturing sector in Bangladesh
has been the largest single contributor to growth, and its share in GDP has risen from 13 percent in 1981 to
17 percent in 2015. Industry’s contribution to growth peaked from about 1 percentage point in the 1980s to
2.7 percentage points in 2015. The share of the services sector has stabilized at 53-54 percent of GDP, and
its contribution to GDP growth has risen from around 2 percentage points in the 1980s to over 3 percentage
points in the 2000s. By contrast, agriculture’s share in GDP has come down from 30 percent in 1981 to 15
percent in 2015, and its contribution to GDP growth was below 1 percentage point throughout most of the
past three decades. Growth in industry came largely from manufacturing and construction, while that in the
services sector was broad-based, led by wholesale and retail trade and transport, storage and
communication.
4. These structural shifts have been accompanied by improved job opportunities for both men and
women. Several key changes have taken place in Bangladesh’s labor market since 2000, including a gradual
decline in the share of total employment in agriculture and strong employment growth in urban areas.
Successive labor force surveys confirm that three-quarters of the new jobs added in Bangladesh between
2002/03 and 2013 were in the non-agricultural sector. Of the estimated 14m net new jobs created over this

                                                                                                                   5
period, 10.5m were outside agriculture; accordingly, the share of the workforce engaged in agriculture fell
from 52 percent to 45 percent, while that in manufacturing rose from 14 to 21 percent. One-half of the net
increase in total employment was due to women’s increased participation in the workforce: the total number
of employed women increased sharply from 9.8m in 2002/03 to 16.8m in 2013 (Figure). The gender gap in
labor force participation rate narrowed, particularly amongst lower age-cohorts, as did the gender gap in
wages.
5. Bangladesh has made good use of the deep and elastic demand offered by the global economy to
expand job opportunities in the manufacturing sector. The largely export-driven readymade garment
(RMG) sector in Bangladesh has provided very good           An equal number of men and women joined
employment opportunities for young women and Bangladesh’s workforce between 2002/03 and 2013
contributed to their empowerment. While the                     60
manufacturing sector overall (i.e., RMG and other                                                   16.8




                                                             Aggregate employment
                                                                                           16.2
                                                                40       9.8     11.3
industries) continues to employ more men than




                                                                   (million)
women, the number of jobs for women in the sector
more than doubled between 2002-03 and 2013.                     20               36.1      37.9     41.2
                                                                        34.5
Bangladesh is now the world’s second largest exporter
of readymade garments after China, making it unique               0
                                                                      2002-03 2005-06 2010          2013
among low-income countries in its high share of                           Men              Women
manufactured goods in exports. The share of exports        Source: Labor Force Surveys, various rounds. BBS.
in GDP has more than trebled since 1981. In FY14, exports of the ready-made garment sector exceeded
US$24 billion, and the sector employed an estimated 4m workers, mostly women, many of whom were
from poor rural areas. The potential rewards of continued export-led job creation and growth are extremely
high: if Bangladesh were to capture 20 percent of China’s current garment exports, its total exports would
more than double, creating millions of new jobs in the economy.
6. Remittances from workers abroad have also emerged as a significant source of income. In many
areas of rural Bangladesh, remittance incomes from family members working abroad represent both a
significant proportion of household income as well as a substantial source of fund inflows into the local
economy. Agriculture is no longer the dominant source of income in rural areas (Ahmed, forthcoming);
instead, rural households now draw a substantially larger proportion of their incomes from non-agricultural
activities and transfers from both local and foreign migrant workers. With an estimated 8m citizens working
abroad, overseas remittances to Bangladesh exceeded US$14 billion in 2013-14 (FY14), equivalent to about
8 percent of GDP, or nearly double the share a decade ago. That said, while Bangladesh is among the
world’s top ten remittance receiving countries, it has the lowest remittance per worker amongst this group
because of the low level of education and skills of the typical migrant worker.

TRIPLE PAYOFF: FASTER GROWTH, FEWER POOR, BETTER HUMAN DEVELOPMENT
7. Bangladesh is among the select group of countries worldwide that have recently experienced both
faster growth as well as a modest decline in inequality. GDP growth has risen from an average of 4.7
percent per annum in the 1990s to 5.6 percent in the 2000s, and to over 6 percent since 2010 (figure). Higher
labor incomes and rising remittances have been extremely important drivers of broad-based growth.
Inequality in rural areas, where about 70 percent of Bangladesh’s population resides, remained more or less
unchanged between 2000 and 2010 while inequality in urban areas trended downwards. With a Gini index
of per capita consumption of about 0.3 at the national level, inequality in Bangladesh is lower than in Nepal,
India, Sri Lanka, Indonesia, and most other East Asian countries. Thanks to its much-improved economic
performance since 2000, poverty projections indicate Bangladesh has surpassed the Millennium

                                                      6
Development Goal of halving the incidence of extreme poverty between 1990 and 2015. Between 2000 and
2010, the number of poor based on the national poverty line fell by more than 17 million, compared to a
decline of less than one million between 1991-92 and 2000, making this decade the most remarkable period
in its history in terms of fastest-ever growth and poverty reduction.
                                                 GDP growth rate and pace of poverty reduction has picked up appreciably since the 2000s
                                            7                                                                                                    75
    Growth rate (% 5-year moving average)




                                            6




                                                                                                              Poverty Headcount Rate (percent)
                                                                                                                                                 65
                                            5
                                                                                                                                                 55
                                            4
                                                                                                                                                 45
                                            3

                                            2                                                                                                    35

                                            1                                                                                                    25

                                            0                                                                                                    15
                                                FY92 FY94 FY96 FY98 FY00 FY02 FY04 FY06 FY08 FY10 FY12 FY14                                           1980   1985    1990    1995    2000    2005    2010   2015    2020

                                                       GDP Growth             Per-capita GDP Growth                                                          National Poverty Line          PPP$1.25 Poverty Line


                                                     Note: Poverty estimates based on HIES data except those for 2015 which are based on projections).

8. Significant achievements in human development over the years have contributed towards
improving labor market prospects for workers, which in turn have spurred demand for education
and skills. Bangladesh is world-renowned for its non-governmental organizations (NGOs) like BRAC and
ASA, and microfinance institutions like the Grameen Bank, which have pioneered innovative mechanisms
to provide services to the poor. The country has made remarkable progress in improving human
development indicators, including life expectancy, fertility, infant and child mortality, education,
immunization rates, and sanitation. Successive governments have exhibited willingness and flexibility to
work with NGOs to experiment with community-based approaches to service delivery, and have achieved
notable successes in several areas. In 1991, the educational attainment of Bangladeshi women was among
the lowest in the world (80 percent illiteracy, 33 percent secondary school enrollment). However, through
massive expansion of schools, targeted stipends to bring the poorest and girls into schools, and continued
investments in education, female primary school enrollment rates are now higher than those in Pakistan,
Nepal, and Bhutan, and about the same as in India. This has helped set in place a virtuous cycle in
Bangladesh whereby better-educated women now have significantly better labor market prospects than
before, and increased labor force participation by women in turn leads to better human development
outcomes as well as higher demand for more and better education and skills.2




2 The vast majority of Bangladesh’s RMG workers are rural women, who were introduced to formal employment through this
sector (Afsar 2001, Kabeer and Mahmud 2004). Increased employment helped improve several key outcomes, including women’s
bargaining power within the household, fertility choices, and investments in children’s education (Kabeer 2001, Hossain 2012,
Heath and Mobarak 2014). Heath and Mubarak (2014) estimate that about 15 percentage point of the national gain in girls’ school
enrollment rate can be attributed to the growth of the RMG industry since rural families kept girls in school due to cognitive skill
requirements of garment industry jobs.

                                                                                                                                                 7
                                Significant Poverty Reduction Challenges Still Remain
 Despite Bangladesh’s noteworthy development achievements, many Asian countries have done much better since
 1980 (see Table below) and so Bangladesh remains one of Asia’s poorest countries, with constrained public services
 and comparatively weak institutions. Moreover, even if its economy were to continue to grow as rapidly as it has since
 2000—i.e. much faster than it ever has before—simulations indicate that the poverty rate in the country would fall to
 15-20 percent by 2030—good progress indeed, though nevertheless still well short of what is required to eliminate
 extreme poverty by 2030. In 2010, 31.5 percent of Bangladesh’s population (around 48m people) lived below the
 national poverty line; about 45 percent still did not have access to electricity. Today, pockets of high poverty persist
 across the country, particularly in places with poor infrastructure and where the population has low human capital and
 skills. Despite good progress with poverty reduction and other MDGs, Bangladesh’s under-nutrition burden is one of
 the highest in the world. Interventions to increase access to water and sanitation, better rural road connectivity, and
 improved social services remain very important for poor people.
         While Bangladesh has done well, many other countries did much better over the same period
                         GDP per capita (current US$)           GNI per capita (Atlas method, current US$)
                           1980         2013 % (annual)                1980       2013          % (annual)
  China                     193        6,807             11.4           220      6,560                 10.8
  South Korea             1,778      25,977               8.5         1,900     25,920                  8.2
  Sri Lanka                 273        3,280              7.8           280      3,170                  7.6
  Indonesia                 536        3,475              5.8           510      3,580                  6.1
  India                     271        1,499              5.3           270      1,570                  5.5
  Philippines               685        2,765              4.3           700      3,270                  4.8
  Bangladesh                220          958              4.6           220      1,010                  4.7
  Pakistan                  296        1,275              4.5           340      1,360                  4.3
            Source: World Development Indicators. *Data for 1985; ** 1989.
 Despite encouraging recent developments in the labor market, nearly half of all workers remain in agriculture, and an
 overwhelming majority still languishes in the informal sector. Unemployment rates are higher among the youth
 compared to the overall population. While rural areas continue to account for the bulk of the poor, the share of the
 poor population living in urban areas has been
 increasing over the past two decades, as more people      Considerable spatial variation in poverty incidence
 move from rural areas in search of better employment
 and income generating opportunities. In 1991, the
 urban poor accounted for 10 percent of the national
 poor population; in 2000, this share had risen to 14.4
 percent, and further to 17.7 percent by 2010. Between
 1991-92 and 2010, the number of poor people residing
 in urban areas increased by 2.1 million; by contrast,
 the total number of rural poor declined by 17 million
 over the same period. Rapid urbanization has
 adversely impacted economic performance and
 general livability of urban settlements. In Dhaka
 alone, an estimated 3m people live in urban slums,
 where the standard of living and environmental
 conditions are generally worse than in rural areas.
 Despite Bangladesh’s relatively compact land area,
 upazila-level poverty maps reveal considerable spatial
 variation in poverty incidence. Mapping the results of
 a recently concluded exercise to prepare more
 disaggregated poverty estimates reveals considerable
 variation in poverty incidence within each division
 (see adjacent Figure). For instance, while the poverty
 rate in the five poorest upazilas in Rangpur division is more than twice as high as the national average, the poverty
 rate in the ten richest upazilas is lower than the national average. Similarly, poverty incidence in selected upazilas in
 the ecologically-vulnerable southwest region are much higher than the national average.

9. As highlighted in the Seventh Five Year Plan background paper on ending extreme poverty, the
agricultural labor market in Bangladesh tightened significantly in the decade of 2000s , which led to
an increase in the real agricultural wage rate. Three main channels were the primary contributors: (a)


                                                                 8
relocation of farm labor to rural non-farm sectors; (b) relocation of rural labor to urban activities through
the “pull effects” of urbanization, creating employment opportunities for the extreme poor in labor-
intensive construction and transport activities; and (c) jobs for the poor created in the manufacturing sector.
Robust inflows of remittances from overseas workers contributed to spurring the creation of non-farm
employment opportunities in rural areas.

MORE AND BETTER JOBS ARE NEEDED FOR FASTER PROGRESS ON TWIN GOALS
10. Looking ahead, accelerating the ongoing employment shift of casual workers and small farmers
engaged in agriculture into salaried employment in more dynamic and remunerative sectors of the
economy offers by far the most promising exit out of poverty. Jobs are atop the development agenda for
both citizens and policy makers in Bangladesh. The labor force is growing by 3.1 percent per annum—1.3
times the South Asian average and 1.7 times the global average—and 21m people are projected to enter the
workforce between 2015 and 2025. Nearly one-half (45 percent) of the country’s estimated 58m workforce
is engaged in the agricultural sector, which contributes about one-fifth of GDP. About 34 percent is
employed in the services sector, which contributes about one-half of GDP; the rest—i.e., 20 percent—
works in the industrial sector, which contributes over 30 percent of GDP. Gross output per worker is thus
nearly four times as high in industry and services compared to agriculture.
11. Given the importance of creation of more and better jobs in the Bangladeshi context , the
main role of public policy should be to help ensure that the conditions are in place for strong private
sector led job creation and growth, to understand why there are not enough good jobs, and to
remove or mitigate the constraints that prevent the creation of more of those jobs. The Bangladesh
Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD; see Box) classifies priority areas for action into two main
groups: (i) foundational priorities—i.e., those which are pre-requisites for faster job creation and
growth, and (ii) key public policy areas where concerted action over the next 3-5 years could have
a transformative impact on the pace of progress towards eliminating poverty and boosting shared
prosperity.
                                                     What is an SCD?
 Two years ago at the 2013 Spring Meetings in Washington DC, the Board of Directors of the World Bank Group
 representing its 188 member countries endorsed ambitious goals to end extreme poverty and promote shared
 prosperity. The first goal is a global target of reducing the extreme poverty rate – i.e., the percentage of people living
 on less than $1.25 per day in purchasing power parity (PPP) adjusted terms – to 3 percent by 2030. The second goal
 is a country level target to promote shared prosperity – i.e., to foster income growth of the bottom 40 percent of the
 population in every country.
 This Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD) aims to identify key priorities for Bangladesh to reduce extreme poverty
 and boost shared prosperity. In line with the World Bank Group’s new country engagement model, the findings of
 this SCD will provide inputs for the preparation of an upcoming Country Partnership Framework, which will outline
 the WBG’s engagement to help Bangladesh achieve these twin goals.
12. This report identifies five key areas where concerted efforts over the next 3-5 years could have a
transformative impact on accelerating the creation of more and better jobs: (i) energy, (ii) inland
connectivity and logistics, (iii) regional and global integration, (iv) urbanization, and (v) delta management.
Broad consensus already prevails among key stakeholders in Bangladesh on the importance of each of these
areas, as evidenced by the high priority accorded to them in the government’s latest Five Year Plan as well
as the support voiced for each of these in the public consultations carried out across different parts of
Bangladesh as part of the SCD preparation process. This report goes beyond presenting just a diagnostic
per se, and also includes a number of recommendations and suggestions on how best to tackle these
challenges.


                                                                   9
13. An extensive body of work clearly shows how access to infrastructure in Bangladesh is an
important determinant of both agricultural and non-farm incomes in rural areas. To date, Bangladesh
has largely neglected investment in infrastructure. Public investment in (hard) infrastructure was less than
2 percent of GDP, and it lags far behind its regional competitors in infrastructure quality (Table). By
contrast, total investment in hard infrastructure in China, Thailand, and Vietnam exceeded 7 percent of
GDP. Those countries also invested another 7-8 percent of GDP in education, training and health. Unless
infrastructure bottlenecks in Bangladesh are addressed in a timely manner, they risk becoming increasingly
important constraints limiting future growth prospects. WBG estimates indicate that reaching sustained 7.5-
8.0 percent growth rates will require significant increases in investment to at least 33 percent of GDP,
including an increase in infrastructure investments to around 10 percent of GDP per year.
                 Infrastructure Quality in Bangladesh Lags Behind its Regional Competitors
                         Country     Infrastructure
            Country                                    Electricity     Roads       Railroad        Port
                         Ranking     Score (Overall)
         China              46             4.7             5.2           4.6          4.8           4.6
         Thailand           48             4.6             5.1           4.5          2.4           4.5
         Sri Lanka          75             4.0             4.8           5.1          3.7           4.2
         Vietnam            81             3.7             4.2           3.2          3.0           3.7
         India              87             3.6             3.4           3.8          4.2           4.0
         Cambodia          107             3.1             3.0           3.4          1.6           3.6
         Pakistan          119             2.7             2.1           3.8          2.5           4.4
         Bangladesh        127             2.5             2.5           2.9          2.4           3.7
         Myanmar           137             2.1             2.8           2.4          1.8           2.6
         Source: World Economic Forum, Global Competitiveness Report 2014-15; Ranking out of 144 countries.

1. THE ENERGY SECTOR
14. Even though electricity generation capacity has doubled since 2009, Bangladesh continues to face
significant power shortages. In 201, Bangladesh generated only 7,xxx MW of electricity (from an installed
capacity of 10,xxx MW), a quantity that is grossly inadequate to sustain middle- or high-level economic
activity for a nation of almost 160m people. At the same time, only 60 percent of the population had access
to electricity, and per-capita electricity consumption of 294 kWh per year was one of the lowest in the
world. In light of these basic facts, the availability and reliability of power is a key concern for businesses:
surveyed on 15 factors that comprise the business environment, Bangladeshi firms rated electricity second
highest as a constraint to their operations (after political instability, and– ahead of finance and corruption).
More specifically, 28 percent of firms surveyed identify electricity as their top obstacle and 52 percent
identify its as a major constraint to doing business. In the 2014 Doing Business report, Bangladesh was also
ranked the lowest out of 189 economies on the "Getting Electricity" indicator. Domestic firms face ten
times as many outages in a typical month as the average for all countries for which Enterprise Survey data
are available and five times as many as the average for low-income countries. There was a 22 percent
shortfall in meeting peak capacity in FY13, and 13 percent in non-peak demand. at the same time, energy
demand is projected to rise nearly five-fold to over 190 TW hours by 2030.
15. Gas is critical for the power sector in Bangladesh, since it fuels 70 percent of generation. However,
World Bank estimates suggest that domestic gas production will peak at 3,000 mmcfd in 2017 and then
begin to decline. Exploration of additional domestic gas is now a priority, particularly offshore. In the
meantime, LNG imports will likely be required soon to fuel existing gas-fired plants as well as those under
construction. Given Bangladesh’s over-reliance on natural gas, power supply diversification is also a key
need. Other issues facing the power sector include: (i) the dual challenge of massive investment in new
capacity while simultaneously facing an increasing cost of supply; (ii) enhancing private sector investment
(despite early success in attracting private investors, only one new large independent power producer has

                                                         10
started operation in Bangladesh in the last decade); (iii) raising current end-user gas prices to parity with
prices in neighboring countries and regional benchmarks (currently they are well below parity); and (iv)
managing the increase in fuel oil use by rental power plants and independent power companies, which has
resulted in a nearly three-fold increase in the average cost of power supply (a cost that has not been fully
passed on to consumers).
16. Chapter 3 of this report provides a number of specific suggestions and recommendations on priority
actions for the energy sector to support Bangladesh achieve sustained growth, enhance access for the forty
percent lacking power, and contribute to faster poverty reduction.

2. INLAND CONNECTIVITY AND LOGISTICS
17. Bangladesh needs to accelerate the economic transformation of its rural areas; and improving
connectivity is key. There is a wealth of evidence on the role of improved inland connectivity on raising
agriculture productivity, promoting the movement of the workforce from farm to non-farm employment,
and reducing poverty. Research using household-level panel data shows rural road investments in
Bangladesh have reduced poverty significantly through higher agricultural production, higher wages, lower
input and transportation costs, and higher output prices, and also led to higher girls' and boys' schooling. i
Adequate attention to ensuring this network is properly maintained and developed and further integrated
with the larger transport network remains an important public policy priority. In particular, Bangladesh
needs to move away from the “build, neglect, rebuild” mindset, and instead ensure enough funding is
available for maintenance. In addition to investments in rural roads, the country also needs to improve east-
west connectivity, particularly connecting the southwest to Dhaka.
18. In addition, Bangladesh can enhance its international competitive edge by improving logistics.
High logistics costs are an implicit tax that biases the economy away from exports, and limit access to
imported inputs and final goods. There is significant evidence on the impact of logistics costs on trade.
Chittagong port, which handles nearly 85 percent of the country’s merchandise trade, is plagued by labor
problems, poor management and lack of modern equipment, and is the only major port in South Asia that
has not implemented the landlord port model. Similarly, railway and road networks connecting the ports
with hinterland are underdeveloped and beset with logistical problems that impose significant costs on
firms. Air transport is also inefficient, due to congestion and lack of capacity at the air terminal. The Dhaka-
Chittagong corridor is Bangladesh’s most important trade link, but it is extremely congested and its current
performance hinders export growth. The government’s role in the transport sector is worth reviewing,
particularly regarding logistics services. Finally, as the report argues, Bangladesh should improve physical
connectivity with India, but priority should be to remove the policy constraints to seamless cross-border
movement of cargo.

3. REGIONAL AND GLOBAL INTEGRATION
19. Export-led growth has served Bangladesh well; there remains significant potential for further
expansion in this crucial area. An extensive body of evidence has documented the benefits that accrued
to Bangladesh’s economy from trade liberalization in the 1990s. There is, however, still a large unfinished
trade reform agenda. Thus far, Bangladesh’s strong success in exports has primarily been based on low-
skill, low-wage-based competitiveness in garments, which dominate the export basket. However, this
strategy does not guarantee continued growth in exports, given the pressures of global competition and the
possible emergence of future competitors with a better wage-productivity combination. The example of
Vietnam shows the benefits of accelerated export-oriented development, moving in the space of 25 years
from being one of the poorest countries in the world to a lower-middle income one, with FDI and trade

                                                      11
playing a dominant role in the economy: exports and imports each form 90 percent of GDP, with exports
more than seven times as much per capita as Bangladesh today. Bangladesh is well placed to expand
manufacturing exports given its geographic proximity to two of the world’s most populous countries, as
well as other fast-growing economies. Finally, attracting more FDI in the country would help upgrade
technology and improve export market linkages, thereby improving upon an area where Bangladesh has
had only limited success to-date.
20. Bangladesh needs an export-led strategy that builds on existing labor-embedded exports and
focuses on diversifying products, skills, and markets. Faster export growth will require both
consolidating on strengths in RMG through further expansion and moving to higher-value garments, as
well as a gradual diversification into other manufacturing areas such as pharmaceutical products, non-
leather footwear, light-engineering goods, and ship-building, plus other areas such as information
technology and IT-enabled services.ii As elaborated later in this report, the 2013 Diagnostic Trade
Integration Study outlines a four-pronged strategy to enhance the integration of Bangladesh’s economy
with regional and global markets: (i) breaking into new markets through better trade logistics and
exploitation of regional trading opportunities, (ii) breaking into new products through a more neutral and
rational trade policy, concerted efforts to spur private investment, and strategic development and promotion
of services trade, (iii) improving worker and consumer welfare, and (iv) building a more supportive
environment for export growth, including strengthening the institutional capacity for strategic policymaking
aimed at increasing international competitiveness and bringing focus and coherence to the government’s
reform efforts.

4. URBANIZATION
21. Urban population growth in Bangladesh has recently been faster than in most other South Asian
countries, with employment opportunities being by far the most important attraction for incoming migrants
from rural areas and other smaller urban settlements. It is well known that urban density can help businesses
to prosper, as long as the agglomeration advantages of network effects and economies of scale outweigh
the disadvantages of congestion, pollution and other negative externalities. As noted earlier, export-led
growth has been a powerful engine for job growth in Bangladesh’s urban areas. The “pull effects” of export
sector jobs in urban areas have also created additional employment opportunities for the poor in
construction and transport, which have been powerful drivers of poverty reduction. But the adverse
consequences of rapid urbanization, such as the fast-deteriorating living conditions, are now becoming
prominent and need to be addressed: UNESCAP estimates indicate that about 70 percent of the urban
population in Bangladesh lives in slums (twice as high as India), with poor quality housing that is often
located in precarious areas. In addition, improving urban transport in response to increasing congestion has
emerged as a key challenge. Both economic performance and general livability of urban settlements has
been adversely impacted due to inadequate and poor quality of urban transport infrastructure and services.
Developing transport systems requires policy and institutional reforms to ensure better planning, and
coordination among the various government departments and agencies entrusted with their completion.
Institutional development programs are required to re-align institutions to urban transport functions and
strengthen their capacity.
22. Improved municipal governance and revenue enhancement will be key to improve productivity,
livability, and inclusiveness of urban settlements. Municipal governments in Bangladesh are heavily
dependent on central government grants, which account for over 85 percent of their development
expenditures. The financial resource for urban development is very limited: less than 1 percent of GDP is
spent on urban infrastructure development, compared to about 4 percent in China during the 1990s when

                                                     12
urbanization was comparable to Bangladesh’s current rate. Even much more developed cities like New
York budget 5 percent of their GDP to urban development. As argued later in this report, local governments
in Bangladesh should be granted greater financial autonomy and responsibility. Moreover, the current
municipal service provision models are worth reviewing, especially service providers’ institutional capacity
and performance. Finally, a key public policy priority is to increase the economic density of Dhaka, which
currently accounts for over one-third of Bangladesh’s GDP, as well as of other urban areas across the
country.

5. ADAPTIVE DELTA MANAGEMENT
23. Bangladesh’s major rivers and its long shoreline on the Bay of Bengal have shaped its
comparative advantage and determined the location, nature, and pace of its development. The rivers
have conferred unquestionable benefits to transport, trade, agriculture, and livelihoods, but also pose
significant risk through recurrent floods, erosion and water pollution. The long coastline has enabled sea-
bound trade and created opportunities for Bangladesh to be a transportation hub for countries in its
hinterland—including particularly northeast India, Nepal, Bhutan and southwest China—but it has also
brought the risk of cyclones, storm surges and tsunamis, saline intrusion, and incessant hydromorphic
modification of coastal land areas. Moreover, the associated risks will grow greater with climate change,
raising the frequency and severity of extreme events. . In fact, in 2014, Bangladesh was ranked the most
climate-vulnerable country in the world. For Bangladesh, growth will be sustainable only if it accompanied
by better resource management and particularly adaptive delta management: the threats to the Bangladesh
delta, which covers xx% of Bangladesh’s land area, are existential, particularly when they are exacerbated
by climate change, and so adaptive delta management should be integrated in all aspects of planning and
sector development—including agricultural practices, water supply and sanitation, the placement of energy
and transport infrastructure, and indeed the location of all public and private infrastructure.3
24. Although increased investment in infrastructure for land and water management has reduced
vulnerability in rural areas in recent years, strengthening and expanding existing delta infrastructure
is needed to reach optimal levels of resilience. To this end, the government is preparing the Bangladesh
Delta Plan 2100, an integrated and holistic long-term plan to ensure safe living and sound economic
development in Asia’s largest and the world’s most populated delta country. A key aspect of this endeavor
will be the adoption of an adaptive delta management approach to enable robust decisions to be made that
affect all aspects of life and livelihood development, based on several future scenarios. Adaptive delta
management will help to ensure that investments in all sectors anticipate long-term uncertainties in climate
change and socio-economic growth, and limit over- or under- investment. In addition, it is particularly
important (i.e., in terms of making prudent decisions on resource allocations) that impacts on long-term
developments like climate change and socio-economic growth are fully integrated into delta management
and development planning more generally.
25. One sector that is particularly sensitive to the successes and failures of delta management is
agriculture. Since nearly half the labor force in Bangladesh continues to be employed in agriculture, and
much of that labor force is poor, for poverty reduction to continue in Bangladesh delta management needs
to continue to support higher land productivity, crop diversification, and reduced vulnerability. Bangladesh
has recently done remarkably well in agricultural productivity growth – largely on account of technical
change. Key drivers have been liberalization of input markets, adoption of modern varieties, increasing use

3 Even though Bangladesh’s response to these challenges has achieved some encouraging results, strengthening and extension of
the current delta-infrastructure is required to protect the population, economic assets and future investments.

                                                             13
of machinery, greater access to markets and price hike of agricultural products. Looking ahead, a top
priority for Bangladesh is to shift away from a relatively narrow focus on staple crop productivity towards
meeting the fast-growing demand of Bangladeshis for a more diverse, sophisticated, and nutritious diet.
There is significant potential to further increase productivity and incomes in agriculture while making it
more climate resilient and nutrition-sensitive. An important part of the economic and ecological
sustainability is to assist farmers in improving the effectiveness in the use of inputs. Farm level evidence
shows that a large share of farmers are overusing fertilizers (well beyond technical recommendation levels,
and to the point of not yielding any additional output). In addition to increased agricultural productivity and
diversification, the main drivers of growth in the rural non-farm sector will likely remain connectivity and
proximity to urban areas.

FOUNDATIONAL PRIORITIES:
26. The previous section discussed five areas (energy, inland connectivity, trade integration, urbanization,
and delta management) where sustained achievement in addressing bottlenecks could result in
transformational growth of 8% or more, creating more and better jobs and lifting greater numbers out of
poverty. But growth and job creation also depend critically on Bangladesh sustaining and extending its
achievements in establishing the foundations for growth. These foundations include (i) maintaining sound
macroeconomic management, (ii) consolidating and deepening its exemplary achievements in human
development, and (iii) further expanding a supportive environment for increased private investment. In each
of these areas, Bangladesh has done well in the past, but past success cannot be taken for granted or expected
to continue without effort, and so these areas will continue to require sustained policy attention.
27. Strong Macroeconomic Fundamentals: In achieving and sustaining increasing levels of growth over
the past few decades, Bangladesh has benefited from generally prudent management of fiscal and monetary
policy, and the resultant macroeconomic stability it has generated. Looking ahead, this solid foundation
needs to be strengthened and deepened. Key macroeconomic management challenges for the government
include strengthening the tax system, both policy and administration-related aspects, to make it more
efficient, transparent, and fair, improving the health of the financial sector and enhancing financial
intermediation, and better implementation of the Annual Development Program. Successful
implementation of the 2011-2016 Tax Modernization Plan, through which the government plans to increase
tax collection by about 3 percent of GDP, will be key to providing the additional public resources to spur
growth, especially much-needed investments in infrastructure, as will improvements in the income tax and
customs code to enhance equity and efficiency. Improved performance of state-owned commercial banks
is also important and can be achieved in part by implementing the Action Plan the government has
developed with IMF support. Finally, improved public investment management is needed to strengthen the
link between government policy priorities and resource allocation, and in turn between resource allocation
and performance.
28. Human Development Challenges: While Bangladesh has had remarkable success in enhancing access
and equity in education, striving to universalize access for the remaining hard-to-reach children is an
important policy imperative. Notwithstanding notable achievements in nearing universal access to primary
education, attaining gender equity at the primary and secondary education levels well ahead of the MDG
target for 2015, marked reduction in repetition and dropout rates, and reasonably high levels of completion
in primary education, gross enrollment rates of the poor lag those of the non-poor. Out of 10 primary
students who enter school in Bangladesh, only about 7 or 8 students reach grade 5, and only 5 reach grade
10. Children living in urban slums in particular suffer from both demand and supply-side constraints.


                                                      14
29. Improving skills and productivity are crucial to Bangladesh’s quest to accelerate economic growth and
create more and better jobs in the formal sector for its expanding workforce. Ensuring further improvements
in the quality of education can help propel the economy into the next phase of higher productivity-led
growth. International experiences show that improvement in quality of education has a much larger impact
on economic and social development than increases in access without increases in quality. Yet learning
achievements continue to be quite low in Bangladesh: for instance a recent assessment of literacy and
numeracy in grade 5 indicates that only 25 and 33 percent of grade 5 students master Bangla and
Mathematics competencies, with students from poor households generally doing much worse. Learning
inequities begin early, and continue throughout students’ lifetimes. Nearly 90 percent of the labor force in
Bangladesh is informal and has low levels of education and less than 5 percent of the current workforce has
tertiary education. Due to lack of standards and limited partnerships with the active labor market, technical
and vocational education and training and the higher education system in Bangladesh are not equipped to
respond to changes in demand and quality standards both in the domestic labor market and overseas where
the vast majority of Bangladesh’s emigrant workers are employed in low-skilled jobs.
30. Institutions and Business Environment: Bangladesh has experienced a variety of forms of
government since its independence in
1971, including military rule. Following
the reintroduction of the parliamentary
system in 1991, power has, until
recently, alternated between the two
main political parties, the Awami
League and the Bangladesh Nationalist
Party. While successive governments
have generally exhibited strong
commitment to poverty reduction and
human development, divisive and
confrontational politics have created
policy uncertainty and hampered efforts to address critical problems requiring long-term engagement. A
comparative analysis of the Bangladesh Enterprise Surveys in 2007 and 2013 reveals that political
instability has secured the position of top-most concern of businesses (figure). Looking ahead, many
Bangladeshi institutions are not adequately equipped to address key challenges the country faces as it fast
approaches middle income status, as they were established when it was at much lower levels of income.
Stronger public sector institutions are needed to manage Bangladesh’s larger and more complex
economy. Moreover, accelerating economic progress will require going into a more complicated
phase of reforms that address a whole range of factors adversely affecting investment incentives
and production efficiency, including corruption. Difficulties faced by investors in gaining access
to serviced land is one of the key such obstacles and constraints impeding higher private
investment.
31. This SCD aims to identify why there are not enough good jobs in Bangladesh, what
conditions would help to promote strong private-sector-led growth and job creation, and
what can be done to remove or mitigate the constraints that prevent those conditions from
obtaining. To this end, it divides priority action areas into two main groups: (i) foundational
priorities, which are pre-requisites for faster growth and job creation, and which Bangladesh has
addressed reasonably well in recent years; and (ii) transformational areas, where concerted action
over the next 3 to 5 years could have a transformative impact on the pace of progress towards

                                                     15
eliminating poverty and boosting shared prosperity—but also where Bangladesh has tended to lag
behind its Asian peers. These latter include (i) energy, (ii) inland connectivity and logistics, (iii)
regional and global integration, (iv) urbanization, and (v) delta management. Key stakeholders in
Bangladesh already largely agreed on the importance of each of these areas, and they feature prominently
in the government’s Seventh Five Year Plan (completed in 2015). The remaining sections of this SCD delve
into each of these foundational and transformative areas in greater detail, presenting not only a diagnostic
of each area but also suggestions on how best to tackle the challenges identified.




i
Khandker, S. Bakht, Z. & Koolwal, G. (April 2006) The Poverty Impact of Rural Roads: Evidence from Bangladesh.
World Bank Policy Research Working Paper3875, Washington DC
ii
  Bangladesh’s online work industry has grown tremendously in recent years, and it is in a strong position to tap its
early growth stage. The total yearly earnings from IT workers is estimated to have grown from around $10m to over
$40m in the past few years, representing one of the fastest growth rates in the world on eLance, oDesk and Freelancer
platforms. Bangladesh stood on the sidelines as the IT-BPO industry took off in the last decade, while neighboring
India benefited tremendously - its industry employed 2.8m workers, generated $69 billion in revenue, and 25 percent
of total exports in 2012. By tapping this opportunity, Bangladesh could create mass employment and income for youth
and women, increase total services exports, and help develop a knowledge-based economy.




                                                         16
