                                                                   Acknowledgements
The team is co-led by Roland Clarke (Program Leader), and Emmanuel Skoufias (Lead
Economist). We would like to thank the members of the Brazil Systematic Country Diagnostic
(SCD) core team: Magnus Lindelow (Program Leader), Pedro Olinto (Program Leader), Gregor
Wolf (Program Leader), Paul Kriss (Program Leader), Paul Procee (Program Leader), Mark Dutz
(Lead Economist), Antonio Nucifora (Lead Economist), Boris Utria (Country Operations Advisor),
Candyce Rocha (Senior Communications Officer), Hector Gomez Ang (Country Manager), and
Eduardo Wallentin (Senior Manager). The core team worked under the strategic guidance of
two Country Directors (Deborah Wetzel and Martin Raiser) for which we are most grateful.


The task team leaders (TTLs) and the core team have relied extensively on the knowledge
and inputs provided by colleagues from the Brazil Country Team from all the different Global
Practices (GPs) and the International Finance Corporation (IFC) and we are all truly thankful for
the help and support provided. The table below identifies the team members from the various
GPs, who contributed their time, knowledge, and experience on Brazil for the preparation of
this SCD:


The World Bank
                             Team Members
Group Team
Agriculture                  Diego Arias, Fatima Amazonas
Climate Change               Christophe de Gouvello
                             Barbara Bruns, Rita Almeida, Michael Drabble, Leandro Costa, André
Education
                             Loureiro
Energy and Extractives       Christophe de Gouvello
Environment and Natural      Ernesto Sánchez Triana, Klas Sander, Bernadete Lange, Adriana
Resources                    Moreira
                             Heinz Rudolph, Mark Dutz, Leyla Castillo, Bujana Perolli, Shanthi
Finance and Markets
                             Divakaran, Ceyla Pazarbasioglu
Gender                       Miriam Muller, Renata Mayer Gukovas, Aude-Sophie Rodella
                             Lorena Viñuela, Laura Zoratto, Etel Patricia Bereslawski, Miguel-
Governance
                             Santiago da Silva Oliveira
Health Nutrition, and
                             Tania Dmytraczenko, Ezaú Pontes, Magnus Lindelow
Population
IFC                          Luciana Marchesini, Miguel Angel Rebolledo Dellepiane
Jobs                         Joana Silva, Rafael Prado Proença, Rita Almeida
Macroeconomics and           Antonio Nucifora, Rafael Barroso, Edith Kikoni, Fabio Bittar, Cornelius
Fiscal Management            Fleischhaker
MIGA                         Dan Biller, Jorge Rivas
The World Bank
                            Team Members
Group Team
                            Emmanuel Skoufias, Aude-Sophie Rodella, Martha Viveros, Renata
Poverty and Equity
                            Mayer Gukovas, Ali Sharman, Thiago Scot
Social Protection and       Maria Concepcion Steta Gandara, Claudia Baddini, Anna Fruttero,
Labor                       Renata Mayer Gukovas
                            Mark Dutz, Thomas Kenyon, Paulo Correa, Martha Licetti, Tanja
                            Goodwin, Jean François Arvis, Julie Barbet-Gros, Daria Taglioni, Tom
Trade and
                            Farole, Erik van der Marel, Laura Dachner, Roberto Echandi, Doyle
Competitiveness
                            Gallegos, the WDR 2016 team, Pluvia Zuniga, Priyam Saraf, Marialisa
                            Motta
                            Georges Bianco Darido, Shomik Mehndiratta, Eric Lancelot, Bianca
Transport and ICT
                            Bianchi Alves, Satoshi Ogita, Gregoir Gauthier, Alexandre Takahashi
                            Josef Lloyd Leitmann, Emanuela Monteiro, Catalina Marulanda,
Social, Urban, Rural and
                            Andres Villaveces, Alberto Coelho Gomes Costa, Frederico Pedroso,
Resilience
                            Nancy Lozano Gracia
Water                       Martin Gambrill, Thadeu Abicalil, Erwin de Nys


The team is also very grateful to Flavia Nahmias and Mônica Porcidonio, for preparing the
document, the bibliography and the logistics of the SCD. In addition, the following people have
provided substantive inputs and guidance: Augusto de la Torre (Chief Economist) and peer
reviewers: Indermit Gil (Director, DECDP), Bert Hofman (Country Director, EACCF), and Ana L.
Revenga (Senior Director, GPVDR).

IBRD
Regional Vice President: Jorge Familiar
Country Director: Martin Raiser
Task Managers: Roland Clarke and Emmanuel Skoufias



IFC
Vice President: Snezana Stoiljkovic
Regional Director: Irene Arias
Task Managers: Eduardo Wallentin and Luciana Marchesini


MIGA
Vice President: Karin Finkelston
Director: Ravi Vish
Manager: Dan Biller
Executive Summary
Retaking the Path to Inclusion,
Growth and Sustainability
RETAKING THE PATH TO INCLUSION, GROWTH AND SUSTAINABILTY




1.	      Brazil is a vast country and its development prospects matter globally. A continental
power, Brazil is the fifth largest country on earth (in both land area and population). It covers
a vast territory containing the world’s largest rainforest (the Amazon) substantial freshwater
resources, valuable agricultural land, and multiple minerals, metals and other natural capital.
Its size gives it systemic importance from the environmental point of view as the lung of the
earth and also has important consequences for the structure of the economy and political
institutions. As with most large economies, it is relatively closed. This tendency has been
strengthened by a historical focus on the domestic market as the driver of development.
Another implication of Brazil’s size is a relatively high degree of decentralization in a federative
structure, which increased further with the return to democracy in the mid-1980s.


2.	     Brazil’s prospects have attracted particular interest also because it historically was
and remains today one of the world’s most unequal societies. Dating back to the original
allocation of land during colonial times and more recently to the distribution of economic
opportunities and access to basic social services, deep and persistent inequalities have
characterized Brazil’s development path. The country’s size and historically high inequality
have given debates about inclusive development paths particular resonance both in Brazil
and well beyond the country’s borders. A continuously rising state footprint following re-
democratization and strong ‘welfarist’ tradition in public policy have been consequences of
policy makers’ efforts to address Brazil’s legacy of sharp socioeconomic inequalities.


3.	     Until the late-1990s, little progress was made in reducing income inequalities in Brazil,
but in the past decade Brazil’s socioeconomic progress has been remarkable and internationally
noted. From 2003, the country has become recognized for its success in reducing poverty and
inequality and its ability to create jobs. Innovative and effective policies to reduce poverty and
ensure the inclusion of previously excluded groups have lifted millions of people out of poverty.
Nevertheless, even today, in Brazil 5 percent of the population receives 30 percent of the income
generated (together with Colombia the highest proportion for any country in Latin America).


4.	    Brazil has also been assuming global responsibilities. It has been successful in pursuing
economic prosperity while protecting its unique natural patrimony. Brazil has become one of
the most important emerging new donors, with extensive engagements particularly in Sub-
Saharan Africa, and a leading player in international climate negotiations. Brazil’s development
path over the past decade has shown that growth with shared prosperity, but balanced with
respect for the environment, is possible. Brazilians are rightly proud of these internationally
recognized achievements.




                                                                                             i
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY




5.	     However, the mood in Brazil has recently turned pessimistic. The shifts in the global
economy following the world recession of 2008-2009, rising economic imbalances as the post-
crisis stimulus was maintained too long, and in particular the end of the commodity super-
cycle after 2011, have severely impacted Brazilian growth prospects, and, in 2015, the country
entered recession. Falling government revenues accompanied by increasing expenditure
pressures have led to a significant fiscal deficit, denting investor confidence. Administered
price increases and one of the largest depreciations among emerging market currencies have
driven up inflation, forcing the Central Bank to raise interest rates.


6.	    The bleak short-term economic outlook raises the risk that social and environmental
achievements may not be sustained. Rising unemployment is likely to put pressure on lower-
income households, rising inflation is eating into the real value of social transfers, while fiscal
pressures accentuate spending trade-offs in the public sector. Economic difficulties also have
the potential to sharpen conflicts over land and other natural resources, putting Brazil’s
environmental achievements at risk. They may provoke an increase in urban crime and violence
with negative social as well as economic consequences.


7.	     More fundamentally, the changed economic circumstances have exposed shortcomings
in Brazil’s development model, epitomized by the struggle to achieve a sustainable fiscal policy.
This report argues that the desire for a more inclusive state, after the return to democracy, led
to a bias in favor of a large and increasing role for the public sector. Fiscal policy has been
constrained by hardwired spending commitments and its sustainability risks being undermined
by a burgeoning social security system, which provides substantial benefits to the non-poor.
These commitments were affordable during a period of extraordinarily high commodity prices
and relatively strong consumption-driven growth. They look unsustainable in the light of the
recent shift in Brazil’s terms of trade and the country’s weak underlying growth potential,
reflected in the poor track record of productivity growth and lagging performance on a range
of indicators of external competitiveness.


8.	    Against this background, some Brazilians are now asking whether the gains of the
past decade might have been an illusion, created by the commodity boom, but unsustainable
in today’s less forgiving international environment. The answer provided in this Systematic
Country Diagnostic (SCD) is a qualified ‘no’. There is no reason why the recent socioeconomic
gains should be reversed; indeed, they might well be extended with the right policies. This will
however require substantial shifts in Brazil’s growth model and its fiscal policies, as well as
reforms and adjustments in successful policy dimensions such as, for instance, environmental
and agricultural policies or social assistance programs. Brazil’s recent history contains several
episodes of crises that gave rise to important economic and institutional reforms, which




     ii
RETAKING THE PATH TO INCLUSION, GROWTH AND SUSTAINABILTY




alleviated previously binding constraints to further economic and social progress. It also
contains several examples of creative policy design overcoming implementation bottlenecks,
often through the careful collection of evidence and rigorous monitoring and evaluation
(M&E). Another reason to be optimistic is that Brazil’s policy makers today operate in an
environment of much stronger accountability because of the increasing role of independent
control institutions, the growing strength of non-government actors and the rising aspirations
and expectations of the new middle class.


9.	     Brazil thus finds itself at an important juncture and, to a certain extent, the policy
course set today will determine whether the country can sustain the gains of the past and
return to a path of solid, inclusive and environmentally sustainable growth. This SCD offers
a contribution to the debate about Brazil’s future development. It abstains from formulating
specific policy recommendations and rather focuses on highlighting the way in which Brazil’s
development challenges and opportunities are closely interlinked. The causal chains identified
by the analysis lead to a set of broad priorities, which can serve as background for discussion
of concrete reform plans and policies, as well as their feasibility in a complex and fluid political
environment. The remainder of this overview first presents the main causal chains traced
in this SCD and explains the structure of the report, before providing a chapter-by-chapter
summary of the main argument.


The determinants of poverty reduction and shared prosperity—the
narrative of this SCD

10.	    The basic argument of this SCD is that Brazil needs to adjust its fiscal policy and its
growth model if the country is to sustain the socioeconomic gains made over the past
decade. The story of Brazil’s recent achievements is fundamentally a story of buoyant labor
markets, declining wage inequality and progressive social policies, all supported by the boom
in commodity prices that began around the turn of the millennium. It coincided with the
successful macroeconomic stabilization Brazil achieved in the late 1990s, thus allowing the
country to take full advantage of high commodity prices and abundant international liquidity.
The improvement in the terms of trade facilitated rapid consumption growth without
jeopardizing external balances. This in turn swelled public coffers thanks to a tax system built
largely around indirect, consumption-linked taxes, and financed a substantial expansion in
social transfers and improvements in access to a range of public services. Consumption-based
growth and real exchange rate appreciation favored the domestic services industry, which
accounted for the bulk of new employment creation disproportionately benefiting less-skilled
workers. Rising formalization, improved social safety nets, and large increases in the minimum
wage combined to push up the relative earnings of the less skilled and thus contributed to




                                                                                             iii
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY




falling earnings inequality. Abundant liquidity facilitated access to credit, including among
households, thus further reinforcing the consumption-based growth dynamics.


11.	    By late 2015, the factors that drove socioeconomic progress in the past decade had
mostly gone into reverse. International commodity prices have trended down since late 2012,
with oil prices recently following suit, global liquidity conditions have tightened since May 2013
and December 2015 saw the first US Federal Funds Rate increase since 2006. Brazil, as most
emerging markets, faces a much bleaker international outlook than at most times since the early
2000s. Strong fiscal and financial buffers allowed the country to react to the 2008-2009 global
recession with countercyclical fiscal and monetary policies, but in the light of headwinds from
the commodity and financial markets and weak underlying growth potential, such measures
have failed to stem the gradual deceleration of Brazil’s economy since 2012 to face outright
recession in 2015. Indeed, the maintenance of countercyclical policies in the light of the declining
growth potential created growing macroeconomic imbalances during 2013 and 2014. As a result,
the authorities were forced to correct policy; monetary policy tightened in 2013 and a difficult
fiscal adjustment is now under way.


12.	    With the changed economic outlook, two fundamental weaknesses of Brazil’s economy
have come to the fore. First, Brazil has struggled for several decades to generate strong and
sustained productivity growth. This weakness is reflected, for instance, in the gradual decline
of Brazil’s manufacturing capacity, the small share of high technology products in its own
export basket, the bias in employment creation toward relatively low productivity services
such as catering and home care, and consequently in the low rate of aggregate growth in gross
domestic product (GDP) per worker and in total factor productivity. It is also mirrored in the
wide dispersion of productivity levels across firms within industries, suggestive of substantial
allocative inefficiencies. The underlying causes of Brazil’s productivity malaise are complex.
They include a high cost of finance and doing business, the poor state of the country’s physical
infrastructure, limits to competition resulting from domestic regulation as well as relatively
high tariff and non-tariff barriers against exports, and muted incentives for innovation,
including technology adaptation, due to a myriad of distortive or ineffective government
interventions. Another structural constraint to higher productivity growth may lie with the
inadequate skills of the labor force, despite the very substantial progress Brazil has made in
providing greater access to education.


13.	   Stronger productivity growth alone will not generate inclusive growth. The hallmark
of Brazil’s progress in shared prosperity over the past decade was the extent to which
economic growth was reflected in fast job creation and declining earnings inequality. While
improvements in the business and regulatory environment and greater public and private




    iv
RETAKING THE PATH TO INCLUSION, GROWTH AND SUSTAINABILTY




investment will clearly be critical to relaunch economic growth, how this growth translates
into the creation of a sufficient number of good jobs for Brazil’s bottom 40 percent (B40) will
be equally important. This SCD consequently pays significant attention to the dynamics of
Brazil’s labor markets and to the opportunities available to the B40 and the assets at their
disposal to avail of such opportunities. Without a return to growth and the adoption of a more
sustainable, less commodity and less consumption-dependent growth model, improvements in
living standards for the B40 will remain elusive. However, while growth is a necessary condition
for shared prosperity, it is not sufficient. Policies that enhance economic opportunities, build
human capital and resilience, and recognize the assets of the poor (including their claim over
natural resources and land rights) deserve particular attention.


14.	    The second weakness in Brazil’s economic model is related to the sustainability of public
spending commitments in the light of the economy’s underlying growth potential. Brazil’s
public sector has continuously grown since the introduction of democracy in the mid-1980s.
Fundamentally, this is related with spending commitments that were enshrined in Brazil’s
1988 Constitution and with the nature of the country’s fragmented politics, where access to
government funds is a key incentive for building and sustaining political coalitions. The large
claim of Brazil’s public sector on the country’s limited domestic savings has traditionally been
a source of both macroeconomic instability, which Brazil finally overcame with the Plano
Real and the fiscal adjustment of 1999, and a relatively high cost of capital, which remains
a problem until today. In light of buoyant revenue performance, fiscal constraints lost some
of their salience during the first decade of the 2000s but the substantial expansion of public
spending after 2008 and the collapse in revenues since the sharp economic downturn in
2014–2015 have exposed Brazil’s underlying budget rigidities. Without fiscal adjustment, it
seems, the country may be stuck with weak investor confidence, high interest rates in the
light of concerns over macroeconomic imbalances, and as a result little impetus for a return
to investment-driven growth. At the same time, the necessary fiscal adjustment is fraught
with important distributional consequences, which may affect Brazil’s future prospects for
continued inclusive economic development.


15.	    Addressing fiscal trade-offs will be critical for the ability of the public sector to redistribute
resources (income and services) to the poor, within a sustainable fiscal and macroeconomic
framework. The analysis in this SCD highlights that some of the largest public expenditure items
in the social sphere benefit mostly the better-off, public pensions being an obvious example.
In other areas, including health care or general education, there is ample scope for greater
efficiency. Many budget subsidies to various economic sectors may even be harmful, by distorting
competition, or may be wasted in poorly planned and executed investment projects. By reforming
social security, reducing waste, abolishing inefficient subsidies, and reallocating resources to




                                                                                                   v
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY




those services mostly benefiting the B40, the necessary fiscal adjustment can be made consistent
with further social progress. In this regard, particular attention should be placed on safeguarding
and even expanding programs and services that protect the most vulnerable, such as women,
Afrodescendants, and indigenous peoples, many of whom still suffer discrimination and are
particularly subject to violence and insecurity, despite considerable government efforts in recent
years, which have begun to bear fruit.


16.	    Beyond the structural conditions for future job creation and the quality of Brazil’s
inevitable fiscal adjustment, the prospects of the B40 are also intrinsically linked with the
country’s vast natural assets and its leadership in the global environmental agenda. Many of
the poor and vulnerable depend on the natural environment for their livelihoods, such as small-
scale agricultural producers, as indigenous communities whose lifestyles are dependent on the
preservation of Brazil’s natural habitats, as well as urban dwellers exposed to pollution, water
scarcity or power shortages, and the risks of natural disasters. The high population density and
large numbers of poor in urban areas characterize the vulnerability to natural hazards in the
country, largely driven by the suboptimal land use and planning that characterizes Brazilian
cities. With much fewer means to protect or insure themselves against environmental risks,
the poor and B40 are particularly affected by the degree to which government policy and
regulation manages to balance the needs of economic development with the objective of
environmental sustainability. This SCD shows that there is significant scope to reduce the
burden of existing regulation and improve their environmental impact, for instance in the
management of land and water resources. Indeed, Brazil has the opportunity to position itself
as a leader in exploring green growth paths for emerging markets through innovative policy
design. This has the potential to create new economic opportunities for the B40 and greatly
increase their resilience against climate-related and other natural shocks.


17.	    The reforms required to preserve Brazil’s socioeconomic achievements and return the
country to a sustainable growth path are challenging. Brazil rightly looks back at its recent
progress in social inclusion with pride. Some in the country see a direct association with an
expansive public sector and fear that regulatory reforms and spending cuts may unwind
many of these gains. The analysis of this SCD points in a different direction. Brazil’s political
institutions have required compromises that have swelled government commitments even
at the cost of significant inefficiencies. In times of tight fiscal constraints, it may be time to
review some of these compromises and generate a new consensus in favor of a more efficient,
while still inclusive, economic and social model. Brazil’s own history suggests that a new
policy consensus has emerged at times of crisis and allowed the country to overcome past
institutional constraints to better public sector governance. In the late 1990s, repeated bouts
of high inflation finally convinced the political class to establish a new set of institutions –




    vi
RETAKING THE PATH TO INCLUSION, GROWTH AND SUSTAINABILTY




the macroeconomic tripod and the fiscal responsibility law – that guaranteed macroeconomic
stability for the next 15 years. Likewise today, poor macroeconomic prospects, the decreasing
public tolerance of the ‘old ways’ of political deal making, as well as growing pressure for
improvements in the quality of services may create incentives for policy makers to align behind
a coherent economic strategy and overcome the vested interests that have blocked reform
to date. Brazil’s political establishment has already demonstrated leadership and vision in
declaring ambitious climate objectives – a national consensus seems to be forming in favor of
a future green growth model. All this is reason to be optimistic.


18.	    The structure of the SCD follows the argument in the previous paragraphs. Chapter
1 summarizes Brazil’s achievements in reducing poverty and boosting incomes of the B40,
drawing up a profile of the poor and vulnerable, their main assets, access to markets and public
services and susceptibility to various economic risks, as well as the effectiveness of government
transfers. Chapter 2 looks at Brazil’s political institutions to get at the root of the country’s fiscal
challenges. Chapter 3 examines the consequences of these fiscal challenges for macroeconomic
management and traces the evolution of Brazil’s macroeconomic policy framework since the
days of high inflation in the late 1980s. Chapter 4 deals with the structural reforms needed
to raise the level and types of private investment required to increase productivity growth
and competitiveness, with a particular focus on the role of infrastructure. Chapter 5 reviews
the scope for efficiency enhancing and socially progressive reallocations of government
expenditures. It also analyzes why some vertical government policies, such as the Programa
Bolsa Família (PBF) conditional cash transfer (CCT) program, have been so successful, while
others—in infrastructure, or in the area of education—have had a more mixed record. Chapter
6 looks at the challenges for improved environmental and natural resource management, and
outlines the contours of a future green growth strategy for Brazil. Chapter 7 concludes the SCD
and draws out the main constraints to Brazil’s development. In the remainder of this overview,
we summarize the responses to the key questions in each chapter.


Who are the poor and bottom 40 percent in Brazil and how did they fare?

19.	    Between 2001 and 2013, 24.6 million Brazilians have escaped poverty, although
Brazil remains one of the most unequal countries in the world. The reduction in poverty is an
achievement of regional significance, representing almost 50 percent of the reduction in poverty
in the whole Latin American and Caribbean (LAC) region (Figure 1). Brazil also experienced a rapid
decline in inequality over the past decade, with the Gini coefficient of household incomes falling
from 0.59 to 0.53. To a large extent, it was due to a policy of social inclusion in the context of
a booming economy, fueled by favorable external conditions. Brazil’s achievements were also
of historical significance, in that it was the first time in the history of Brazil that a sustained




                                                                                                 vii
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY




reduction in poverty and inequality had been achieved. Nevertheless, even after the reduction in
poverty and inequality, Brazil remains one of the most unequal countries in the world, with a Gini
coefficient higher than in most countries except Colombia and Honduras in Latin America and
Caribbean and a few countries in sub-Saharan Africa.



          Figure 1: Progress in Poverty and Inequality Reduction in Brazil

                                                                   Gini Coeﬃcient
                                                                   Extreme Poverty Rate (<R$70/month)
                                                                   Poverty Rate (<R$140/month)
                               %
                Poverty Rate




                               %

                               %

                               %

                               %

                               %

                               %

          Source: Calculations based on on the National Household Sample Survey (PNAD) 2001–13.




20.	    While the incidence of poverty is significantly higher in rural areas, the majority of the
Brazilian poor live in urban centers. Using the administrative poverty lines of R$140 and R$70
per capita per month of the PBF and the Brasil Sem Miséria (BSM) plan, the incidence of poverty
in rural areas is more than double that in urban areas, with levels of moderate and extreme
poverty at 22.6 and 9.1 percent, respectively, in 2013, compared to 6.3 and 3.1 in urban centers.
However, the gap between rural and urban poverty rates has declined from 30.3 percentage
points in 2001 to 16.3 percentage points in 2013. Moreover, Brazil has experienced a high rate
of urbanization, with 85.2 percent of the country’s population living in urban areas in 2013.
As a result, in spite of the lower incidence of poverty in urban areas, in 2013 60 percent of the
nation’s poor (almost 17 million) lived in cities.


21.	     Labor markets drove shared prosperity, while transfers helped reduce extreme poverty.
The road to prosperity for the majority of poorer Brazilians has been through a formal sector job.
In this regard, Brazil is similar to other middle-income countries, where labor earnings represent
the largest share of income among the B40, and hence the performance of the labor market is a
key determinant of poverty reduction and shared prosperity. For the poorest Brazilians, however,
social transfers have been more important than labor markets in the past decade. Sixty two
percent of the decline in extreme poverty in Brazil between 2004 and 2013 was due to changes in
non-labor income (mainly transfers from the PBF CCT program) (see Figure 2).




   viii
RETAKING THE PATH TO INCLUSION, GROWTH AND SUSTAINABILTY




                  Figure 2: Sources of Reductions in Poverty, Extreme Poverty and Inequality,
                  2004-2013


                                         Gini              Poverty R$140             Poverty R$70
                       %

                       %                                                           -6%

                       %                                   -14 %
                                -20 %
                       %                                                   -26 %
                                                                                          -32 %
                       %
                                         -41 % -39%
                       %

                       %
                                                                   -60 %
                                                                                                   -62 %
                       %



                             Share of Adults               Labor income             Non labor income

                  Source: Calculated from PNAD 2004-2013




22.	    Brazil’s labor market over the past decade has combined rapid job creation and
decreased informality with a considerable compression of the wage distribution. In many
emerging markets and in developed economies, policy makers have faced a dilemma: either
accept increasing wage inequality as the price to pay for low unemployment, or protect the
relative incomes of those in employment but at the cost of increased joblessness or informality
among the low-skilled. Brazil was able to avoid this policy dilemma over the period 2003-2013.
The result has been a net job creation rate of close to 2 percent per year, and reduced levels of
informality.


23.	    Favorable external conditions have played a critical role in shaping labor market
outcomes in Brazil. The commodity price boom prompted significant real exchange rate
appreciation and this in turn encouraged the growth of non-tradable domestic services.
Rising job opportunities for low-skilled workers in these sectors led to rising incomes, which
in turn fed back into growing demand for goods and services such as housing, durable goods,
and retail or transportation. In the context of strong aggregate labor demand, the result
was a remarkable reduction in the skills premium (Figure 3a).1 However, policy played a role
too: widening access to education increased the supply of skills and thus helped lower the


1 A recent report Jobs, Wages and the Latin American Slowdown by de la Torre et al. (2015) notes a similar trend across
Latin America. The reasons for declining skills premia are still not entirely understood but likely are not with differences
in the skill intensities between tradable and non-tradeable sectors. Instead it seems patterns of demand during the
boom were favorable to sectors employing less-skilled workers and the supply curve for less skilled workers seems to
have become steeper. It is not clear that these trends are sustainable, raising concerns that the social gains of the past
decade may be partially reversed in the coming years.




                                                                                                                    ix
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY




premium, while aggressive increases in the minimum wage succeeded in shifting up the wage
share in the economy as a whole. Rising unit labor costs, however, particularly in higher-skill
intensive manufacturing, reduced competitiveness and precipitated a decline in profitability,
further accentuating the shift towards lower-skill non-tradables (Figure 3b).



     Figure 3: Wage Inequality Fell After 2003, as The Minimum Wage Increased Sharply



     (3a) Skill Premium                                            (3b) Productivity And Wages, Index, 2003=100



                            Secondary to Primary LHS




                                                                                     Min. wage
                                                                                                              Av. Wage




                     Tertiary to Secondary RHS


                                                                                                              Labor Prod. (Y/L)




     Source: LAC Equity Lab - Socioeconomic Database for Latin     Sources: International Monetary Fund (IMF), Brazilian Institute
     America and Carribean data (CEDLAS and World Bank) and        of Geography and Statistics (IBGE), Inter-Union Department of
     Ipeadata.                                                     Statistics and Socioeconomic Studies (DIEESE), World Bank.
     Note: Skill premium is deﬁned as the ratio of average wages
     by skill level.




24.	    As commodity prices have slumped, it has become clear that the labor market
drivers of poverty reduction and shared prosperity cannot be sustained without increasing
productivity and investment. The real exchange rate has depreciated sharply, unemployment
is increasing, and the decline in wage inequality may well start to go into reverse. Continued
increases in the minimum wage are likely only to be compatible with macroeconomic stability
in an environment of increasing productivity. In other words, Brazil will need a different
growth model to sustain past gains. This will require a new political consensus to support the
necessary fiscal and structural reforms. It is therefore important to understand the underlying
institutional factors that have shaped the evolution of public policy in Brazil and how they
may affect the hard choices Brazil faces today.




    x
RETAKING THE PATH TO INCLUSION, GROWTH AND SUSTAINABILTY




How do Brazil’s political institutions affect the design and
implementation of public policy?

25.	    The reintroduction of democracy in Brazil in 1985 came with the recognition that the
huge inequalities of the past were unacceptable and unsustainable and that an inclusive
development path was required. Brazil’s socioeconomic history is marked by persistent and
huge inequality, between land-owners and slaves, between educated elites and illiterate
masses, between privileged and non-privileged business groups, and between the wealthy
South and the less developed North and Northeast of the country. The 1988 Constitution sought
to redress this legacy and repay the accumulated ‘social debt’. Brazil’s economic institutions
in the past three decades have therefore assumed a distinctly ‘welfarist’ orientation, with
significant social entitlements enshrined in basic legislation. At the same time, however, the
Constitution did not ignore the interests of the still-powerful traditional elites, and the need
to balance subnational and national interests in a continent-sized country. The result was a
compromise whereby the traditional elites were convinced to share power through generous
public sector handouts and a complex system of checks and balances. Thus the political
settlement had an important role in setting the course of fiscal policy over the next three
decades.

26.	    Expenditure pressures and difficulties in formulating and implementing policy have
been exacerbated by a highly fragmented political setup, and a decentralized federation. Few
other countries have more parties represented in parliament and more complex coalitions—
the current government, for instance, relies on no less than 13 parties for support in Congress.
To this must be added the considerable influence of subnational governments in both the
Senate and the Chamber of Deputies, through their state-level political machines, which ensure
that the loyalty of deputies to the governors and the states is often stronger than that to their
parties. The result is a high degree of political fragmentation. Traditionally, political leaders have
forged the necessary deals through the allocation of senior positions in the government (Brazil’s
cabinet is one of the largest in the world, with currently 31 ministers and 39 before October 2015)
and through a large number of budget amendments in favor of specific regional interests. The
consequence has been a large public footprint (Figure 4) and considerable inefficiencies in the
formulation and implementation of policy priorities (Figure 5).




                                                                                               xi
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY




    Figure 4: Brazil’s Public Sector is Large (Expenditure as a Percentage of GDP)
             Advanced




         %                                 Venezuela
                         Russia

                                  Brazil




                                                                                                                                                 Developping Asia
                                                                                   Developping
         %                                                   Argentina

                                                                         Uruguay




                                                                                                            Colombia
                                                                                                 Malaysia
                                                       LAC




                                                                                                                                        Mexico
                                                                                                                                China
                                                                                                                        India




                                                                                                                                                                    Thailand
         %




                                                                                                                                                                                Chile



                                                                                                                                                                                               Indonesia
                                                                                                                                                                                        Peru
         %



         %

             Source: World Development Indicators



                        Figure 5: Brazil’s Policy Eﬀectiveness is Low Compared to Peers


                                                                                                                         Policy
                                                                                                                         Eﬃciency




                                                                                                                                                                       Korea



                                                                                           4       3        2          1 0

                                                                                                                                                                               India
                                                                                                                                                                               China
                                                                                                                                                                               Mexico
                                                                                                                                                                               Brazil

                                                        Judicial
                                                                                                                                                                         Bureau
                                                           Ind
                                                                                                                                                                         Index

                                              Source: Inter-American Development Bank, Public Policy Attributes, 2015




27.	   Despite these institutional inefficiencies, Brazil has been capable of policy adjustments
and far-reaching reforms at critical times. Two important examples are the Plano Real (1994)
and the Fiscal Responsibility Law (2000). The Plano Real was the first successful program to




   xii
RETAKING THE PATH TO INCLUSION, GROWTH AND SUSTAINABILTY




reduce Brazil’s chronically high inflation rate. The Constitution was amended to ensure that
fiscal policy was aligned in support of monetary policy objectives. After the emerging market
crises of the late 1990s, the exchange rate was allowed to float and an inflation-targeting
regime was adopted. Combined with prudent fiscal policy, the floating exchange rate regime
and the adoption of an inflation target formed the ‘macroeconomic tripod’. In this context,
the Fiscal Responsibility Law changed the framework for intergovernmental fiscal relations to
make it consistent with the overall sustainability of public finances. The result was more than
a decade of relative macroeconomic stability and significant economic and social progress.


28.	    Brazil’s recent experience also shows that institutional deficiencies can be overcome
with good policy design to achieve tremendous development results. The best example of
a well-designed policy is the Bolsa Família (PBF), a CCT program to poor families that has not
only contributed in a major way to directly reduce poverty, but also improved the access of
beneficiaries to basic services, such as public education and social security. Key elements
of success of the PBF, which have now been extended into an integrated poverty reduction
program – Brasil Sem Miséria – were: (a) a clear objective, (b) an evidence based design, and
(c) rigorous Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E). This contains important lessons for other
government flagship programs, such as for instance the accelerated growth program (PAC)
aiming to encourage more investment in infrastructure. While the PAC clearly satisfies the first
condition of success, its record on evidence-based design and M&E is mixed. Brazil will need
once more to draw on its capacity to generate institutional innovations at critical times to
support critical fiscal and structural reforms needed to put the country back on a sustainable
and inclusive growth path.


What adjustments are needed to Brazil’s macroeconomic and fiscal
framework to safeguard stability and lay the foundations for a return
to sustained growth?

29.	    In the late 1980s and early 1990s, the macroeconomic landscape was dominated by
an unsustainable fiscal deficit, instability, hyperinflation, an extraordinarily high cost of
capital and low savings and investment rates. High inflation reflected the fiscal consequences
of unresolved distributional conflicts, while the high cost of capital was a consequence of
measures to protect financial wealth in times of macroeconomic instability and prevent capital
flight. Both public and private savings have historically been low. The Plano Real of 1994 and
the subsequent fiscal reforms of the late 1990s managed to bring inflation under control and
restore macroeconomic balance, but these reforms did not address the underlying structural
problems of chronically low savings, high capital costs and an increasingly overextended and
rigid public sector.




                                                                                          xiii
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY




30.	   The macroeconomic stability achieved since the late 1990s, however, facilitated
economic growth in the decade to 2013. Inflation was kept under control and the rise in
monetary policy credibility allowed real interest rates to decline (Figure 6), although they
remained among the highest in the world. This, together with increased revenues from
commodity prices, facilitated fiscal adjustment, helping the government achieve primary
surpluses of around 3 percent of GDP throughout much of the 2000s despite a significant
increase in current spending (Figure 7). As a major commodity exporter, Brazil benefited from
excellent terms of trade throughout the decade, which filled public coffers with revenues
and helped fuel a domestic consumption boom (Figure 8). Public debt declined by around 10
percentage points of GDP to 60 percent at the eve of the global recession in 2008 and, owing
to prudent supervision, the banking sector maintained solid capitalization and strong balance
sheets despite a rapid expansion of domestic credit.



   Figure 6: Laying The Foundations – The Plano                                                     Figure 7: The Beneﬁts of Fiscal Stabilization
   Real Annual Inﬂation and Real Interest Rates                                                     through the Fiscal Responsibility Law
   (Ex-post), 1996-2015




                                                                                                             Fiscal Responsibility law
                                                                                             % of GPD




                                                    Real interest rate                                                                   Interest spending
                                                   Broad National
                                                   Consumer Price Index




                                                                                                                    Current primary expenditures (R)
                                                                                                                    Primary surplus
         Jan


                     Jan


                                 Jan


                                             Jan


                                                         Jan


                                                                     Jan


                                                                                 Jan
               jul


                           jul


                                       jul


                                                   jul


                                                               jul


                                                                           jul


                                                                                       jul




                                                                                                        Source: National Treasury Secretariat, Federal
    Source: Central Bank of Brazil, World Bank estimates.                                               Revenues Service, IMF. World Bank estimates.




   xiv
RETAKING THE PATH TO INCLUSION, GROWTH AND SUSTAINABILTY




     Figure 8: Consumption Driven Growth




                                                                                                     2010
      %




                                                                                2007

                                                                                       2008
                                                           2004



                                                                         2006
                               2000




                                                                                                            2011
          1997




                                                                                                                          2013
                                             2002




                                                                  2005




                                                                                              2009




                                                                                                                   2012
                        1999




                                                                                                                                        2015*
                                      2001



                                                    2003




                                                                                                                                 2014
                 1998




                 Net Exports          Priv. Consumption            Gov. Consumption            Investments           YoY Growth



      Sources: IBGE and World Bank calculations.
      * Four quarters to third quarter of 2015




31.	    Solid fiscal and foreign exchange buffers thus gave Brazil the room to respond to the
global recession and recover fast, but were unable to cushion a permanent reduction in the terms
of trade, or deal with pre-existing structural constraints. Fueled by a combination of tax breaks
and a rapid increase of ‘directed’ credit through the public banks, growth in 2010 bounced back
to 7.6 percent. External conditions helped as commodity prices stayed strong in the initial post-
recession years and global monetary stimulus led to huge capital inflows into emerging markets,
including Brazil. In addition, monetary policy was highly accommodative, with— between 2011 and
mid-2013—record low interest rates. However, the fiscal and monetary stimulus could not deal
with what was to be a permanent downturn in the terms of trade. Thus, inflationary pressures
started to build while growth slowed in the face of the preexisting structural constraints, and
the economy became increasingly unbalanced. When the commodity cycle turned and the
US Federal Reserve announced the ‘tapering’ of extraordinary bond purchases, Brazil was left
exposed to shifting investor sentiment (Figure 9). Consequently, the Real lost more than half of
its value against the U.S. dollar between 2011 and the end of 2015, forcing interest rates back up
to 14.25 percent. The economy came to a halt, while inflation rose rapidly.




                                                                                                                                                xv
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY




          Figure 9: When the Cycle Turned, Imbalances Rose




                                                                                                                               1Q2015
    Index 1Q2010-100




                                                                                                                                        3Q2015
                                                                Terms of Trade Index




                                                                                                    3Q2013


                                                                                                             1Q2014


                                                                                                                      3Q2014
                                                                               Nominal FX index
                                                                               (USD per BRL)




                                                                                           1Q2013
                                              Current Account Deﬁcit (R)
                                     3Q2010


                                                  1Q2011




                                                                                  3Q2012
                                                                      1Q2012
                                                            3Q2011
                            1Q2010




                       Source: Central Bank of Brazil, Funcex, World Bank estimates




32.	     In 2016, Brazil finds itself requiring a painful macroeconomic and fiscal adjustment.
Budget revenues have fallen as the consumption boom faded. However, spending has
proved far more difficult to adjust given the generous social security system and rigidities in
expenditure commitments often enshrined in constitutional provisions. Monetary policy was
tightened to bring inflation expectations down and the consumer price index back within the
Central Bank’s target band of 4.5–6.5 percent. Major attempts were made to adjust fiscal policy,
initially through cuts in discretionary spending on public infrastructure and on transfers to
state-banks for directed lending operations. Payroll tax breaks for selected sectors introduced
in 2012 to stimulate employment were unwound, some increases in taxes were legislated
and tariffs for electricity and water were adjusted upwards. However, these measures have
been insufficient to restore the fiscal balance of the previous decade, let alone to create fiscal
space for public investment. Moreover, even these modest measures have faced considerable
opposition in Congress.




   xvi
RETAKING THE PATH TO INCLUSION, GROWTH AND SUSTAINABILTY




33.	     Ultimately, Brazil faces the choice of addressing inequities in public spending and
reducing transfers to the better off, or contemplating the need to unwind social programs
and thus see some of the social gains of the ‘golden decade’ reversed. The underlying fiscal
problem of gradually rising expenditure commitments, particularly to the non-poor, was
not addressed during the period of rising revenues. With the turn of the terms of trade, the
adjustment has become both more necessary and more difficult as the distributional trade-
offs at the heart of Brazil’s fiscal policy challenge can no longer be hidden behind a rising
public sector footprint. Moreover, the fiscal stimulus intended to mitigate the crisis added to
the expenditure commitments and the erosion of the revenue base, making fiscal adjustment
even more difficult. Beyond fiscal adjustment, however, to relaunch sustainable economic
growth, Brazil needs to address its structural problems, including low productive investment,
lack of infrastructure, and the high cost of capital with segmented financial markets.


What are the underlying structural constraints to higher productivity
and sustained job creation?

34.	    Brazil’s growth record over the past decade masks an underlying structural weakness.
Around two-thirds of the increase in GDP over the 2002-2010 period was due to increases in
the quantity and quality of labor inputs, adding about 2.7 percentage points to annual growth
on average, as Brazil went through an accelerated demographic transition and reaped the
gains of widening access to education. Investment made a modest contribution, adding about
0.9 percentage points to growth annually, which accounts for just under 25 percent of growth
over the period. On the other hand, productivity (TFP) growth added just 0.4 percentage points
to growth, contributing only 11 percent to the rise in incomes. The demographic transition in
Brazil will soon come to an end, and with it the previous motor of Brazil’s expansion on the
supply side. Without increases in investment and in TFP, future growth rates will fall well short
of the recent past, and the scope for socially inclusive policies will be limited.


35.	   A closer look at the structural sources of productivity growth sheds light on the nature
of the underlying challenges. There are three main sources of productivity growth related
to the structure of an economy. First, productivity may increase as a result of structural
transformation, as people shift from lower-productivity jobs, usually in agriculture, to higher
productivity ones in services and industry. Second, productivity increases because of a shift
of resources from lower productivity firms to higher, fast-growing ones. Third, productivity
increases within existing firms as a result of the adoption of new technologies including better
management processes. None of these structural dynamics has worked in Brazil’s favor. The
country was an early urbanizer in the 1950s and 1960s. Immigrants from rural areas clung to
precarious informal employment opportunities and a lack of integrated urban planning pushed




                                                                                          xvii
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY




them into settling in Favelas that sprung up in all major Brazilian cities, where they remained
cut-off from the provision of better quality public services. The pattern of consumption and
non-tradable intensive growth over the past decade has brought many urban dwellers into
formal sector jobs, but this has not led to major increases in aggregate productivity. Between
2000 and 2013, most jobs were created in services subsectors where productivity was flat,
some in industry and construction where it declined, while jobs were lost in agriculture, which
was the only sector experiencing increasing productivity (Figure 10). As a result, aggregate GDP
per worker rose merely 1.3 percent per year from 2000 to 2013, and even during the boom years
of 2003–2010, did not exceed 2 percent.



      Figure 10: Too Few Productivity Gains from Structural Change, 2000-2013
                                              Services         Agriculture        Industry
                                                                      105.6%
          Employment Growth
          Productivity Growth

                                                                                  50.8%
                                            41.5%


                                                     11.7%



      Source: IBGE, World Bank estimates.                    -19.6%                       -5.5%




36.	    Brazil has a few outstanding and internationally recognized enterprises, but for every
top performer (such as Embraer), there is a myriad of poorly performing companies that reduce
overall productivity. The variation in productivity levels in Brazil is higher than in most of its
peers. Interestingly, this pattern is mirrored in the dispersion of management quality across
Brazilian firms. Wide disparities in productivity levels and management performance across
firms are an indication that competitive pressures do not work well: poor performers survive
and good performers fail to attract additional resources. Also most firms are globally isolated
and fail to learn from evolving global technologies.


37.	     Indeed, there is a host of obstacles to market integration and competition in Brazil,
including a lack of infrastructure, a large economy relatively closed to external competition,
a heavy bureaucratic burden, and a segmented financial market with very high interest rates.
First, competition suffers from the poor state of Brazil’s infrastructure, in particular in the area
of transport and logistics. This is particularly important given the continental size of Brazil. Not




  xviii
RETAKING THE PATH TO INCLUSION, GROWTH AND SUSTAINABILTY




only does poor transport and logistic infrastructure reduce the competitiveness of Brazilian
producers in global markets, it also reduces the level of economic integration across regions
in Brazil, allowing wide differences in productivity and income levels to persist across states.
Second, Brazil’s business environment is burdened by heavy regulation. For instance, it takes
83.6 days to open a new business in Brazil, compared to 6.3 days in Mexico and 4 days in the
Republic of Korea. Because the cost of entry and operation is high, entrepreneurship is stifled,
and incumbents have an advantage over new competitors. Third, Brazil also limits competition
and learning opportunities from abroad by maintaining one of the highest rates of effective
protection among emerging markets and industrialized countries. High tariffs on imports of
intermediates and capital goods mean that in some sectors the effective rate of protection of
some domestic producers is in triple digits.


38.	    A final critical barrier to competition and investment in Brazil is a segmented financial
system characterized by significant policy discretion in the allocation of credit. The current
arrangements are both a cause and a consequence of Brazil’s historically high cost of capital.
Given high market interest rates, the government has attempted to stimulate private
investment through directed credits at below-market rates, administered both through state-
owned banks and through a series of earmarked credit schemes run by private commercial
banks. This led to a sharp increase in the market share of public banks, from 30 to about 55
percent, during 2010–2014. Borrowers that do not have access to directed credits in turn pay
high interest rates (real rates of over 15 percent for corporates and 50 percent for households,
on average) if they are not priced out of the market altogether. Indeed, the credit market has
bifurcated further since the crisis. Directed credit—either granted by state-owned banks or
channeled through the large private banks—increased from 35 to 55 percent of total credit
to the domestic private sector during 2008-2015 (see Figure 11). The final verdict is not out on
the impact of Brazil’s financial sector policies on enterprise productivity, and as a result on
their overall costs and benefits. However, they may have reduced the effectiveness of monetary
policy by making a substantial share of credit allocation insensitive to changes in the policy
rate and they carry significant fiscal costs, which may limit their scope in the future, in the light
of the reduced fiscal space.




                                                                                              xix
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY




    Figure 11: Directed Credits Increased Post-crisis But With Limited Impact On
    Investment And Productivity
    (11a): Real Interest Rates on New Earmarked and                                           (11b): Stocks of Earmarked and Non-earmarked
    Non-earmarked Credits, Percentages, 2011–15                                               Credit to the Private Sector, Percentages of GDP,
                                                                                              2007–15

                                                                                                                      Nonearmarked
                                                         Nonearmarked

                                                                                                                          Earmarked

                                                        Selic
                                                        Earmarked
                          Mar

                                Jul
                                      Nov

                                            Mar

                                                  Jul

                                                         Nov

                                                                Mar

                                                                      Jul

                                                                            Nov

                                                                                  Mar

                                                                                        Jul
        Mar

              Jul

                    Nov




                                                                                                  Mar

                                                                                                        Oct
                                                                                                              May

                                                                                                                    Dec
                                                                                                                          Jul

                                                                                                                                Feb
                                                                                                                                      Sep

                                                                                                                                            Apr
                                                                                                                                                  Nov

                                                                                                                                                        Jun
                                                                                                                                                              Jan

                                                                                                                                                                    Aug
                                                                                                                                                                          Mar

                                                                                                                                                                                Oct
                                                                                                                                                                                      May
        Source: Central Bank of Brazil                                                            Source: Central Bank of Brazil




39.	    Competitive pressures are one key determinant of innovation and productivity
upgrading at the firm level. In emerging markets such as Brazil, much innovation is ‘catch-up’
innovation, whereby firms adapt international technologies and processes to local conditions.
In the absence of competition, particularly from abroad, however, the incentives for firms
to remain connected to the international technological frontier are limited. A smaller share
of Brazilian firms than in middle-income and Organization for Economic Cooperation and
Development (OECD) peers regularly implement process or product innovations according to
World Bank enterprise surveys. In addition, Brazil’s percentage of high technology exports is
relatively low compared to peers (Figure 12a). Government efforts in recent years have yielded
success in improving the supply of science and technology inputs—Brazil produces many
more PhDs than a decade ago and government spends more than many other middle-income
countries on research and development (R&D) (Figure 12b). However, these efforts have yet
to translate into higher innovation by Brazilian companies. The lack of competitive pressure
may be one reason. A dearth of workers with the necessary skills to successfully operate
new technologies may be another. Public policy thus may need to go beyond public funding
of scientific research and state handouts to support firm-level innovation. Public policy will
also need to support citizens to benefit from the opportunities generated by a dynamic and
competitive market economy, and protect the poor against economic volatility, structural
adjustment and natural risks.




   xx
RETAKING THE PATH TO INCLUSION, GROWTH AND SUSTAINABILTY




    Figure 12: Despite Increasing Public Investments in R&D, Brazil Remains a
    Mid-tech Economy
    (12a) High-technology Exports (% Of       (12b) R&D Expenditures (% Of GDP)
    Merchandise Exports)

                                                                                                            R&D in 2011




                                            % of GPD
                                China 25                                                                    Growth in R&D (2000-2011)


                     Mexico    12.3

                     US 11.7

                      4.5



                                                       Korea
                                                               China
                                                                       UMI
                                                                             LAC
                                                                                   Brazil
                                                                                    USA
                                                                                            OECD
                                                                                                   Mexico
                                                                                                             India
                                                                                                            Russia
            India

            Brazil     3.7
      Source: World Bank WDI                      Source: World Bank WDI




How much fiscal space does Brazil have to continue its progressive
social policies?

40.	    The increase in public expenditure financed by increased revenues reached its limit
in 2014. In that year, Brazil recorded a primary deficit for the first time in 15 years. Even during
the height of the global economic crisis, a small primary surplus was maintained, as revenues
remained relatively buoyant. This time is different. Revenues are closely tied to consumption
because of the high reliance on indirect taxes and as consumption has slumped so has fiscal
performance. The share of truly discretionary spending in Brazil’s budget is very low and consists
mostly of infrastructure investments as well as subsidies and transfers to particular sectors of
the economy. The bulk of spending is tied up in social commitments, including social security,
health, education and social transfers (many of which do not go to the poor). The choice for
Brazil will be whether to strengthen the fiscal foundations of the macroeconomic framework,
by reducing transfers to the well-off, or to introduce spending cuts that fall disproportionately
on the poor and undo some of the social progress of the past decade.


41.	    The public sector in Brazil has a large footprint, and for many it has been a source of
significant support in the past decade. In addition to the targeted social transfer programs,
now bundled under the umbrella of BSM, the state has been instrumental in widening access
to public services for the poor and deprived. Brazil increased completion rates of basic (primary
plus lower secondary) education by 20 percentage points to close to 70 percent since 2001.
Infant mortality fell by 70 percent since the mid-1990s and maternal mortality rates by over
50 percent. Access to power supply, drinking water and sanitation also improved, although




                                                                                                                                   xxi
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY




important gaps remain among the poor in the latter area. As a consequence of these important
achievements, Brazil compares very well with other middle-income country peers and countries
in Latin America and the Caribbean (Figure 13), and these achievements need to be safeguarded.



      Figure 13: Signiﬁcant Social Progress in Brazil, 2013



          How Brazil Fares Against Comparison Countries                                   Brazil vs. Mexico and LAC

                                                                                                   Sanitation
                                  Sanitation
                                                                                                   Facilities
                                  Facilities                                                                     Access
                                                                            Average Years
                                                                                                                 To Water
                                                                             Of Education
              Infant                             Access
            Mortality                            To Water
                                                                                School
                                                                            Enrollment                               Homicides
                                                     Brazil                 Ages                                              Brazil
                                                     LAC                                                                      LAC
                                                     Synthetic MIC                                                            Mexico
                                                     MICS                          Primary                       Life
                                           Homicides                                School                       Expectancy
                         Life
                                                                                Enrollment           Infant
                         Expectancy
                                                                                                     Mortality


      Source: World Bank WDI (left ﬁgure) and LAC Equity Lab (right ﬁgure)
      Note: School enrollment rates and average years of education for Brazil are not available in the WDI.




42.	    There is a lot of scope for continuing progressive social policies if spending is reallocated
from entitlement programs, which largely benefit the better-off. Fiscal adjustment and social
progress are not contradictory. In 2014, the share of social assistance transfers directly targeting
the poor was just 7.7 percent of primary general government spending. Adding primary health,
early childhood education and primary education spending, the share increased to 16.4 percent.2
Public administration consumed 5.4 percent of spending, and with multiple overlapping
responsibilities and generous civil servant pay packages there would appear to be scope for
some savings there (Figure 14). Transfers to businesses, including implicit tax expenditures
and transfers through the state banks, exceed 5 percent of GDP, or the equivalent of almost 14
percent of primary expenditure. The bulk of spending is on pensions (not including the semi-
contributory rural pensions), an important part of which accrue to public servants and other
better-off households. The public pension system has been running deficits, thus directly eating
up fiscal space that could be used to protect the poor and vulnerable. Therefore, there are many


2 Data for primary health, early childhood education, and primary education were estimated based on the proportions
(relative to overall health and education expenditures) observed in 2012.




   xxii
RETAKING THE PATH TO INCLUSION, GROWTH AND SUSTAINABILTY




opportunities to reduce spending without affecting the poor. Indeed, by creating fiscal space
for public investment, and for increased transfers to the unemployed and vulnerable, such cuts
would help safeguard the social gains of the past decade.


43.	    In addition to the reallocation of spending across budget lines, the poor and vulnerable
could also benefit from efficiency gains in spending in various areas. Despite significant gains
in educational achievements over the past decade, the B40 continue to be disadvantaged by
the low quality of publicly provided basic education. Richer households can afford to send their
children to better, private schools, thus increasing the chance of acceptance in one of the publicly
funded state universities. The poor do not have this option and are thus particularly reliant
on government efforts to improve educational quality. The variance in educational outcomes
across states with similar socioeconomic conditions suggests there is ample room for policy
and good management to make a difference, and for subnational governments to learn from
each other. Similar arguments can be made for other public services, such as urban transport,
water and sanitation, housing and, importantly, protection from crime and violence. In the case
of health care, long waiting lines and poor quality have prompted public dissatisfaction despite
considerable improvements in access and the introduction of a tax funded, free system of
universal care. Once again, the better-off compensate through additional private health plans;
the poor have to stand in the queue. Despite average housing investments3 being around 10
percent of GDP for the last three decades, capacity constraints at the local level, lack of fiscal
space, and land acquisition and resettlement issues have bedeviled the implementation of
social housing programs like Minha Casa Minha Vida (MCMV). Out of an estimated housing
deficit of 27 million units by 2023, 7 million units are for higher-income families. In each of
these areas, well-designed policy interventions could help improve the quality of services
for all beneficiaries, benefiting in particular poor households that have few opportunities
to substitute private provision for poor public services. The poor also stand to benefit from
policies that make economic growth compatible with the preservation and enhancement of
Brazil’s natural assets and that increase resilience against increasing climate risks.




3 Including government, private, and household investment. Estimates based on ‘ownership of dwelling value added’
variable from National Accounts.




                                                                                                         xxiii
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY




         Figure 14: Expenditure by Function – 2014 (% of Primary Expenditure)



                                     Pensions                                                Health



                                                        %                            %


                                                                                                           Education
                                                                                                           except
         Higher Education                      %                                             %
                                                                                                           higher
                                               %                                                           education
                    Defense                    %
                    Transport                      %
                                                       %                              %
                             Urban
                                                             %
                                                                 %          %                       Others
                                 Labor

                                          Public
                                                         Public            Social Assistance
                                        Security
                                                         Administration



     Source: National Treasury Secretariat, Federal Revenues Service, IMF. World Bank estimates.
     Note: ‘Labor’ includes unemployment beneﬁts and Urban includes sanitation and housing. Social Assistance includes CCT, other
     SSN, school feeding programs, Benefício de Prestação Continuada (BPC) and RMV (elderly and disabled) and rural pensions.




Can socioeconomic development and the protection of Brazil’s huge
natural capital be reconciled?

44.	    Brazil stands out for its contribution to climate change mitigation due to its dramatic
success in reducing deforestation, making the country a leader in global climate negotiations.
This achievement (see Figure 15) would be welcome in any country; given Brazil’s size, it is of
global significance. This success is symbolic of a broader effort in Brazil’s development policy
towards protection of its natural assets and recognition of the ways in which they affect
the livelihoods and welfare particularly of many poorer people. Since the 1990s, Brazil has
emerged as a leader in new agricultural technologies, including low-tillage farming and the
recent expansion of climate-smart agricultural practices. Land regeneration and reforestation
programs have been successfully implemented in several regions of the country. Brazil has the
ambition to show that social and environmental sustainability are complementary.




  xxiv
RETAKING THE PATH TO INCLUSION, GROWTH AND SUSTAINABILTY




                 Figure 15: Brazil is a Leader in Climate Change Mitigation Eﬀort

                 (a) Deforestation in Amazônia Legal between 2004 and 2014, Thousands of square kilometers




                                                                                                                                             -82%




                                          Source: Instituto Nacional de Pesquisas Espaciais (INPE) 2015



           (b) GHG Emissions– Brazil – 1990-2013 (Co2eq)
                                                                                                                      2004
                                                      1995




                                                                                                               2003
                                                                                                        2002




                                                                                                                             2005
                                                                                         2000
                                                                                                2001




                                                                                                                                    2006
                                                             1996




                                                                                  1999
                                                                           1998




                                                                                                                                                  2008
                                               1994




                                                                                                                                           2007
                   1990


                                 1992
                                        1993




                                                                    1997
                          1991




                                                                                                                                                         2009




                                                                                                                                                                                     2013
                                                                                                                                                                2010
                                                                                                                                                                       2011
                                                                                                                                                                              2012
      Billions




                      Land Use Change & Foresty                        Agriculture                     Industrial               Waste               Energy
                                                                                                       Processes


                  Source: Annual estimates of greenhouse gas emissions in Brazil, Ministry of Science, Technology, and Innovation (2014).




45.	    However, many challenges still remain for Brazil. The management of natural
resources such as land and water is inefficient with negative consequences for economic
opportunities and sustainability. Despite the increase in agricultural productivity, the variation
of productivity across farms remains huge, as a result of which more land needs to be brought
under cultivation to compensate for poor yields. Speculative land grabs continue to lead to
illegal deforestation and sometimes violent clashes between indigenous people and illegal




                                                                                                                                                                                            xxv
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY




loggers, despite significant improvements in surveillance and enforcement. Similarly, in water,
wide variance exists in the quality of water management across locations, while in addition
there is a serious North-South imbalance between water intake and use.


46.	    Rapid urbanization and the effects of climate change are creating additional risks to
sustainable livelihoods. Urban sprawl increases the environment footprint of cities and the
spread of precarious housing makes people vulnerable to natural disasters, climate-related
or not. Many informal urban settlements are at risk from flooding or have been erected on
contaminated land. In Brazil, the vehicle fleet trebled between 2000 and 2015 (Figure 16). The
situation is particularly bad in Brazil’s megacities such as São Paulo or Rio de Janeiro, and
several medium-sized cities, where transport-related air pollution is becoming a significant
health hazard.


    Figure 16: With Prosperity Comes Congestion (Car Ownership Trebled In Brazil in
    15 Years)

    2015

                                                                                 millions
    2010

                                                     millions
    2005

                               millions
    2000

                        millions

    Source: Sistema de Registro Nacional de Veículos Automotores – RENAVAM/DENATRAN




47.	    A green growth path is possible for Brazil. Brazil’s land, forest and water resources
are assets that if well managed can yield ample economic returns, provide livelihoods, render
environmental services and buttress Brazil’s global reputation. Brazil’s cities can become more
livable and attractive to global talent and investment alike, if pollution and congestion are reduced,
and if weather-related and other disaster risks are mitigated. Public investment will be needed
to realize these opportunities, but the private sector can play an important role too, if the right
policies are in place. Brazil’s national and subnational governments can already draw on a rich set
of experiences. However, in the country’s management of natural resource and environmental
protection as in so many other policy fields, the fragmentation of policy making across tiers of
government has added to the complexity and reduced the effectiveness of individual programs
and initiatives. Dealing with these issues will allow Brazil to realize its ambition to be a leader in
green growth among emerging markets.




  xxvi
RETAKING THE PATH TO INCLUSION, GROWTH AND SUSTAINABILTY




What are the priority constraints that can be derived from the analysis
of this SCD?

48.	   The priority constraints in Brazil suggested by this SCD follow from the narrative
introduced at the beginning of this overview. Three requirements can be derived for sustaining
poverty reduction and shared prosperity in Brazil into the future.


49.	    The first requirement is the creation of sufficient productive and well-remunerated jobs
to provide employment opportunities for all Brazilians of working age. This in turn depends
on increasing productivity, stimulating investment and innovation, and ensuring that the labor
force is sufficiently skilled to meet the demands of the labor market in an upper-middle-income
country. Increased investment and innovation are a function of a stable and sustainable fiscal
and macroeconomic framework, improvements in the business environment, access to capital
at reasonable prices and, above all, increased competition, together providing the conditions for
improving productivity.


50.	    A second basic requirement for continued poverty reduction and shared prosperity
is more efficient and better-targeted government spending. This is fundamental to improve
access to and the quality of public services and to regain the fiscal space necessary for
greater public investment while continuing (and possibly increasing) transfers to the poor
and vulnerable. The time has now come to question who receives public resources and for
what public purpose. The further reduction of inequality will depend significantly on the state
redistributing the resources it allocates away from the non-poor to the poor.


51.	    The third requirement for improved livelihoods and economic opportunities is the
smarter management of Brazil’s natural resources and the better mitigation of environmental
pollution and the risk of natural disasters. Three principal issues in natural resource
management stand out and affect the B40 directly and indirectly through their effects on
growth and incomes. These are the questions of access to land and insecure property rights,
water management and, more broadly, the management of the natural environment. All of
these issues are ones of governance in which the state acts as a mediator between competing
private interests, and to support those (the poor and vulnerable) who are least able to protect
their interests.


52.	   Three criteria were used to identify priority constraints on sustained poverty reduction
and shared prosperity. These were: (a) the constraints should have a critical medium and long
term impact on the welfare of the B40, including generating synergies and complementarities
with relieving other constraints; (b) that any proposed measures should fit into the available




                                                                                          xxvii
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY




resource envelope and be consistent with long-term fiscal and environmental sustainability;
and (c) there should be some evidence of impact from other countries or Brazil’s own
development experience.


53.	    By applying these criteria to the three requirements it is possible to identify five priority
constraints: (a) Inefficient and not-well targeted spending commitments that consume fiscal
space needed for pro-poor spending priorities generate a relatively high tax burden, and—in
an unfavorable global context—have become a cause of serious fiscal imbalances. (b) Public
sector governance weaknesses and institutional arrangements that complicate the necessary
fiscal adjustment and exacerbate inefficiencies in the choice, design and implementation of
public programs (including those with private participation). (c) Segmentation of financial
markets, lack of long-term credit and high interest rates, which reduces the efficiency of the
allocation of capital and negatively affects private investment. (d) A poor business environment,
characterized by a complex regulatory framework, an uneven playing field, a very complex tax
regime, and an economy relatively closed to trade and competition. (e) Inadequacies in the policy
framework for the use and protection of Brazil’s natural resources to maximize the impact of
this asset base on the sustainable improvement in the livelihoods of the poor. These priorities
are the principal constraints for sustainable and inclusive development. Dealing with these
constraints would liberate resources to be allocated to priorities that would support continued
inclusive development, such as early childhood development, improved quality of education at
all levels, public investments in connectivity, and improved market access for the B40, as well
as the expansion of well-targeted social transfers to the most vulnerable, whose livelihoods are
threatened by the current economic recession.




 xxviii
RETAKING THE PATH TO INCLUSION, GROWTH AND SUSTAINABILTY




  Priority Constraints             Potential Opportunities
  Lack of fiscal space and large   Zero based review of all expenditure for efficiency,
  transfer of resources to the     effectiveness and incidence on the poor and non-
  non-poor:                        poor. Possible areas for savings: pension reform;
  Resolution of the constraint     reducing earmarking in the budget; and rationalizing
  would allow more investment,     expenditures. Improvements in the framework for fiscal
  provide resources for the B40,   management (including fiscal rules and institutions, the
  reduce levels of taxation and    budget preparation and execution, public investment
  promote macro stability and      management), will also contribute to create fiscal space
  thereby enable job creation,     and maintain macro-fiscal sustainability. Simplifying
  shared prosperity and poverty    the tax system, rationalizing tax expenditures, reducing
  reduction.                       the use of tax amnesties and improving capital-wealth
                                   taxation.

                                   To protect the vulnerable through enhancing the
                                   responsiveness of non-contributory safety net programs
                                   (for example, PBF) to benefit newly eligible groups, targeting
                                   specific groups, such as indigenous populations in remote/
                                   isolated areas (Amazon), Afrodescendants and other
                                   minorities, and women, reducing crime and violence through
                                   cross sectoral programs, increasing support for programs
                                   against gender based violence and providing economic
                                   opportunities for women.
  Public sector governance         Development of institutions and processes focusing on
  weaknesses and institutional     quality of public service delivery, as well as encouraging
  fragmentation hamper             private sector service delivery (for example, through PPPs,
  effective long-term policy       direct local and foreign investment), accompanied by a more
  design, planning and             systematic implementation of results-based management
  implementation:                  and evidence-based policy formulation. Through increasing
  Dealing with the constraint      the efficiency, and reducing unequal access to education and
  in the medium term would         health, attracting private resources within a strong quality
  increase the quality of          assurance framework).
  services and ensure their
  focus on the B40 in the          Increasing the quality of spending in infrastructure, housing
  context of a sustainable         and in science, technology and innovation (including skills
  and flexible overall policy      upgrading) programs to boost firms’ productivity and thereby
  framework.                       generate more and better jobs, through strengthening of
                                   public accountability while removing obstacles related to
                                   overlapping mandates and poor policy coordination.




                                                                                            xxix
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY




 Priority Constraints               Potential Opportunities
 Segmentation of financial          By reducing the direction of credit, and gradually moving
 markets, lack of long term         away from below market interest rates to ensure all lending
 credit, and high interest rates:   takes place at positive real interest rates; establishing long-
 Resolving the constraint           term financial markets; and reducing subsidies to profitable
 would increase the efficiency      enterprises with market access.
 of the allocation of capital
 and raise private investment.
 Insufficient competition and       Greater openness to trade and investment and greater
 poor business environment:         participation of businesses in global value chains. Investments
 Improving the business             in skills, tax reform (to simplify and increase the transparency
 environment and increasing         of the tax system), and regulatory simplification to improve
 competition is critical to         the business environment. Reducing existing rents and
 increasing productivity            subsidies to privileged businesses and creating a more level
 growth in a sustained way          playing field where business is rewarded for innovating and
 to allow for higher wages          upgrading productivity and low performing companies are
 and higher levels of private       either forced to adjust or exit the market.
 investment.
                                    To invest in infrastructure and logistics to reduce distance,
                                    urban travel times, cost and time of the use of main economic
                                    arteries (road, rail, air, transport and ports) and competition-
                                    friendly regulation of the communications sector. Integrated
                                    land use planning with housing, transport and service
                                    provision so that the poor do not have to sacrifice livability
                                    for access to jobs. Better access for small farmers to markets
                                    to provide income opportunities and hence resources for
                                    investment in improved land yields.




  xxx
