                                  Ov e rv i e w




Cambodia
S u s ta i n i n g s t ro n g g row t h
for the benefit of all
A Systematic Country Diagnostic
This booklet contains the overview from the Cambodia Systematic Country
Diagnostic - Sustaining strong growth for the benefit of all. A PDF of the final, full-
length report, including references, is available at:
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/620151496155751423/Cambodia-Sustaining-strong-growth-for-the-benefit-of-all


This volume is a product of the staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction
and Development / The World Bank. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions
expressed in this paper do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive
Directors of The World Bank or the governments they represent. The World Bank
does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries,
colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do
not imply any judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning the legal status
of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries. Nothing
herein shall constitute or be considered to be a limitation upon or waiver of the
privileges and immunities of The World Bank, all of which are specifically reserved.

Attribution
Please cite the work as follows: World Bank. 2017. Cambodia - Sustaining strong
growth for the benefit of all. Overview. Washington, D.C. : World Bank Group.

Rights and permissions
The material in this publication is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting
portions or all of this work without permission may be a violation of applicable
law. The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World
Bank encourages dissemination of its work and will normally grant permission to
reproduce portions of the work promptly.

For permission to photocopy or reprint any part of this work, please send a request
with complete information to the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc.
222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, USA

Telephone: 978-750-8400 Fax: 978-750-4470
http: //www.copyright.com/

All other queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be
addressed to the Office of the Publisher, The World Bank.

1818 H Street NW
Washington, DC 20433, USA
Fax: 202-522-2422
E-mail: pubrights@worldbank.org

Cover photo: small1’s/Shutterstock
Interior design: Florencia Micheltorena, Buenos Aires, Argentina.
Abbreviations
ASEAN	    Association of Southeast Asian Nations
CCT	      conditional cash transfer
CSES	     Cambodia Socio-Economic Survey
CSO	      civil society organization
EU	       European Union
FDI	      foreign direct investment
GDP 	     gross domestic product
GNI	      gross national income
HEF	      health equity fund
HIV/AIDS	 human immunodeficiency virus/acquired
	         immune deficiency syndrome
HR	       human resource
IWRM 	    integrated water resources management
LDC	      least developed country
LGBTI 	   lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, and/or intersex
L-MIC	    lower middle-income country
MDG	      Millennium Development Goal
MFI 	     microfinance institutions
NDC	      Nationally Determined Contribution
NGO	      non-governmental organization
ODA	      official development assistance
OOP	out-of-pocket
PIM	      public investment management
PPP	      public-private partnership
PPP	      purchasing power parity
RBS	      risk-based supervision
RGC	      Royal Government of Cambodia
SCD	      Systematic Country Diagnostic
STEM	     science, technology, engineering, and mathematics
TB	tuberculosis
TVET	     technical and vocational education and training
US	       United States
USD	      United States dollar
Contents
Acknowledgements	3

Overview	7


List of Figures
1.	 Labor productivity gains have been lower than in comparators (left),
	 partly due to the specialization on low capital intense industries (right)	      10
2.	 Cambodia still lags behind on some dimensions of
	 economic competitiveness	                                                        11
3.	 Prevalence of stunting is higher among the poor (left),
	 and Cambodia lags behind other countries in access to improved
	 water and sanitation facilities (right)	                                         13
4.	 Compared to other countries, Cambodia is highly exposed
	 and vulnerable to disasters	                                                     14
5.	 Cambodia has had one of the fastest capital deepening episodes
	 among its peers (left); MFI loan sizes have increased (right)	                   16


List of tables
1. Cambodia SCD pathways and identified priority areas for development	            18




                      IBRD                  IFC                     MIGA
 Regional Vice        Victoria Kwakwa       Dimitris Tsitsiragos;   Keiko Honda
 President                                  Nena Stoiljkovic        (EVP&CEO)

 Director             Ulrich Zachau         Vivek Pathak            Merli Baroudi

 Task Team Leader     Miguel E. Sanchez     Daniel Street           Paul Barbour
                      Obert Pimhidzai       Sarak Duong
Acknowledgements
This report is the product of work by a multi-sector World Bank Group team led
by Obert Pimhidzai, Miguel Eduardo Sánchez Martín, and Daniel Street (Task Team
Leaders). Inguna Dobraja (Country Manager) and Sarak Duong (Cambodia IFC
Head) provided close support and advice to the team, as well as leadership during
the consultations. The report benefits from the much-appreciated contribution of
Minna Hahn Tong (Consultant) and Maria Dumpert (Consultant) in drafting and
editing.

The team is grateful for the outstanding guidance and strong backing provided by
Ulrich Zachau (Country Director), Vivek Pathak (Director, IFC), Xiaoqing Yu (Director,
Strategy and Operation), Kyle F. Kelhofer (Senior Manager, IFC), Mathew Verghis
(Practice Manager, MFM), Salman Zaidi (Practice Manager, Poverty), Sudhir Shetty
(Chief Economist), Shabih Ali Mohib (Program Leader), Lou Scura (Program Leader),
and Lars Sondergaard (Program Leader).

The report draws on the main building blocks of growth and competitiveness
(Kazi Matin, Guillermo Arenas, Theepakorn Jithitikulchai, Dilaka Lathapipat,
Miguel Sánchez), poverty and inclusion (Obert Pimhidzai and Kimsun Tong, with
contributions from numerous colleagues), gender and social sustainability (Erik
Caldwell, Theepakorn Jithitikulchai), and natural resources (Maria Dumpert and
Tijen Arin, with contributions from a large number of colleagues). Following the
Concept Note, additional background notes on firm performance and FDI (Asya
Akhlaque), governance (Sokbunthoeun So), ICT (Seda Pahlavooni), innovation
(Smita Kuriakose, Antoine Coste), skills (Une Lee, Sanda Liepina), statistical capacity
(Junhe Yang, Mustafa Dinc), tourism (Wouter Schalken), transport (Genie Jensen),
and urbanization (Judy Baker, Natsuko Kikutake) were prepared. In addition,
Theepakorn Jithitikulchai and Dilaka Lathapipat co-authored a background
paper on long-term growth projections that is expected to serve as input to the
preparation of Cambodia Vision 2050.




                                                                                          3
    Peer reviewers for the report were Gabriel Demombynes (Program Leader) and
    Stephane Guimbert (Manager).

    The team also received valuable feedback on preliminary findings and messages at
    nine meetings (held in Phnom Penh, Sihanoukville, Siem Reap, and Kratie). Many
    thanks to the 375 stakeholders who participated in those meetings and provided
    their thoughts and suggestions on the storyline and proposed priorities.

    Consultations and postcard interventions were organized thanks to the ideas and
    active involvement of our communications team, consisting of Leonora Aquino
    Gonzales, Saroeun Bou, Sophinith Sam Oeun, Ben Alex Manser, and Kanitha
    Kongrukgreatiyos, as well as Elise Vanormelingen (Consultant).

    Excellent organizational administrative assistance was provided by Amara Khiev.
    The team is also grateful to Chanchamrong Ly (IT) and the entire Administrative and
    Client Support team—Narya Ou, Vanna Pol, Da Lin, Rom Daneth, Kunthea Kea, Lyden
    Kong, China Chhun, Phalla Yin, Ravan Chieap, Linna Ky—for their extraordinary
    support during engagement meetings with stakeholders.

    Finally, the team benefited from the guidance and insights of a technical RGC
    counterpart working group at the Ministry of Economy and Finance, headed by H.E.
    Vongsey Vissoth, H.E. Hem Vanndy, and Vanarith Chheang.




4
Cambodia SCD team members
Global Practice/Topic          Focal Points

Agriculture                    Steve Jaffee, Mudita Chamroeun

Climate Change, Environment,   Miguel Angel Jorge, Timothy Bouley, Michael McCormick,
and Natural Resources          Tijen Arin, Maria Dumpert, Robert Reid

Education                      Simeth Ben, Tsuyoshi Fukao

Energy and Extractives         Xiaoping Wang, Sunil Khosla

Finance and Markets            Ratchada Anantavrasilpa, Colleen Mascenik

Gender and LGBTI               Erik Caldwell Johnson, Pamornrat Tansanguanwong,
                               Theepakorn Jithitikulchai, Elizaveta Perova, Hillary Johnson

Governance                     Leah April, Sokbunthoeun So

Health, Nutrition, and         Somil Nagpal, Anne Marie Provo, Tomo Morimoto
Population

IFC                            Daniel Street, Sarak Duong

Innovation                     Smita Kuriakose, Antoine Coste

Jobs and Skills                Dilaka Lathapipat, Theepakorn Jithitikulchai, Une J. Lee, Sanda
                               Liepina

Macroeconomics and Fiscal      Miguel Eduardo Sanchez Martin, Kazi Matin, Sodeth Ly
Management

Poverty                        Obert Pimhidzai, Kimsun Tong, Carolina Mantilla

Social Protection and Labor    Pablo Acosta, Claudia Zambra

Social, Urban, Rural, and      Mika Torhonen, Judy Baker, Natsuko Kikutake, Henrike Brecht
Resilience

Statistical Capacity           Junhe Yang, Mustafa Dinc

Trade and Competitiveness      Lan Van Nguyen, Guillermo Arenas, Wouter Schalken, George
                               Clark, Asya Akhlaque, Yifan Wei, Wim Douw

Transport and ICT              Seda Pahlavooni, Genie Jensen, Veasna Bun, Naomi Halewood

Water and Sanitation           Joop Stoutjesdjik, Virak Chan, Phyrum Kov, Greg Browder




                                                                                                 5
6
Overview
Over the past two decades, Cambodia has achieved stellar
economic growth and poverty reduction
Thanks to rapid and sustained growth, Cambodia has become one of the world’s           Key Findings
leaders in poverty reduction and shared prosperity. Official estimates show that
the percentage of Cambodians living under the national poverty line fell from 47.8     “Around 3.6
percent in 2007 to 13.5 percent in 2014. Poverty reduction was particularly dramatic   million net jobs
during the 2007-2009 period, when poverty declined by 25 percentage points             in industries and
and 3.3 million people escaped poverty, thanks in large part to an expansion of        services have
cultivated area and high international food prices which benefited both farmers and    been created in
agriculture workers. Other indicators of living standards such as asset ownership,
                                                                                       Cambodia over
housing amenities, and human development outcomes have also improved, with
                                                                                       the past twenty
Cambodia successfully achieving most of the Millenium Development Goals by
                                                                                       years.”
2015 (Box 1).

Cambodia sustained an average growth rate of 7.6 percent in 1994-2015, ranking
sixth in the world, and has now become a lower middle-income economy. Growth
has been driven by exports of goods and services (mainly garments and tourism),
which grew by a blistering 19.6 percent a year, with Cambodia ranking second in
the world after Equatorial Guinea and ahead of stellar performers such as Vietnam
and Bangladesh. Agriculture and, more recently, construction and real estate have
also been main engines of strong economic growth. As a result, gross national
income (GNI) per capita more than tripled from USD 300 in 1994 to an estimated
USD 1,070 in 2015, the year in which Cambodia became a lower middle-income
economy. Cambodia’s impressive achievements have been built upon openness to
trade and capital flows and driven by preferential trade treatment and large inflows
of official development assistance (ODA) and foreign direct investment (FDI).

To a large extent, Cambodia’s success has ridden on employment creation. With
its growing working-age population, Cambodia is still in the early phases of its
“demographic dividend” and has so far been extremely successful in creating jobs



                                                                                                     7
    Box 1: MDG attainment and LDC graduation criteria
    Overall, Cambodia has made significant progress in achieving the Millennium Development
    Goals (MDGs). For example, the country has more than halved extreme poverty (from 33 percent
    in 2004 to 10 percent in 2011), more than halved maternal mortality (from 1,020 per 100,000 live
    births in 1990 to 161 in 2015), reduced child mortality (from 117 per 1,000 in 1990 to 28 in 2015),
    increased the primary education enrollment rate (from 92.1 percent in 2000 to near-universal
    enrollment of 94.7 percent in 2014), and made significant progress in combating HIV/AIDS (with
    the incidence rate declining from 0.08 per 100 people in 2001 to 0.01 in 2013).

    However, achievements are mixed for a few MDGs, including tuberculosis (TB), environmental
    sustainability, demining, and gender equality. TB incidence and death rates remain high. Although
    the pace of deforestation has slowed down slightly thanks to recent policy changes, it has
    remained high over the past two decades. Similarly, although the percentage of contaminated
    land cleared of unexploded ordinances has increased to 45 percent, it still falls far short of the
    target of 100 percent.




8
for youth and women in labor-intensive activities. The country has benefited from
a large structural transformation—meaning the reallocation of economic activity
across the three broad sectors of agriculture, manufacturing, and services—with
around 3.6 million net jobs created in industry and services and 0.7 million in
agriculture and fisheries over the past two decades.

Growth has also been driven by the country’s rich and diverse natural capital,
which supports the livelihoods of millions of Cambodians. Agriculture, which
depends heavily on  natural resources  and ecosystem services, contributed to 30
percent of gross domestic product (GDP) in 2015. More than five million people
rely on agriculture and fisheries to supplement their income and support their
food security, and 88 percent of the population still relies on traditional biomass for
cooking. Tourism, another engine of economic growth, is also dependent on natural
resources and environmental sustainability.


As a lower middle-income economy, Cambodia is facing
new challenges to sustaining strong economic growth
Going forward, Cambodia may not be able to rely on the same factors that drove
strong growth and poverty reduction over the past two decades. Cambodia’s
eventual graduation from being a least-developed country (LDC) will bring
a progressive decline in donor financing and an erosion of preferential trade
treatment. At the same time, salaries are rising, and it will be increasingly difficult for
Cambodia to keep exporting unprocessed rice and low-end garments. In the case of
agriculture, the outlook for commodity prices is not positive, and Cambodia’s scope
for further gains in cultivated area is more limited nowadays, especially considering
the need for environmental sustainability.

Notably, the productivity of labor has increased more slowly than in other rapidly
growing economies, partly due to the relatively low use of capital in production.
During 1993-2014, Cambodia registered 3.5 percent growth in labor productivity
compared to the 4.7 percent achieved by Vietnam during the same period and
the 7.1 percent average growth rate in Thailand during the boom years of 1986-
1996 (Figure 1, left). Productivity in the garment industry remains lower than in
most comparator countries, and evidence indicates relatively little investment in



                                                                                              9
     Figure 1. Labor productivity gains have been lower than in comparators (left),
     partly due to the specialization on low capital intense industries (right)
             Labor productivity decomposition                     Firm-level productivity and capital intensity, 2016
     8%
                                                                     Myanmar

     6%                                                            Cambodia
                                                                   Bangladesh
     4%
                                                                    Philippines
                                                                      Thailand
     2%
                                                                   Guatemala
     0%                                                               Vietnam
                                                                    Nicaragua
     -2%
            Cambodia          Vietnam         Thailand                            0     3000        6000       9000       12000
            1993-2014        1993-2014       1986-1996
                                                                         Capital intensity     Median productivity (garments)
             Capital intensity     Labor quality       TFP               Median productivity (manufacturing)

     Source: World Bank staff calculations using National Accounts and WDI; World Bank staff estimates from Enterprise Survey 2016.


                       equipment and machinery upgrading (Figure 1, right). Gross capital formation
                       as a percentage of GDP averaged less than 20 percent of GDP over the past two
                       decades, lower than comparator countries and much lower than Vietnam and
                       Thailand during boom years.

                       In the face of declining competitiveness, Cambodia’s low-value production and
                       heavy concentration in garments and tourism will become increasingly challenged.
                       Most of Cambodia’s garment export items are targeted to the low-quality/low-
                       price segment of the U.S. and EU markets. Only in recent years have some garment
                       factories started to move toward higher value addition (embroidery, washing,
                       printing), likely spurred by declining external competitiveness in the context
                       of U.S. dollar appreciation and the rapidly rising minimum wage (from USD 80
                       a month in 2013 to USD 153 a month in 2017, now on par with Vietnam). While
                       some nascent higher-value export products (including bicycles, television parts,
                       and ignition wires) have been observed in recent years, most of the activities in
                       Cambodia are still mainly labor-intensive assembly, with little to no production



10
of pieces and parts. Tourism is also coping with U.S. dollar appreciation and rising          Key Findings
wages, and challenges in infrastructure and environmental sustainability constrain
diversification of activities within the sector.                                              “With 87 days
                                                                                              needed on
A number of institutional, human capital, and, to a lesser extent, infrastructure
                                                                                              average to
constraints hamper competitiveness as well as the creation of a vibrant private
                                                                                              start a business,
sector in Cambodia. While some progress has been made, Cambodia lags behind
                                                                                              Cambodia ranks
other lower middle-income economies in these areas (Figure 2). Burdensome
                                                                                              180th out of 189
formalization processes make Cambodia one of the most difficult places in the
world to register a business—Cambodia ranks 180th out of 189 countries on
                                                                                              countries in the
this dimension, with 87 days needed to start a business (compared to 25.9 in                  world.”
East Asia and the Pacific). Low educational attainment also constrains economic
diversification and upgrading: although net enrollment in primary education
increased significantly, lower secondary education completion rates (43 percent in
2013) remain significantly below the average for lower middle-income economies
(71 percent). Entrepreneurs report that school certificates and degrees, even at the
tertiary level, are not a signal of worker competence, pointing to quality challenges.
Moreover, technical and vocational education and training (TVET) faces negative


Figure 2. Cambodia still lags behind on some dimensions
of economic competitiveness

                                  Institutions
                                        7
                   Innovation           6        Infrastructure
                                        5
           Business                     4             Macroeconomic
         sophistication                 3              Environment
                                        2
                                        1                   Health
             Market                     0                 and primary
              size                                         education

         Technological                                  Higher education
           readiness                                      and training     Cambodia 2015
                                                                           Cambodia 2006-07
             Financial market                    Goods market
               development       Labor market      efficiency              Lower-MIC 2015
                                   efficiency                              ASEAN-5 2015


Source: Global Competitiveness Indicators, World Economic Forum.




                                                                                                          11
   Key Findings       perceptions and does not seem to provide the skills that are in demand by the private
                      sector. In terms of infrastructure, significant improvements in power supply have
     “ Thirty-nine    been achieved in recent years, but the price of electricity remains high compared to
percent of grade      neighboring countries: the average tariff for large industrial consumers remains at
                      least 35 percent higher than in Thailand, Myanmar, or Vietnam.
      6 pupils had
    a below basic
proficiency rating    To ensure that growth will continue to be inclusive, a series
    for reading in    of constraints that particularly affect poorer households
     Khmer, and a     should be overcome
       third of the
   children under     Limited human capital hinders socioeconomic mobility. Most Cambodians not
five are stunted.”    in extreme poverty are by international standards either moderately poor or
                      vulnerable to falling into poverty, with two-thirds of the population living under
                      USD 5.50 a day PPP. The slow growth of an economically secure consumer class can
                      be explained in part by low household endowments in terms of education, health,
                      and land. A national assessment of student achievement found that 39 percent of
                      grade 6 pupils had a below basic proficiency rating for reading in Khmer. Such poor
                      learning outcomes—which can be attributed to fewer and inadequately trained
                      teachers and fewer hours compared to peers—affect the ability of individuals to
                      climb the socioeconomic ladder.

                      Human capital limitations begin early in life due to poor nutrition, lack of nurturing
                      care, and absence of early stimulation. Having grown up in a period of very high
                      poverty and maternal and child undernutrition, the majority of Cambodia’s
                      current cohort of young workers likely experiences some of the lifelong, negative
                      consequences of childhood malnutrition and other early life deprivations. About 33
                      percent of children under age five are stunted (Figure 3, left), and only 35.9 percent
                      of 3-5 year olds were enrolled in early childhood education during the 2014-2015
                      academic year. Access to improved water and sanitation facilities (at 75 and 42 percent
                      of total population, respectively) remains significantly below the average for lower
                      middle-income economies (90 and 52 percent, respectively, Figure 3, right) and is
                      a major contributor to stunting, along with sub-optimal infant feeding practices
                      and low dietary diversity. In addition, despite significant improvement, Cambodia
                      still has one of the highest maternal mortality rates in the region (161 per 100,000
                      live births in 2015), which points to problems in health care quality and access.



  12
Figure 3. Prevalence of stunting is higher among the poor (left), and Cambodia lags
behind other countries in access to improved water and sanitation facilities (right)
      Prevalence of stunting, height for age                             Percentage of people with access
            (% of children under 5)                                      to improved water and sanitation

     Vietnam                                                    Bangladesh
      (2010)
                                                                Guatemala
 Philippines
     (2013)                                                      Nicaragua
Guatemala
   (2014)                                                        Philippines

Cambodia                                                              Vietnam
  (2014)
                                                                      L-MICs
Bangladesh
   (2014)                                                       Cambodia
           0% 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80%                               0%     20%         40%     60%     80%    100%

           Top Quintile       Bottom Quintile                            Improved sanitation         Improved water

Source: UNICEF (left); WHO/UNICEF Joint Monitoring Program (right).




Socioeconomic mobility is also hampered by high exposure to financial and                                      Key Findings
weather shocks, with very limited social protection to help households manage
shocks. Approximately 6.3 percent of the population had catastrophic spending in                               “Cambodia
2013, and 3.1 percent had to incur debt to pay for health expenditures. Cambodia                               ranks among
ranks among the world’s top ten countries in terms of out-of-pocket (OOP) health                               the world’s top
spending, with OOP payments for health services at 60 percent of all health                                    ten countries in
expenditure. Disasters are another source of catastrophic spending, with Cambodia                              terms of out-of-
ranked as the 8th most disaster-prone country in the world in 2015 by the United                               pocket (OOP)
Nation’s World Risk Index (Figure 4). A 2013 post-flood needs assessment found that
                                                                                                               health spending,
the average monthly incomes of those affected dropped more than 25 percent,
                                                                                                               60 percent
amounting to USD 37.6 million. Meanwhile, social protection systems are still in
                                                                                                               of all health
the initial stages, with Cambodia spending less than 0.1 percent of GDP on social
assistance compared to the world average of 1.6 percent.1
                                                                                                               expenditure.”



1     ASPIRE database. Accessible at datatopics.worldbank.org/aspire/.



                                                                                                                             13
     Figure 4. Compared to other countries,
     Cambodia is highly exposed and vulnerable to disasters
                                            World Risk Index, Top 20
                     Vanuatu
                        Tonga
                   Philippines
                  Guatemala
             Solomon Islands
                  Bangladesh
                  Costa Rica
                  Cambodia
          Papua New Guinea
                  El Salvador
                 Timor-Leste
           Brunei Darussalam
                    Mauritius
                   Nicaragua
               Guinea-Bissau
                            Fiji
                         Japan
                     Vietnam
                      Gambia
                      Jamaica
                                   0    5        10    15     20       25   30   35   40

     Source: United Nations University (2015).


     Persistent gender gaps in earnings and job quality also pose a challenge to
     achieving shared prosperity. Female labor force participation in Cambodia, at 79
     percent in 2014, is among the highest in the world, and female-owned enterprises
     comprise more than half of all business establishments in Cambodia. However,
     female-owned businesses are generally smaller, less profitable, and less likely to be
     registered than male-owned businesses. While women represent 85 percent of the
     garment sector labor force, most are engaged in assembly, while the higher-paying
     quality and supervision work is done by men. Moreover, according to the Cambodia
     Socio-Economic Survey (CSES) 2014, the gender earnings gap in 2014 was as high as
     30 percent among those with low education, notably dropping to 7 percent among
     college graduates, which underscores the importance of closing the educational
     attainment gap. In terms of political representation, women account for only 7
     percent of ministerial posts, placing Cambodia in the bottom 20 percent globally
     (Inter-Parliamentary Union, 2016).



14
Consultations with civil society organizations (CSOs) highlighted that some                     Key Findings
population groups still experience marginalization and exclusion, heightening
their vulnerability and preventing them from sharing the benefits of growth. For                “The gender
example, approximately 10 percent of the Cambodian population suffers from at                   earnings gap in
least one form of disability. About 45 percent of adults with disabilities do not earn
                                                                                                2014 was as high
an income, and household wealth for people with disabilities is about half that of
                                                                                                as 30 percent
non-disabled people. People who are lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, and/or
                                                                                                among those with
intersex (LGBTI) continue to face stigmatization by their families, communities, and
                                                                                                low education,
the media, along with discrimination in workplaces and schools. Although ethnic
minorities do not have significantly higher poverty rates than the average, they
                                                                                                notably dropping
are highly vulnerable to the loss of land. In 2007, it was estimated that indigenous            to 7 percent
communities had lost 30 percent of their traditional land since 1989, and conflict              among college
over land remains a highly contentious issue in the country.                                    graduates.”

While not preventing strong growth and poverty reduction thus far, governance
challenges affect firm competitiveness, the quality of public service delivery, and
access to assets and opportunities. The incidence of bribery (affecting 63 percent
of reporting firms in 2016) has somewhat declined, but remains by far the highest
among peer countries. In the 2015 Corruption Perceptions Index, Cambodia ranked
150th, with only Afghanistan and North Korea performing worse in the Asia-Pacific
region. Government spending on health and education remains below average for
a lower middle-income economy, and overreliance on donors for public service
delivery persists. While substantial progress has been achieved in public financial
management (e.g., Single Treasury Account, the implementation of program
budgeting, and a financial management information system), some fundamental
weaknesses remain (RGC, 2015a). Patronage, misallocation of human resources, and
limited capacity are still prevalent in the civil service. Finally, in a context of poor rule
of law, land disputes and displacement have disproportionately affected the poor
and vulnerable, although notable progress has been made over the past 15 years.


Risks stemming from rapid credit growth and natural
resource degradation could affect economic sustainability
A number of rising risks could potentially affect Cambodia’s development path,
including increasing exposure to microfinance debt and financial overheating.



                                                                                                           15
                               While Cambodia presents low risk of debt distress (IMF, 2016), a programmed
                               fourfold increase in the public sector wage (between 2013 and 2018) is increasing
                               fiscal pressures, since the public payroll already represents around 40 percent of
                               revenue. In terms of macro-financial risks, Cambodia’s credit to the private sector is
                               booming and jumped from 2 percent of GDP in 1993 to 63 percent in 2015, already
                               above the average for lower middle-income economies (Figure 5, left). Credit at
                               microfinance institutions (MFI) is also booming, growing at annual rates of more
                               than 40 percent in recent years. In a decade, average loan sizes have increased
                               from around USD 200 to USD 1,000, doubling the pace of expansion of income per
                               capita in 2004-2014 (Figure 5, right). Notably, in 2016 and 2017, the National Bank of
                               Cambodia enacted a series of macroprudential measures that are expected to help
                               mitigate the risks related to fast credit growth.

                               Climate change, coupled with natural resource degradation and unplanned
                               urbanization, is also anticipated to affect future growth. Average damages from
                               disasters have been estimated at USD 235 million per year (Germanwatch, 2016).


     Figure 5. Cambodia has had one of the fastest capital deepening episodes among
     its peers (left); MFI loan sizes have increased (right)
            Credit to private sector (% of GDP)                                                 % of indebted households & loan size (USD)
     120%                                                                                     1200                                                                   50%

     100%                                                                                     1000                                                                   40%

      80%                                                                                      800
                                                                                                                                                                     30%
      60%                                                                                      600
                                                                                                                                                                     20%
      40%                                                                                      400

                                                                                                                                                                     10%
      20%                                                                                      200

       0%                                                                                        0                                                                   0%
          1993
                 1995
                        1997
                               1999
                                      2001
                                             2003
                                                    2005
                                                           2007
                                                                  2009
                                                                         2011
                                                                                2013
                                                                                       2015




                                                                                                     2004

                                                                                                            2007

                                                                                                                   2008

                                                                                                                           2009

                                                                                                                                  2010

                                                                                                                                         2011

                                                                                                                                                2012

                                                                                                                                                       2013

                                                                                                                                                              2014




         Cambodia                 Lower middle-income                              Vietnam                                % indebted households
         Nicaragua              Guatemala     Philippines                          Bangladesh                             loan per household
     Source: IMF Financial Access Survey and World Bank staff calculations from CSES 2004-14; Source: World Development
     Indicators, National Bank of Cambodia.



16
In the future, climate change will heighten Cambodia’s vulnerability to natural                 Key Findings
disasters—based on the scenario of a 2°C temperature rise by 2050, initial estimates
suggest that climate change will reduce the country’s total GDP by at least 1.5                 “Cambodia has
percent in 2030 and 3.5 percent in 2050 (RGC, 2015b). Cambodia’s natural capital is             experienced one
also being degraded rapidly by unsustainable economic activities. Official estimates            of the fastest
indicate that forest cover declined from nearly 60 percent in 2006 to less than 47              episodes of credit
percent in 2014, and approximately 45 percent of the country’s original, natural                deepening around
wetland area has been lost. Such losses have wide-ranging impacts, including on                 the globe.”
the productivity of the agricultural and fisheries sectors, hydropower generation,
and tourism assets. In addition, urbanization could bring negative consequences
for economic growth. Although urbanization in Cambodia is still in its early stages,
the average population density in urban areas is already higher than in Vietnam or
China, and a large percentage of the population lives in urban poor settlements.


In light of these challenges, a set of ten priority areas for
development has been identified
Based on in-depth analysis and extensive consultations, this Systematic Country
Diagnostic (SCD) identified ten key areas of development for ensuring strong,
inclusive, and sustainable growth going forward. Identification of the priority
interventions involved a two-step process. First, in-depth analytical work and a
literature review, together with an extensive consultation process,2 informed the
selection of ten development areas for action. Second, following consultations, a
two-tier methodology was applied to assess the constraints to growth and asset
accumulation and to identify the most pressing priorities within those ten areas
for development (Table 1). Interventions in the identified areas for development
contribute to three different “pathways” or avenues for achieving the twin goals
of poverty reduction and shared prosperity in Cambodia. These pathways would
also benefit from cross-cutting public administration and public finance reforms to
strengthen the capacity of the public sector.


2  Extensive engagement with key stakeholders (government, civil society, private sector,
development partners, academia, and the National Assembly) comprised nine meetings held in
four different regions of the country. Participants provided feedback on the key development
opportunities for achieving poverty reduction and inclusive growth in a sustainable manner in
Cambodia.



                                                                                                             17
                          The areas for development were ranked based on (i) their impact in creating and
                          enhancing households’ participation in better economic opportunities, (ii) the share
                          of the population affected, and (iii) their complementarity with other interventions.
                          The areas for development identified as “highest priority” have the largest impact
                          on the twin goals in terms of boosting firms’ ability to create more productive jobs,
                          sustaining growth, and raising household income. “High priority” areas have a
                          moderate immediate direct impact on the twin goals but form the building blocks
                          for sustained growth and increased income-generating capacity of households.
                          “Moderate priority” areas include those actions that may not yet address the most
                          significant constraints but have consequential implications in the long term or
                          those that have high but localized impacts. Some selected policy options in each of
                          the ten areas are shown in Table 1. A brief description of each area for development
                          is also provided below.


     Table 1. Cambodia SCD pathways and identified priority areas for development
     Pathway               Area for development              Priority   Selected policy options in this area
     i. Increasing         1. Reducing the costs of          Highest    Create a task force to   Establish a National
     economic              firm establishment and                       improve the business     Single Window for
     competitiveness       operation (including business                environment and          trade facilitation
     and                   environment, informal fees,                  curb informal fees
     diversification to    trade facilitation, electricity
     sustain strong        costs)
     growth and
     create jobs           2. Boosting public and            High       Pass a PIM Sub-          Develop an
                           private investment in                        decree and develop       internal bond
                           infrastructure and machinery                 manuals and              market (including
                           acquisition while developing                 procedures               sovereign and
                           capital markets                                                       private)
                           3. Strengthening regulation       Moderate   Introduce a Risk-        Enhance crisis
                           and supervision of the                       Based Supervision        preparedness, and
                           financial sector to mitigate                 approach                 establish a financial
                           risks from strong credit                                              safety net
                           growth, while building
                           further financial inclusion
                           4. Fostering agricultural         High       Facilitate knowledge     Strengthen systems
                           modernization in the                         and technology           and stakeholder
                           aftermath of the commodity                   adoption throughout      capacities to
                           price boom                                   the value chain (via     manage product
                                                                        PPPs, incubators,        quality, food safety
                                                                        pluralistic extension)   and risks


18
Table 1. continue
Pathway                Area for development                  Priority   Selected policy options in this area

ii. Building           5. Endowing people with               Highest    Implement the           Improve
human assets           skills by boosting attainment                    Lower Secondary         accreditation and
to facilitate          and learning outcomes                            School Effectiveness    quality assurance
economic               of secondary and higher                          Standards               mechanisms in
mobility and           education                                                                higher education
shared prosperity                                                                               and TVET

                       6. Investing in the early             High       Implement the Fast      Expand access
                       years (nutrition, pre-primary                    Track Road Map for      to opportunities
                       education)                                       Improving Nutrition     for early learning
                                                                                                and stimulation
                                                                                                through
                                                                                                community centers

                       7. Protecting households              Moderate   Expand Health           Strengthen
                       from shocks (OOP in health,                      Equity Funds to other   the ID Poor
                       DRM, social protection)                          vulnerable groups       targeting system
                                                                                                and establish
                                                                                                conditional cash
                                                                                                transfers

iii. Ensuring          8. Maintaining and                    High       Adopt an integrated     Improve
a sustainable          developing natural capital,                      approach to             sustainable
growth pattern         while strengthening climate                      natural resource        management and
by investing in        resilience                                       management in           conservation in
natural capital,                                                        the Cardamom            protected areas
climate resilience                                                      Mountains and Tonle     and forests
and urban                                                               Sap landscape
development
                       9. Promoting competitive,             Moderate   Implement an            Develop a
                       sustainable, and inclusive                       integrated urban        centralized
                       cities through integrated                        planning agenda         sanitation network,
                       urban planning                                                           and solid and liquid
                                                                                                waste management
                                                                                                solutions

iv. Cross-cutting       10. Public administration and        High       Upgrade                 Enhance citizen
                       public financial management                      human resource          feedback
                       reforms for improved service                     management              mechanisms to
                       delivery                                         systems and             improve public
                                                                        introduce               service delivery
                                                                        performance
                                                                        monitoring
Source: World Bank staff analysis in consultation with stakeholders.



                                                                                                                    19
20
Pathway 1: Increasing economic competitiveness and diversification
to sustain strong growth and create jobs

Rapid growth in exports has been an important driver of growth and employment
but may not be sustainable unless the economy becomes more competitive and
more diversified. As mentioned earlier, Cambodia is expected to see a progressive
decline in preferential trade treatment and an increase in labor costs, coupled with
more intense competition in garments from neighboring countries such as Vietnam
and Myanmar. Moreover, under the managed float/peg, the recent U.S. dollar
appreciation makes Cambodian goods relatively more expensive in the European
markets and vis-à-vis other competitors. In order to sustain strong growth and
create jobs, Cambodia needs to enhance export competitiveness and economic
diversification. This could be achieved through a series of measures that help
facilitate firm operations, encourage domestic savings as well as investment in the
tradable sector, strengthen regulation and supervision of the financial sector, and
modernize the agriculture sector.

In particular, to regain competitiveness in the short to medium run, one of the
most pressing needs is to reduce the costs of firm establishment and operation.
Reducing the costs of firm establishment could involve measures such as creating a
single window to streamline the procedures and costs for opening a business, and
reducing or eliminating the minimum capital requirement to be deposited in a bank
before a company is registered. Firm operations would be facilitated by abolishing
unnecessary procedures and informal fees and gifts, for which a Special Task Force
could be created. Reducing the costs and time involved in trading across borders will
also be important, for example by completing the automation of border procedures,
removing unnecessary documentation requirements, and establishing a National
Logistics Council to help ensure that Cambodia’s hard and soft logistics infrastructure
supports trade expansion. Finally, a stronger institutional and regulatory framework
is needed to improve energy efficiency and lower electricity costs. Measures could
include setting up a declining medium-term tariff policy, developing a medium-
term system expansion plan informed by public consultation, ensuring that large
projects are competitively procured, and developing a comprehensive policy for
expanding regional cooperation with Vietnam, Lao PDR, and Thailand. It will also be
important to fully assess the environmental and social impacts and externalities of
the various energy options.


                                                                                          21
     To facilitate value addition and economic diversification, these interventions could
     be complemented by efforts to boost infrastructure and mechanization while
     developing capital markets. To move away from reliance on donors for infrastructure
     investments and help boost infrastructure in an effective and sustainable way, it
     will be important to build up public investment and asset management. Public
     investment management (PIM) for government-funded investments could be
     strengthened by passage of a PIM Sub-decree, the development of project
     selection and implementation manuals, and capacity building at core and line
     ministries. For externally funded projects, enhancing donor coordination, avoiding
     a piecemeal approach to project selection, and ensuring adequate operation and
     maintenance budgets would help ensure project effectiveness and sustainability.
     Cambodia could also streamline its existing tax incentives in a new Investment Law
     (as envisaged in the government’s Industrial Development Policy) to help move
     away from tax holidays toward a more targeted incentive system that fosters private
     investment in machinery, research and development, and training. This would
     help increase productivity and foster diversification by encouraging investment in
     higher value-added sectors. In addition, promoting the use of the national currency
     and developing an internal bond market would help foster domestic savings and
     provide a higher degree of exchange rate flexibility in the medium run, which would
     help the economy regain competitiveness in the context of U.S. dollar appreciation
     under dollarization.

     It will also be critical to mitigate the risks from strong credit growth while increasing
     financial inclusion. While fast credit expansion has been one of the main factors
     fueling economic growth, it is important to address the mounting risks, especially
     those stemming from a potential construction bubble and over-indebtedness
     which can hurt macroeconomic stability, poorer households, and the environment.
     Banking and micro-finance supervision need to be strengthened, for example
     through a risk-based supervision (RBS) approach that complies with the latest
     international Basel standards. A series of macro-prudential, data quality, and
     oversight measures would also help strengthen financial sector stability, including
     introducing limits on multiple loans and introducing loan-size-to-income limits
     for household lending. Authorities could also consider developing secondary
     regulations for the microfinance sector and adopting lending guidelines to prevent
     predatory lending to households who have little capacity to repay. At the same




22
time, it will also be important to support crisis preparedness, establish a financial
safety net, and strengthen financial inclusion, for example by facilitating access to
banking services and mobile banking through digital finance.

At the same time, given the continued importance of the agricultural sector to growth
and poverty reduction, Cambodia will need to foster agricultural modernization.
Now that the commodity price boom is over, different sources and drivers of
agricultural growth must be nurtured. In particular, irrigation could play a larger
role in fostering agricultural productivity and diversification, with greater emphasis
on ensuring the functioning of existing irrigation schemes. Several measures could
help in this regard: applying clear procedures and adequate financing for irrigation
system operation and maintenance, increasing technical and financial support
for farmer water user groups, and facilitating the adoption of alternative small-
scale irrigation technologies. To spur broader productivity gains in agriculture,
interventions that help facilitate knowledge and technology adoption are needed.
Non-traditional (and non-state) forms of farm advisory and other technical services
could be encouraged, including those applying technology. Channels to facilitate
collaboration among public sector, private sector, and academic institutions on
applied agricultural research and innovation will also be important for increasing
productivity. Another priority is to strengthen the availability of core public goods
while differentiating Cambodia’s agriculture (and agro-industry) based on quality,
for example by enhancing systems for managing quality and food safety. At the
same time, Cambodia’s agriculture and overall food system should play a stronger
role in improving local nutritional outcomes, with the government helping to
ensure that a diverse range of high-nutrient foods is readily available and affordable
and that consumers are aware of the importance of these in their diets.




                                                                                         23
24
Pathway 2: Building human assets to facilitate economic mobility and
shared prosperity

Stronger human capital is crucial not only for enabling people to take up better
job opportunities in the non-farm sector but also for facilitating economic
diversification and job creation. Cambodia has the opportunity to improve the
quality of learning and increase educational attainment in order to help increase the
chances of the poor and economically vulnerable to attain economic security. Such
jobs may not be aligned with the diversification and competitiveness strategy but
would instead provide economic opportunities to the large share who will remain
outside the global value chains. Emerging priorities for achieving this goal are a
new focus on investing in the early years of children and increasing the transition
to and completion of high-quality secondary and tertiary education as well as
TVET. This would also require improvements in public service delivery and could be
complemented by strengthened and expanded social protection systems, not only
to reduce vulnerability but also to equalize access to high-quality education and
improve nutrition outcomes for the poor.

One key priority is to endow people with skills by boosting attainment and learning
outcomes of secondary and higher education. Addressing both supply- and
demand-side constraints to access to education is key. One demand-side priority
is to change the incentives for the poor to invest in more education and make
education more affordable for them, for example by prioritizing pro-poor school
grants and by making the targeting of the national scholarship program more
equitable. On the supply side, effective implementation and expansion of the Lower
Secondary School Effectiveness Standards is needed to strengthen the system of
education service delivery and hold schools accountable for student learning. The
quality and relevance of tertiary education can also be improved through greater
autonomy for public higher education institutions, strengthened accreditation
and quality assurance mechanisms, and more active use of public resources to
encourage science, technology, engineering, and mathematics (STEM) subjects.
To improve education more generally, better matching the supply of skills training
with employer demand, including strengthening the role of intermediaries, is also
needed. One option is for the RGC and development partners to subsidize the
development of industry-specific training centers to ensure that training is aligned
with employers’ needs and with industry and growth trends.


                                                                                        25
     Another priority for building human assets is to invest in the early years to prevent
     constraints on children’s development. This requires ensuring that children are
     well-nourished, start school early (at the prime time for brain development), and
     have an adequate learning environment. On the nutrition front, results-based
     mechanisms such as Service Delivery Grants and Health Equity Funds (HEFs) could
     be used to improve the availability and quality of nutrition services outlined in
     the Fast Track Road Map for Improving Nutrition (FTRM).3 Government financing
     could also be scaled up for social and behavior change communication aimed
     at harmonizing nutrition-relevant messages across sectors. Such supply-side
     improvements can be complemented by demand-side incentives (e.g., targeted
     cash transfers, transportation allowances, and community-level incentives such as
     commune councils / commune social funds) to encourage behavior change and
     consumption of essential early years services. To expand access to opportunities
     for early learning and stimulation, non-institutional modalities such as the Home-
     Based Care / Parental Education Program and Community Preschool could be used
     and expanded in rural areas. Another important factor for child nutrition is access
     to water and sanitation, which could be improved by the establishment of a well-
     funded program for implementation of the National Action Plan for Rural Water and
     Sanitation, expansion of piped water service in rural areas, and capacity building for
     water operators to improve service performance and efficiency.

     In addition to building the assets of the poor and near-poor, it will be important to
     help them protect their gains. Measures aimed at mitigating shocks and building
     resilience would help shield household income and prevent households from
     falling into poverty. To improve financial protection against catastrophic health
     expenditures, the HEFs could be expanded with a deeper benefit package for the
     poor and some basic protection for other vulnerable groups. As a basis for any
     expansion of safety net coverage, the ID Poor targeting system should be reviewed


     3  The Fast Track Road Map for Improving Nutrition (2014-2020) outlines five packages of
     nutrition interventions to be delivered at scale: (i) Nutrition counselling during antenatal care;
     (ii) micronutrient supplementation and deworming for mothers and newborns; (iii) treatment
     of severely wasted children; (iv) micronutrient supplementation for prevention and treatment
     strategies; and (v) behavior change communication focused on the 1,000 day window of
     opportunity. Three additional activities are proposed to enable the scaling up of these packages:
     (vi) remove financial and human resources barriers to scale up efficient interventions; (vii) leverage
     support through other ministries and initiatives; and (viii) improve nutrition data in existing
     information systems.



26
and refined, with an eye toward eventually having a list and ranking of the poor
as well as non-poor that is linked to a civil registry system and can be used for all
public safety net programs. Another social protection program for consideration
is a conditional cash transfer (CCT) program which could provide a much-needed
safety net for the poor, softening the impact of shocks as well as fostering desirable
behaviors such as school attendance or feeding habits to fight stunting. A CCT
could also serve as a delivery vehicle for consolidating a number of schemes (e.g.,
public pensions for the elderly poor, support to the disabled, support to poor
households with pregnant women and/or small children). In preparation for aging,
pension reform is also needed, starting with harmonization of the different ongoing
schemes with the aim of achieving full portability. In addition, exposure to natural
disasters could be reduced through risk-sensitive planning and design, while
further efforts could aim at enhancing risk assessment capacity and improving
disaster preparedness capability and rapid fiscal response.




                                                                                         27
28
Pathway 3: Ensuring a sustainable growth pattern by investing in
natural capital, climate resilience, and sustainable urban development

Cambodia faces several critical decisions on the tradeoffs in supporting its food,
energy, and water needs while also conserving its natural systems. As discussed
earlier, while urban development has contributed substantially to growth
and poverty reduction, unsustainable economic activities and management
practices have significantly degraded Cambodia’s natural resource base over
the last two decades. Compounding these issues are expected changes in the
water regime in Cambodia from the Mekong River, with impacts from upstream
hydropower development and increased water use for agriculture and domestic
needs. Given the interlinkages between natural resource-based ecosystems and
man-made urban environments, addressing these challenges requires spatially
integrated approaches. For natural resources, this means taking into account
natural challenges and trade-offs related to modernizing agriculture, improving
fisheries, expanding sustainable tourism, and developing hydropower within
a specified landscape, in coordination with managing and restoring degraded
forests and aquatic ecosystems and strengthening resilience to climate change
and natural disasters. For urban planning, this means developing a long-term
strategy for implementing reforms across various urban sectors, including
water, sanitation, transport, and disaster risk management, in a specified city.
With such measures, Cambodia will substantially strengthen its capacity to
achieve its long-term growth and poverty reduction objectives, along with its
climate adaptation and mitigation commitments in its Nationally Determined
Contribution (NDC).

Efforts to implement and scale up Cambodia’s existing national-level reforms and
programs on natural resources and climate change would go a long way toward
preserving the country’s natural capital. For example, the development of targeted
public expenditure programs would help address financing gaps for the RGC’s
national strategies, action plans, and practices related to natural capital,  climate
change, and green growth as well as increase support to local authorities for
implementation. To reduce the high costs of unsustainable economic activities,
environmental impact assessments and strategic environmental assessments could
be institutionalized for all public and private projects with likely impacts on the




                                                                                        29
     environment and livelihoods. Specific to the forestry sector, further efforts are needed
     to combat deforestation and move toward sustainability, for example through the
     development of a strategic plan and policy framework for the management of
     conservation corridors, expansion of alternative livelihood opportunities from non-
     timber forest products and eco-tourism, improvements to the zonation of land use
     and tenure, and development of sustainably managed plantations for fuelwood
     and timber. The management of Cambodia’s water resources and highly productive
     fisheries also requires stronger implementation of existing plans, policies,
     and practices for the Mekong River and Tonle Sap ecosystems.  As a first step,
     Cambodia  should continue to  improve the implementation of Integrated Water
     Resources Management (IWRM),  particularly through further support for  water
     information systems and local government  capacity  building. Importantly, given
     the interlinked nature of Cambodia’s terrestrial and aquatic landscapes, a spatially
     integrated approach to natural resource management is needed, with stronger
     co-management, less fragmentation, and common targets across different sectors
     among both national and local governments.

     Sustainable growth will also depend on the development of competitive,
     sustainable, and inclusive cities through integrated urban planning. An integrated
     urban planning agenda should bring together land use and disaster resilience
     plans with investments in transportation networks and infrastructure. To date, only
     Phnom Penh and Battambang have developed detailed urban master plans, with
     limited progress in their enforcement and implementation. In parallel, master plans
     for urban transport, solid waste management, drainage and sewage, and water
     supply plans have been developed for Phnom Penh. Strengthening the coordination
     and implementation of these plans is important for urban development and
     management. Stronger institutions and innovative financing mechanisms such as
     public-private partnerships are also needed, as most municipalities do not have
     enough resources to strengthen their institutional capacity or to make adequate
     investments in infrastructure. Within these integrated plans, priority areas include
     urban sanitation and transport, as well as the upgrading of urban poor settlements
     and implementation of a transparent and coordinated land registration and titling
     process.




30
Cross-cutting: Public administration and public financial management
reforms for improved service delivery

All of the reform priorities identified in the SCD require significant public sector
capacity to implement reforms and deliver services. The success of all the proposed
interventions rests on improving the quality of public service delivery, which
in turn depends on the government’s ability to generate sufficient revenue for
important public spending and investment requirements, spend the available
resources efficiently and with accountability, and maintain a well-functioning
public administration staffed by competent civil servants. Cambodia has started to
pursue decentralization and deconcentration reforms aimed at improving public
service delivery by increasing the responsibilities and decisionmaking autonomy
of frontline service providers. The rebalancing of responsibilities requires a
corresponding reallocation of funding and human resources across different levels
of government.

Deepening of ongoing public financial management reform, together with
overarching public administration reform, would thus be key to improving capacity
for public service delivery. Modernization of human resource (HR) information
management tools would also be important for supporting the management of
staff performance and overall HR management functions of the public sector. In
addition, a change management approach, together with enhanced mechanisms
for citizen feedback on the quality of services provided, would help increase value
for money in the use of public funding and improve accountability and oversight.
Finally, it is worth noting that a series of identified weaknesses in statistical capacity
indicators call for improving the capacity of the statistical system to inform an
evidence-based decision making process, as well as to monitor and evaluate
progress in development in the coming years.




                                                                                             31
     Selected bibliography
     Germanwatch, 2016. Global Climate Risk Index.

     IMF, 2016. 2016 Article IV Consultation. IMF Country Report No. 16/340. International
     Monetary Fund, November 2016, Washington DC.

     Inter-Parliamentary Union, 2016. Women in Politics: 2015. Inter-Parliamentary
     Union, UN Women. Geneva, 10 March 2015.

     RGC, 2015a. “PFM Evaluation in Cambodia.” Based on the Public Expenditure
     and Financial Accountability Methodology. Royal Government of Cambodia.
     September, 2015.

     RGC, 2015b. “Climate Change Financing Framework.” Royal Government of
     Cambodia.




     Note: in order to facilitate the reading, only a limited selection of sources has been quoted in this
     Overview.

     For a full bibliography, please refer to the final, full-lenght Cambodia Systematic Country Diagnostic
     report,      available   at:    http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/620151496155751423/
     Cambodia-Sustaining-strong-growth-for-the-benefit-of-all




32
Cambodia Country Office
Exchange Square Building
Floor 10th IBRD and 11th IFC
Streets 51-61 and streets 102-106
Sangkat Wat Phnom, Khan Daun Penh
Phnom Penh, Cambodia
www.worldbank.org/cambodia
