               Document of
          The World Bank Group




                                     Report No: 114289-SC



      THE REPUBLIC OF SEYCHELLES



SYSTEMATIC COUNTRY DIAGNOSTIC (P155250)




              June 23, 2017
                        Seychelles Government Fiscal Year

                              January 1 – December 31

                               Currency Equivalents

                    (Exchange Rate Effective as of June 22, 2017)

                      Currency Unit = Seychellois Rupee (SCR)

                                US$1.00 = SCR 13.51

ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

AAL     Average Annual Loss                    ITZ         International Trade Zone
AKI     Availability of Key Indicators         JMZ         Joint Management Zone
AML     Anti-Money Laundering                  LFS         Labor Force Survey
ASP     Agency for Social Protection           M&E         Monitoring & Evaluation
B40     Bottom Forty                           MSC         Methodology, Standards and
CBS     Central Bank of Seychelles                         Classifications
CJS     Crime & Justice Statistics             MSME        Micro, Small, & Medium
CS      Censuses and Surveys                               Enterprises
DPO     Dissemination Practices and            NBS         National Bureau of Statistics
        Openness                               NHRDC       National Human Resources
ECD     Early Childhood                                    Development Council
        Development                            PEFA        Public Expenditure &
EEZ     Exclusive Economic Zone                            Financial Accountability
EITI    Extractive Industries                  PEMC        Public Enterprise Monitoring
        Transparency Initiative                            Commission
FDI     Foreign Direct Investment              PIM         Public Investment
                                                           Management
GDP     Gross Domestic Product
                                               PPBB        Program Performance Based
GNI     Gross National Income
                                                           Budgeting
GOP     Gainful Occupation Permit              PPP         Purchasing Power Parity
GOS     Government of Seychelles               RBM         Results-based Management
HDI     Human Development Index                S&P         Standard & Poor's
HH      Household                              SCAA        Seychelles Civil Aviation
HIE     High-Income Economy                                Authority
IBC     International Business                 SCD         Systematic Country
        Company                                            Diagnostic
ICT     Information &                          SCI         Statistical Capacity Indicator
        Communication Technology               SCR         Seychellois Rupee
IEG     Independent Evaluation                 SFA         Seychelles Fisheries
        Group                                              Authority
IMF     International Monetary Fund            SIDS        Small Island Developing
IOM     International Organization for                     States
        Migration
                                         ii
SOE        State-Owned Enterprise                  TVET       Technical & Vocational
SP         Social Protection                                  Education & Training
SPF        Seychelles Pension Fund                 UN         United Nations
SPI        Statistical Performance Index           UNWTO      United Nations World
SSA        Sub-Saharan Africa                                 Tourism Organization
STB        Seychelles Tourism Board                WDI        World Development
                                                              Indicators
STC        Seychelles Trading Company
                                                   WEF        World Economic Forum
SWA        Social Welfare Assistance
                                                   WTTC       World Travel & Tourism
SYC        Seychelles
                                                              Council
TFP        Total Factor Productivity




     Regional Vice President:   Makhtar Diop
            Country Director:   Mark Lundell
Country Program Coordinator:    Thomas Buckley
            Program Leaders:    Mark Austin, Carolin Geginat, Cristina Isabel Panasco Santos
           Practice Manager:    Ivailo Izvorski
          Task Team Leader:     Alex Sienaert

                                             iii
Contents
A. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS........................................................................................... v

I.       INTRODUCTION................................................................................................... vi
         1. Overview: the approach of the Seychelles SCD ........................................... vi
         2. Country context and historical economic development .............................. ix
         3. Emerging concerns…...................................................................................... xiii
         4. …and opportunities ........................................................................................ xv
         5. Questions addressed, and top priorities and knowledge gaps identified ... xvi

                           SYSTEMATIC COUNTRY DIAGNOSTIC                                                                1
          1. Country Context                                                                                            2
          2. Growth: The need for more productivity-based growth                                                        10
          3. Inclusion: Equipping Seychellois to participate in a changing, high
             income economy                                                                                             34
          4. Sustainability: Enhancing State performance to support productivity
             and participation, and to meet environmental and economic risks                                            54
          5. Summary and prioritization of constraints identified                                                       76
          6. Data appendix                                                                                              91

II.      SUPPLEMENTARY TOPICAL NOTES ............................................................. 105
         1. Topical Note: Tourism in the Seychelles - recent trends and key issues.... 106
         2. Topical Note: Developing the “Blue Economy” for shared prosperity ..... 112
         3. Topical Note: The role of SOEs in growth, inclusion and sustainability .. 117
         4. Topical Note: Social protection - challenges and potential reforms .......... 122
         5. Topical Note: Historical welfare trends in Seychelles ................................ 125
         6. Topical Note: Labor market profile of Seychelles ...................................... 129

III.     SCD SUPPLEMENTARY ANNEXES ................................................................. 131
         1. Annex: Data diagnostic................................................................................... 131
         2. Annex: Consultations ..................................................................................... 134
         3. Annex: References .......................................................................................... 136




                                                              iv
                                     A. ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

We thank the Government of Seychelles for its engagement throughout the SCD process, including
the excellent logistical support and inputs provided by the office of Elizabeth Agathine (Principal
Secretary), Ministry of Finance, Trade and Economic Planning. We are grateful to the many
government officials, members of parliament, and business and civil society representatives in
Seychelles who generously contributed their time, knowledge and views. We also thank other
development partners of Seychelles for useful discussions and inputs, and especially IMF staff
(Tetsuya Konuki, Wendell Samuel, Joe Thornton and Arina Viseth) for their strong collaboration.

The Seychelles SCD is a Country Management Unit product, prepared under the overall
supervision of Mark Lundell (Country Director, AFCS2), with guidance and inputs from Mark
Austin, Carolin Geginat, and Cristina Isabel Panasco Santos (Program Leaders, AFCS2), and
Thomas Buckley (Country Program Coordinator, AFCS2). The task-team leader was Alex Sienaert
(Senior Economist, GMF13), working in close collaboration with Luis Alvaro Sanchez (Senior
Consultant). This product is based on contributions from the full Seychelles country team, as well
as inputs from World Bank Group staff from across the Global Practices (GPs), Cross-Cutting
Solutions Areas (CCSAs), International Finance Corporation (IFC), and the Multilateral
Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA), listed in the table below. The team received valuable
support and input from John Ikeda (Agile Pilots Initiative).

The team thanks the concept-stage peer reviewers Enrique Blanco Armas (Lead Economist,
GMF06), Rafael Munoz Moreno (Senior Economist, GMF02) and Victor Sulla (Senior Economist,
GPV07). The product also benefited from written comments from R. Sudharshan Canagarajah
(Advisor, AFRDE); EFI Strategy Reviewers (Eric Manes with inputs from Anna Fruttero, Helene
Grandvoinnet, Ekaterina Vostroknutova, Alan Moody, Steven Dimitriyev and Roya Vakil); Caren
Grown (Senior Director, GCGDR); Pierre Laporte (Country Director, AFCF2); Judith Laufman
(Senior Operations Officer, AFRDE); Olga Shabalina (Senior Statistician, DEC), and Lars
Sondergaard (Program Leader, EACTF).

 GP/CCSA/Institution                 Contributor
 Education                           Cristina Isabel Panasco Santos
 Energy and Extractives              Zayra Romo
 Environment and Natural             Benjamin Garnaud, Xavier Vincent
 Resources
 Finance and Markets                 Francesco Strobbe, Brinda Dabysing, Emile Van Der Does De Willebois
 Governance                          Kathrin Plangemann, Patrick Kabuya, Fanny Weiner
 Health, Nutrition, and Population   Netsanet Workie
 Macroeconomics & Fiscal             Steven Pennings and Jorge Luis Guzman Correa (DEC, Macroeconomics
 Management                          and Growth, for the use of the DEC/MFM LTGM model)
 Poverty                             Theresa Osborne, Wendy Karamba, Chuqiao Bi
 Social Protection and Labor         Melis Guven
 Social, Urban, Rural & Resilience   Doekle Wielinga, Andre Carletto
 Trade and Competitiveness           Alan Moody, Claire Hollweg
 Transport and ICT                   Tim Kelly, Anat Lewin, Noroarisoa Rabefaniraka
 Water                               Chloe Oliver Viola
 Development Economics               Mustafa Dinc
 IFC                                 Kailash Sharma Ramnauth
 MIGA                                Petal Jean Hackett, Paul Levy


                                                      v
                                     I.   INTRODUCTION

   1. Overview: the approach of the Seychelles SCD

 1.     The Seychelles Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD) aims to identify the most
pressing constraints to inclusive, sustained growth in Seychelles, based on a comprehensive
search for, and analysis of, evidence. The SCD is presented using a slide deck which lays out the
analysis and results. This document provides a brief overview of the approach taken, and sets the
stage for the SCD. It also provides additional information: six selected supplementary topical
notes, and annexes (data diagnostic, summary of consultations, and sources).

 2.     The approach to preparing and presenting the Seychelles SCD has aimed to
contribute to the World Bank Group’s corporate streamlining and simplification (“agility”)
agenda. In line with guidelines provided to the team, the agile approach has sought to build a
strong dialogue with the Client through two scoping missions, and multiple sector team visits that
served to update background materials. A presentation of the SCD analysis and the draft priorities
that were identified was made to the President and the Cabinet of Ministers. A dialogue has also
been maintained with Parliament. A high priority has been assigned to making the results from the
SCD accessible and available to stakeholders during a time of rapid political change in Seychelles.
A continued reflection on the choices available to the country will help to prioritize and address
major information gaps; this SCD seeks to contribute a first step in this process of reflection and
search.

 3.      The framework adopted by the SCD takes as its starting point that Seychelles is a
successful, high-income, small island state. The country now seeks to secure the sustainability
of its development progress to date, to accelerate this progress, and to address a high level of public
concern being reflected in political discourse over disparities in incomes and opportunities. The
SCD examines Seychelles’ economic growth characteristics, the characteristics of poverty and
income distribution (inclusion), and the risks to environmental, social and macroeconomic
sustainability. The approach is systematic in that it attempts to be as comprehensive as possible,
within the constraints of the available data, by harnessing the existing evidence and conducting
new analysis where feasible, informed by consultations.

 4.     Regarding growth, achieving more productivity-based growth is Seychelles’ key
challenge. Economic growth performance has been strong, both over the long term and recently,
and employment rates are high. Structural change in Seychelles’ economy has been limited,
however. The SCD growth analysis therefore focuses on historical growth accounting and
simulation, to examine the drivers of growth at the factor input level and the implications for future
prospects. This analysis shows that growth has been driven by factor accumulation, pointing to
raising productivity growth as Seychelles’ key growth challenge. This finding resonates with
Seychelles having recently joined the ranks of high-income economies, a stage where economic
theory and the international empirical evidence show that sustained economic growth is fueled by
rising productivity. The SCD focuses on identifying the constraints to productivity growth and to
introducing change in the economy.

5.      Regarding inclusion, increasing Seychellois’ direct participation in an increasingly
skills-intensive, sophisticated economy is the paramount challenge for the social sectors.

                                                  vi
Absolute poverty levels in Seychelles are low, but inequality is significant. Assessing rigorously
the recent incidence of growth is not possible due to data constraints, but the available evidence
does suggest that gains for households at the bottom of the income distribution have lagged the
considerable increase over the past decade in average income. 1 Since available household survey-
based analysis showed that market labor income is the most important source of income even for
the poorest households, the SCD identified that understanding better the structure and performance
of the labor market was a knowledge gap, and one that could be addressed using recent labor force
survey data. The SCD therefore commissioned a background paper to fill this gap. Amongst its
key findings: skills premia in the labor market are already high, and increasing, at the top end,
consistent with rising relative demand for more skilled workers. 2 At the same time, there is
evidence of inequity of opportunities and challenges in the quality of outcomes in the education
system. A share of the population is therefore at risk of falling behind. The current social protection
system, although it reduces poverty, is not positioned to counter growing pressures on equity and
social cohesion; spending on social transfers is already at comparatively high levels, and is heavily
concentrated on the elderly.

6.      Regarding sustainability, increasing state performance is the third key challenge for
Seychelles to accelerate progress towards shared prosperity. Seychelles’ path to high-income
status has been marred by volatility and painful setbacks, which can be traced to domestic policy
and an excessive accumulation of national resources in the state. In conjunction with the need for
Seychelles to shift to a more productivity-centered growth model and to equip its citizens to
participate directly in emerging economic opportunities, this leads the SCD to focus on the
challenge of lifting state performance.

7.      Arguing that the “3 Ps” discussed above—productivity, participation and
performance—are the major challenges for Seychelles, the SCD identifies thirteen priority
areas to address in order to make additional progress. Constraints are considered based on the
evidence from household, labor force and business environment surveys, cross-country
benchmarking, and the results of available sectoral and overall public financial management, and
fiscal policy, analysis. Initially, nineteen candidate constraints were identified, which were
narrowed down to a final group of thirteen constraints through additional analysis and aided by
consultations.

8.      Finally, the SCD sorts the 13 constraints identified into five top priorities, five
additional priorities, and a further three areas which should be considered for priority
action, subject to confirmation from additional analysis (“likely priorities”). This
prioritization was based on an assessment of how important each constraint was, directly, to
meeting the relevant challenge, indirectly, through its potential impact in helping to loosen other
constraints (complementarity), the strength of the evidence base on the importance of the
constraint, and, finally, the attainability of addressing the constraint (reflecting factors such as cost,
technical difficulty and timeframe).

9.   Table 1 summarizes the constraints and prioritization identified by the Seychelles
SCD.


1
    See Topical Note: Historical welfare trends in Seychelles
2
    See Topical Note: Labor market profile of Seychelles
                                                           vii
Table 1: Summary of constraints and prioritization
                                                                                                                                                         Prioritization criteria
                                                                                                                Shared prosperity impact (numbers in parentheses indicate likely
                                                                                                                                                                                   Evidence base   Attainability
                                                                                                                         direct impact on other, numbered constraint)
                                                                                                                                                                 Complement-
 Overall prioritization:                                                                                                                                          arity (impact                    Implement-
 Top 5, Additional                                                                                                                                              across growth,                      ation cost,
                                                            Constraint                                            Growth          Inclusion       Sustainabil-                      Evidence of
 Priority, or Likely                                                                                                                                               inclusion,                        technical
                                              (numbers are labels only, not a ranking)                            impact            impact         ity impact                       importance
 Priority (needs more                                                                                                                                           sustainability;                      difficulty,
 analysis)                                                                                                                                                       links to other                     timescale
                                                                                                                                                                  constraints)
                           1. Shortfalls in the private sector enabling environment: aspects of
                           opening & operating a business are difficult (e.g. in the vertically integrated
                                                                                                                      High          High             High
 TOP 5 PRIORITY            tourism sector); limited state capacity to regulate, monitor and evaluate                                                                    Strong        Strong         Medium
                                                                                                                       (6)           (2)           (4) (12)
                           strategically where productive resources are allocated, and the historical
                           dominance of SOEs, have reinforced the high concentration of resources.
                           2. Education and skills development: the system produces a large share of
                                                                                                                      High          High             High
 TOP 5 PRIORITY            the youth lacking in necessary academic or vocational skills and there are                                                                   Strong        Strong         Medium
                                                                                                                       (1)                          (4) (5)
                           insufficient opportunities for continuing education.
                           3. Social assistance: focused on the elderly and not on the youth, and it is
                                                                                                                                    High             High
 TOP 5 PRIORITY            not tied systematically to accessing economic opportunities for those who                  Low                                               Strong        Strong           High
                                                                                                                                   (2) (8)          (4) (5)
                           could work, affecting the structure of incentives.
                           4. Macroeconomic and fiscal policy stability: challenge to prioritize public
                                                                                                                      High                           High
 TOP 5 PRIORITY            expenditure within a consistent and sustainable macro framework, and avoid                             Medium                                Strong        Strong           High
                                                                                                                       (1)                       (5) (10) (12)
                           the build-up of fiscal pressures and risks, including from SOEs.
                           5. Public (government and SOE) spending efficiency: capacity to track and
                                                                                                                     High          Medium
 TOP 5 PRIORITY            monitor the efficiency of government programs and sustain continuous                                                      High               Strong        Strong           High
                                                                                                                 (1) (7) (11)     (2) (3) (9)
                           improvements.
 ADDITIONAL PRIORITY       6. Credit: high cost and limited availability.                                            High (1)       High           Medium              Medium         Medium         Medium
 ADDITIONAL PRIORITY       7. Energy: high electricity prices, particularly for businesses.                          High (1)        Low         High (4) (5)          Medium         Medium         Medium
                           8. Labor market functioning: job flexibility is limited and the structure of the                         High
 ADDITIONAL PRIORITY                                                                                                  High                         Medium              Medium         Strong         Medium
                           labor market constrains opportunities.                                                                    (2)
                           9. Health: rising non-communicable disease prevalence is weighing on life                                                 High
 ADDITIONAL PRIORITY                                                                                                  Low           High                               Medium         Medium           High
                           expectancy (especially for men); spending risks becoming unsustainable.                                                  (4) (5)
                           10. Capacity to absorb environmental and global economic shocks:
                                                                                                                      High                           High
 ADDITIONAL PRIORITY       financial and technical capacity to manage global economic and                                         Medium                               Medium         Strong         Medium
                                                                                                                       (1)                            (4)
                           environmental risks, and the growing impact of climate change.
                           11. Transport and other input costs: high logistics, and domestic and
                                                                                                                      High          High           Medium
 LIKELY PRIORITY           international connectivity, costs, impede tapping international markets, while                                                              Medium          Weak            Low
                                                                                                                       (1)           (8)             (4)
                           options to produce for the domestic market limited by small size.
 LIKELY PRIORITY           12. Governance: transparency and accountability of public action.                     Medium (1)         High           High (5)            Medium          Weak          Medium
                           13. Water & sanitation: seasonal water scarcity is intensifying and sanitation                                            High
 LIKELY PRIORITY                                                                                                      Low            Low                                Weak           Weak          Medium
                           coverage is predominantly on-site.                                                                                       (4) (5)

 Key
           High/strong                      Medium/neutral                            Low/weak


                                                                                                              viii
10.    The remainder of this overview sets the stage for the SCD, discusses emerging
challenges and opportunities, and previews the top priorities identified. It provides a narrative
description of the country and historical economic development context, and the threads of the
argument that lead the SCD to characterize Seychelles’ interlinked growth, inclusion and
sustainability challenges as the “3 Ps” – productivity, participation, and performance.

11.    Following this introduction, the Seychelles SCD is presented as a slide deck, which
includes the detailed evidence base supporting the conclusions and the constraints identified.

12.     Finally, following the SCD slide deck, a set of six short notes provides additional detail
on selected topics, aiming to enrich the information provided by the slides, on a selective basis as
warranted by topics’ relevance to the overall findings: key economic sectors and actors (tourism,
state-owned enterprises), emerging policy frameworks (blue economy), priority policy areas
(social protection), and methodology (growth incidence analysis). The sixth and final topical note
provides a brief summary of the report on the Seychelles labor market, which as mentioned above
was commissioned by the SCD to fill a knowledge gap, and which informed results. Information
on consultations, data diagnostic results, and sources, is provided in the annexes.

    2. Country context and historical economic development

13.     Seychelles, an island state in the western Indian Ocean, is one of the smallest countries
in the world in terms of both its population (about 95,000), and its land surface area (about
500 km2). The country comprises a total of 115 islands, but almost all of the population lives on
just three of the inner granitic islands of Mahé (home to 86 percent of people), and Praslin and La
Digue (11 percent combined). Seychelles is very land-scarce, having little land in absolute terms,
but also amongst the smallest amount of arable land per person of any country. Seychelles has also
been dubbed a “large ocean state”, however, as it has an exclusive economic zone (EEZ) of
approximately 1.4 million km2, about 3,000 times the size of its land territory or 2.5 times the size
of France.

14.     Despite the intrinsic challenges that come with being a small, relatively isolated island
nation, Seychelles has already achieved a remarkable level of economic development. Gross
national income per capita was US$14,760 in 2015 (Atlas method). This is an order of magnitude
higher than the regional average for Sub-Saharan Africa (US$1,637), and makes Seychelles the
only High-Income Economy in Sub-Saharan Africa, a classification it attained in 2015. Seychelles
has performed well by global standards as well. Of 42 small states (with populations of 1.5 million
or less), Seychelles already ranks 12th in per capita income (US$25,810, at purchasing power
parity). Of the 26 very small states with populations of 500,000 or less, Seychelles ranks 5th, behind
Brunei, Bermuda, Iceland, and Malta. In considering the prospects for Seychelles, therefore, the
salient comparators are nearby island states with relevant similarities (e.g., Mauritius, an upper
middle-income economy with a population of 1.3 million and historical links to Seychelles;
Maldives, for high-end tourism), and other states around the world that have managed to achieve
even higher income levels despite their size: such as Bermuda (US$66,670) and Iceland
(US$46,500). 3


3
 Figures for rankings are GNI per capita converted at PPP rates to international dollars (WDI, 2015). The sample
excludes 20 small countries and territories for which the WDI database does not capture income statistics, including
for example the high-income countries of Aruba and Monaco.
                                                         ix
15.      Seychelles’ economy has grown off a low base to achieve its current high-income
status, based on services, especially tourism. Seychelles became independent in 1976, from the
United Kingdom, when the population was about 62,000. Over the subsequent four decades, the
permanently resident population has increased by about half, and output has increased by two and
a half times, in real US dollar terms. 4 Reliance on the plantation-based activities of the colonial
period (copra, and cinnamon and other spices) has long since faded into relative unimportance,
and now generates about two percent of Gross Domestic Product (GDP). Instead, Seychelles’
economy has evolved increasingly to benefit from its rich environmental endowment in a different
way, by supplying tourism, which accounts directly for about a quarter of GDP and employment. 5
Seychelles has developed a strong tourism brand that places the country at the high end of the
global tourism market. 6 Overall, the economy is services-based; services activity accounts for
about three-quarters of GDP. Industry contributes almost all of the rest of output, mainly fish
processing (a tuna cannery is the largest single employer on the main island of Mahé); in addition,
utilities and construction account for approximately 5 percent of output. 7 Primary sector activities
account for only about 3 percent of output, down from (an already modest) 10 percent at the time
of independence.

16.     The growth path has been volatile, Figure 1: Seychelles GDP per capita
however, driven to a large extent by internal (green dots show new highs; red dots show
factors. Seychelles has been fortunate in that it has levels below previous highs – “lost years”)
not been exposed to the sharp and often brutal 18,000 Constant                                       10
environmental shocks that have beset many other 16,000 2005     US$                  Sovereign debt
                                                                                                     8
                                                                                      default (2008)
small island states. Nevertheless, the volatility of 14,000
growth has been high (Figure 1) and characterized 12,000                                             6

by pronounced cycles, including periods where            10,000
                                                                                                     4
progress in lifting per capita incomes has stalled or     8,000

reversed. A key event crystalizes our                     6,000                                      2

understanding of Seychelles’ recent, volatile path        4,000
                                                                                                     0
to economic development, and continuing                   2,000
                                                                  Std. devs. from linear trend (rhs)
challenges: an economic crisis and sovereign debt             0                                      -2

default in 2008. This crisis defines two broad
periods: before and after 2008/2009. The following Source: Staff calculations based on WDI data
discussion focuses on the economic characteristics
of these periods, which are salient for understanding Seychelles’ current priorities. Politics in
Seychelles, and its impact on the role of the state, is summarized in Box 1.

17.    In the two decades prior to the 2008 crisis, economic growth was driven by Foreign
Direct Investment (FDI) and public expenditure. In the 1990s, the country undertook an
aggressive privatization drive, which spurred foreign investment attracted by government policies,
and incentives. The state undertook complementary investments such as the airport, domestic

4
  Sources: Population from first post-independence population census (1978) as cited in IOM (2013), and UN
Population Statistics.
5
  This understates tourism’s importance to the economy given its indirect contributions to other sectors via derived
demand, but current national accounts statistics are insufficient to quantify these by means of a Social Accounting
Matrix. World Tourism Council Statistics place tourism’s overall GDP and employment contributions at well above
50 percent.
6
  See Topical Note: Tourism in the Seychelles - recent trends and key issues.
7
  Source: WDI.
                                                         x
transportation, telecommunications, and training. The fishing industry was fostered through the
development of an International Trade Zone (ITZ), including a major tuna cannery, and state
support to semi-industrial fishing. Other sectors did not receive the same level of attention. The
economy grew, but Seychelles’ growth performance was not exceptional in global terms; it was
similar to the average of a peer group of small economies. 8
                                             Box 1: State and Development

    Until very recently, one party has dominated politics in Seychelles, and followed a state-centric development
    model. Since 1977 a single political party, the Seychelles People's Progressive Front (SPPF) has governed
    Seychelles. The country returned to a multiparty system under a new constitution approved in June 1993. The
    SPPF has won every presidential election since. However, political competition has increased. In December 2015,
    President James Michel won a third and final term, with an extremely narrow majority (193 votes). Confirming
    the trend towards greater political competition, an opposition party coalition took control of the legislative branch
    in the September 2016 parliamentary elections. In October 2016, President Michel resigned and Vice President
    Danny Faure assumed the presidency.

    The SPPF’s development model assigned to the state a strong role, including (free) provision of key public
    services, a large public enterprise sector, and a generous welfare system. At the center of the approach has been
    the capacity of the state to (1) foster an environment conducive to investment in the key strategic sectors, mainly
    fishing and tourism, and (2) to mobilize fees and taxes, the revenue sources that have financed social programs
    and public investments (including in infrastructure and land reclamation).

18.     Meanwhile, the extensive presence of the state led to problems; the economy became
prone to instability, culminating in an economic crisis and debt default in 2008. Public
expenditure pressures mounted during the 1980s and 1990s, and state spending came to absorb
around 65 percent of GDP. Efforts at mobilizing commensurate revenues proved unsustainable,
on account of the use of preferential tax treatments in the 1990s. Large and fluctuating public
sector deficits, which reached up to 22 percent of GDP in 1998, jointly with a pegged and
increasingly overvalued exchange rate, generated large current account deficits. The country was
unable to service its external debt and arrears accumulated. During the 2000s, the debt to GDP
ratio escalated rapidly to reach around 160 percent by the middle of the decade, and close to 200
percent with the inclusion of accumulated external arrears. 9 Servicing this level of public debt put
extreme pressure on the fiscal accounts. Domestic borrowing by the public sector affected the
health of the local banking system and crowded out its capacity to lend to the productive sectors.
These unsustainable economic policies came to a head in mid-2008, precipitated by the surge in
global petroleum and food prices beginning in 2007, which caused import costs and inflation to
spike. The authorities missed payments on commercial foreign debt, and Standard and Poor’s
(S&P) downgraded the sovereign credit rating to selective default.

19.     The Government responded to the 2008 crisis by embarking on a comprehensive
program of economic policy and institutional reforms. The key components were (1) floating
the Seychellois Rupee; (2) adopting a new, independent monetary policy framework; (3) tightening
fiscal policy, backed by a reduction in public employment and replacing indirect subsidies with a
social safety net; and (4) structural measures to redefine the role of the state, including through
privatizations to refocus state-owned enterprises on correcting market failures and supplying
public goods. The reform measures reestablished macroeconomic stability and economic

8
 IMF, December 2008, “Seychelles: Selected Issues”.
9
 This section draws on World Bank, 2013, “Seychelles: How Classic Policies Restored Sustainability”, and IMF,
December 2008, “Seychelles: Selected Issues”.
                                                             xi
performance, beginning in 2009, and meant a departure from the traditional approach to economic
policy and from the established perception of the role of the state in society. The authorities relied
on direct and continuous communication that informed the public about the aim of, and the
expected results from, the policy initiatives, an approach that facilitated the implementation of the
reform program.

20.     The reforms were highly successful at getting the country back on track towards
shared prosperity. Macroeconomic conditions stabilized rapidly and economic growth resumed,
despite the challenging post-crisis global economic backdrop. Income per person recovered to its
pre-crisis level by 2012 (having plunged by 20 percent from 2006-2009) and kept rising. The
Central Bank of Seychelles (CBS) has built up approximately US$500 million worth of foreign
exchange reserves (sufficient to cover about 4 months of imports). Government debt/GDP has
declined to below 70 percent (Figure 2; see also data appendix, slide 101).

21.     Positive economic growth and stability outcomes, sustained until today, have lent
credence to the new approach to policy launched in 2009, but there has been limited
structural economic change and innovation, and Seychelles remains a society and an
economy in transition. Tourism has played an important role in the recovery, including as
Seychelles has successfully tapped new markets when the established ones came under pressure
from the global crisis and its aftermath in the Euro Area. The number of annual tourist arrivals has
doubled since 2008, and exceeded 300,000 for the first time in 2016 (over three times the local
population). The fishing industry also remains a bulwark of the economy. However, innovation
has been low in these two key sectors. Tourism centers on large hotels that offer comprehensive
packages, with a high degree of vertical integration that limits the participation of local operators
in offering complementary services (beyond small-scale accommodation and taxi services). In
fishing, the model remains roughly unchanged, with limited local value added.

22.     Seychelles’ baseline macroeconomic outlook remains favorable, in view of the ongoing
robustness of tourism, although the current pace of real GDP growth, above 4 percent, is expected
to moderate to 3.5 percent in coming years, as construction activity linked to new tourism capacity
development slows (a moratorium on new large hotel permits was extended recently to 2020). The
baseline scenario assumes continued fiscal consolidation, as the government targets a 50-percent
government debt-to-GDP ratio by 2020. The latest Debt Sustainability Assessment (DSA)
indicates a sustainable path for the public debt, though Seychelles remains “very vulnerable to
exogenous shocks”. 10 Amongst the major global credit ratings agencies, Fitch currently rates
Seychelles at BB-/stable (three notches below investment grade). 11




10
     IMF, February 2017, Country Report No. 17/51.
11
     Long-term foreign currency rating, last affirmed on July 29, 2016.
                                                           xii
 Figure 2: Key macroeconomic indicators before and after the 2008/9 crisis
 Seychelles’ economic crisis and debt default in 2008, followed by macroeconomic policy and institutional
 reforms, marked the start of a new era. Seychelles now faces the challenge of entrenching and extending reforms.
  A. Real GDP growth has been strong and less                B. … FDI has surged and public investment has
  volatile since the crisis…                                 been more stable
  14      Percent                                                      45   Percent of
  12                                                                        GDP
                                                                       40                                   2008
  10                                                                                                                        FDI
                                                                       35
   8
                                                                       30
   6
   4                                                                   25
                                                                                 Public GFCF
   2                                                                   20
   0
                                                                       15
   -2
                                           2008                        10
   -4
   -6                                                                   5
   -8                                                                   0
        1985   1990     1995   2000   2005      2010   2015              1985   1990      1995    2000    2005     2010     2015

  C. Government spending has been reduced and                         D. …and both government and total external debt
  kept below revenues…                                                have been consolidated
   70      Percent of                    2008                         250   Percent of                    2008
           GDP                                                              GDP
                           Expenditure                                                                                  Total
   60
                                                                      200                                               external
                                                                                                                        debt
   50
                                                  Revenue             150
   40

   30
                                                                      100

   20
                                                                                                                        Govt.
                                                                       50                                               debt
   10

    0                                                                   0
     1985      1990     1995   2000   2005      2010    2015             1985   1990     1995    2000    2005    2010     2015

 Notes: B: GFCF: Gross Fixed Capital Formation; gaps due to missing data. D: Govt. debt includes monetary debt,
 and guarantees; external data data begin in 2004.
 Sources: IMF; World Bank.

    3. Emerging concerns…

23.    Rapid economic growth since the 2008/9 crisis and recovery has propelled Seychelles
to high-income status, but this has been accompanied by continuing vulnerabilities, and some
new, growing concerns.

24.     First, macroeconomic vulnerabilities remain, and the need to secure the sustainability
of the fiscal and the macroeconomic accounts remains paramount in view of continuing
pressures on, and risks to, public expenditures. Although the recent pace of fiscal consolidation
has been strong, additional permanent measures will be needed to achieve the government’s target
of a 50-percent debt/GDP ratio by 2020 (pushed back from the previous target of 2018). Demands
on public investment will continue, with major projects under consideration. Transfers to some

                                                               xiii
public enterprises will be needed given constraints on borrowing and the limited use of Public
Private Partnerships (PPP) to carry out infrastructure projects. Moreover, the State Owned
Enterprises (SOEs) continue to pose a fiscal risk, given their significant debt levels (around 30
percent of GDP), coupled with weak governance and monitoring, and risks arising from expansion
into new areas due to blurry mandates. There is a web of cross-subsidies and transfers across SOEs,
and the SOEs and government, that needs to be clarified to achieve better operational performance
and risk management. For example, some SOEs receive oil free of taxes, and some carry out social
mandates without corresponding compensation. 12

25.     A growing source of macroprudential risk is Seychelles’ offshore corporate sector,
affecting the banking system where further progress on anti-monetary laundering (AML)
regulation and enforcement is needed. Comprehensive offshore sector statistics do not exist, but
the sector emerged in Seychelles in the 1990s and grew rapidly, with over 180,000 offshore
companies (known as International Business Companies, IBCs) now registered in Seychelles. The
industry and its regulators face a challenge to ensure compliance with tighter global regulations,
especially since several Seychelles-registered entities have been implicated in recent international
scandals. The sector thus needs to shift away from its current “mass market” model of registering
and providing basic company secretariat services to IBCs. This will require further steps to develop
a robust domestic regulatory framework and enforcement system, of the offshore sector and of
AML systems and procedures across the financial sector as a whole. Otherwise, Seychelles is
likely to be further negatively affected by the global trend of banks “de-risking” their
correspondent relationships, hampering the financial transactions needed for international trade,
and further financial sector development.

26.     Second, extreme poverty has been eliminated, but inclusion is lagging, despite already
generous social spending. Poverty in Seychelles, as defined for international comparison
purposes, is very low: 2.5 percent at the US$3.10 per day (2011 Purchasing Power Parity, PPP)
line. In contrast, the national poverty rate is significant, at 39.3 percent (as of 2013). This results
from a much higher national poverty line, equivalent to about US$13 per person per day (in 2011
PPP dollars), and so does not indicate that poverty in Seychelles is high in absolute terms.
Seychelles’ human development attainment is high and is as predicted by its national income, with
a UNDP HDI score of 0.782 (ranking 63rd/188; 2015). Income inequality is significant, however,
as measured by an income Gini coefficient of 0.47 (2012). Cross-country comparisons of
inequality are difficult, but this measure does indicate that income inequality in Seychelles is
considerably higher, for example, than in Mauritius (Gini coefficient: 0.36), and very much higher,
for example, than in Iceland (Gini coefficient: 0.27).

27.     The need to orient policy and implementation to bolster inclusion is pressing. The
persistently unequal distribution of income, despite Seychelles’ long-standing policy focus and
high spending on public services, social protection 13 and housing, points to constraints in accessing
economic opportunities. These constraints could well intensify as the economy develops further,
and demands higher and more specialized skills. If not addressed, the constraints could cause
increasing pressure on state spending, and become a source of social tension. That this concern is
already important and high on the political agenda is evidenced by the actions taken by the then-

12
     See Topical Note: The role of SOEs in growth, inclusion and sustainability
13
     See Topical Note: Social protection - challenges and potential reforms

                                                          xiv
president immediately after the 2015 presidential elections to redress the perception of poverty and
inequality: increasing the minimum wage (by about 25 percent), increasing pensions (by about 40
percent), and other measures with a total fiscal cost of about 3 percent of GDP. 14

28.     Third, the sustainability of the resource base of the economy raises some concerns.
Seychelles has grown while facing labor and land constraints, and a fragile environment. No
comprehensive evaluation of the impact of current or projected economic activity on the marine
environment has yet been made, but in Seychelles, as globally, there are growing worries about
sustainability. In tourism, the government has frozen new approvals for large establishments (with
20 rooms and above) through 2020, reflecting concerns about the impact of the recent, rapid pace
of development. In the industrial fishing sector, a regional authority sets seasonal ceilings to
protect the tuna stock, but some species are deemed overfished. Catch rates of many of the other
main species of fish are declining, reflecting pressures from overfishing in the artisanal,
recreational and sport fishing sub-sectors, and from an increasing environmental footprint of the
tourism industry. The artisanal, recreational and sport fisheries are open-access, which impedes
measures to limit the volume of fishing and thereby ensure sustainability.

     4. …and opportunities

29.    To bolster environmental sustainability, the government has embraced the “Blue
Economy” concept as an organizing principle to drive growth further, while not only
preserving but building the natural endowment. 15

30.     Seychelles has considerable opportunities to continue climbing the income ladder,
especially given its natural wealth, which is of global significance. Seychelles has built a
powerful brand name linked to the abundance and beauty of its natural environment and resources,
including its tropical islands, beaches, and the ocean. The country supports some of the world’s
most pristine, diverse and productive marine ecosystems, though their full extent and condition
are yet to be fully explored; its exclusive economic zone ranks 7th/221 on the Ocean Health
Index. 16 Most of Seychelles’ 115 islands are surrounded by coral reefs. Large sea grass beds exist
and are an important nursery for reef fish, invertebrate sea turtles, and manatees. Fishing grounds
are abundant and home to a wide variety of species. The opportunity is for Seychelles to
consolidate its regional, and even global, leadership status in the management and sustainable use
of these resources. Government is aware of this opportunity and is moving ahead with an ambitious
“blue economy” agenda. A National Blue Economy Roadmap is under preparation, in line with
the UN Sustainable Development Goal 14: “Conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas and
marine resources for sustainable development”.

31.     A further source of opportunities for Seychelles arises from its strategic location in
the western Indian Ocean. This is well-aligned with the emerging global focus on sustainable
ocean resource use and management. The country already has a successful oil bunkering industry,
including five oil tankers to refuel ships at sea (operated by the state-owned SEYPEC), which
benefits from the country’s location on major shipping routes, and Seychelles could play more of
a role in providing services for international transport. In the port, a quay extension is underway,

14
   Growth and revenue outperformance meant that a primary surplus target of 3 percent of GDP was still
comfortably exceeded in 2016 (as agreed under an IMF Extended Fund Facility).
15
   See Topical Note: Developing the “Blue Economy” for shared prosperity
16
   http://www.oceanhealthindex.org/region-scores/scores/seychelles.
                                                       xv
and a PPP investment project for additional fish processing has been proposed. An airport
expansion is underway as well.

32.     ICT is a small but established sector, and there is considerable scope to develop it
further. Seychelles’ relative isolation could perhaps be turned into an advantage by offshore data
storage and ICT services providers. A feasibility study for a second submarine cable is underway;
such a cable would supply the necessary redundancy in international connectivity for this sector
to grow, and notably for the price of voice and data services to drop into line with international
benchmarks. More generally, further ICT development—which has been substantial but not yet
“transformative” for Seychelles—could play a major role in reducing business costs and
supporting government efficiency. Public sector modernization through the provision of
eGovernment services to citizens and businesses, already underway, could be strengthened by
addressing gaps and investing in continued reforms.

33.     Looking ahead, the favorable growth prospects for Seychelles offer an opportunity to
build on the progress made since the 2008/9 crisis. This positive baseline economic growth view
is predicated on the continued strength of tourism demand, and assumes that major exogenous
shocks do not occur. The solid growth expected should provide a conducive environment in which
to address the constraints that have been emerging, and to chart a higher productivity growth path.
The good prospects afford also the opportunity to strengthen the institutions that support economic
management, improve governance, and build buffers to withstand both economic and
environmental shocks, and the effects of climate change. The experience since 2008 has been
commendable in delivering close to a decade of macroeconomic stability and strong growth, but
the supporting reforms and institutional strengthening are still under implementation and critical
goals are yet to be achieved. No major exogenous economic or natural shocks have occurred since
2009, and hence the sturdiness of the current arrangements has not been tested.

   5. Questions addressed, and top priorities and knowledge gaps identified

34.     The preparation of the SCD has taken place during a period of reflection and
discussion in Seychelles on achievements, gaps and opportunities. This reflection has been
driven by examination of post-crisis economic and social progress, as well as by increased political
competition. The questions that the SCD explored resonate with national concerns, which, in turn,
has facilitated the dialogue with stakeholders in the country.

35.     How to sustain growth and move further into the high-income range? Seychelles has
grown its economy in the face of severe land, labor and environmental constraints. Pressure on
these resources will intensify with further economic growth. The SCD considers the drivers of
economic growth, using growth accounting methodologies and assessing the development and
performance of the key sectors of the economy: tourism, fishing and state-owned enterprises. It
identifies the main constraints to investing and operating in Seychelles and the impact of the
limited development of the local private sector. Given the fundamental place of the environment
in the development of Seychelles, special attention is placed on possible constraints to the flagship,
emerging program of the government: the “Blue Economy”. A few important growth-related issues
are highlighted as knowledge gaps.




                                                 xvi
36.      How to foster sustainable social inclusion? The SCD explores the limitations to the
inclusion of the B40, within severe data constraints. 17 Given that labor income is the main income
source for households from the lowest to highest household income decile, the SCD studies the
recent evolution of the labor market, including wages. 18 It also examines the role of labor market
rules, the policies on importing labor, and the evolution of opportunities for the B40. Perceptions
that earnings for younger, less experienced workers have been growing less quickly than earnings
at the top may be feeding back into education and work incentives, with business surveys
highlighting “poor work ethic” and absenteeism challenges. Furthermore, the SCD considers the
impact of the main social programs—Social Housing and Social Assistance—on the B40. The
performance of the healthcare sector (which is mainly public) is examined, and the need for
strategic changes, and important contribution of efficiency improvements in the sector to the wider
state spending efficiency agenda, are identified.

37.    How to enhance sustainability and resilience? Given that domestic policies have been
an important driver of economic volatility, the SCD examines progress that has been made in
building fiscal and macroeconomic institutions and identifies remaining gaps to achieve a strong
and resilient macroeconomic platform for growth and inclusion. Also, the SCD considers the
challenges and constraints to improving governance in a small society. It compares Seychelles
with other small and successful economies and highlights gaps. The SCD also explores the
constraints to the management of natural disasters, which, although contained in the past, could
well escalate with climate change.

38.     By seeking answers to these questions, the SCD identified 19 constraints, that were
narrowed down to 13, aided by internal and external consultations (Table 1). To prioritize
amongst the constraints identified, three prioritization criteria were applied. First, how much
does the constraint impact on achieving the Twin Goals? For Seychelles, with low absolute
poverty, the focus is on increasing shared prosperity by addressing the “3Ps”: productivity,
participation, and (state) performance. This assessment includes how complementary addressing
the constraint would be to support the resolution of other constraints. Second, how strong is the
evidence base on the nature and magnitude of the constraint? Are additional data and analysis
needed (i.e., are there knowledge gaps)? Third, what is the feasibility of removing constraints (cost,
time scale and technical difficulty)?

39.    Five top priority constraints were identified. A preview of these (priorities and options
to address them, and comments on key interlinkages), followed by a summary of high
priority additional analytical work, concludes this introduction to the Seychelles SCD.

40.    First, removing the barriers that impede businesses from opening and operating in
Seychelles is at the root of launching a productivity agenda and empowering the domestic
entrepreneurial sector. The impact of past efforts has been muted, and greater and more
concerted efforts are needed. Streamlining the administrative requirements to opening a business

17
   Data limitations make it impossible to make reliable inferences on the consumption path of the B40, the drivers of
inclusion and the dynamics of the labor market. Existing Household Surveys are not compatible (2007, 2013). A new
household survey scheduled for 2018 will help deepen the understanding of the dynamics of growth and inclusion,
and the role of the labor market and public policy in determining social outcomes.
18
   The significant inequality today found in the distribution of income derives fundamentally from how labor
income is distributed across the economy; the latest estimated labor earnings Gini coefficient (2014) is essentially
identical to the latest estimated Gini coefficient for all (gross) income (2013): 0.47.
                                                        xvii
would help, as Seychelles’ ranking in the 2017 Doing Business remains below its peers. Several
additional measures are required. First, addressing constraints or limitations that emerge from the
current market structures (notably in tourism, fishing, ICT, banking and finance, and retail) that
block entry. Second, a tightened mandate for SOEs could curtail opportunistic behavior that creates
an uneven playing field. Third, SOEs could also create opportunities by unbundling activities and
opening opportunities for private sector participation. Fourth, the rules of the game in areas where
further economic deepening is sought (e.g., the blue economy) need to be spelled out and
implemented in a transparent manner. Fifth, regulatory and enforcement steps to address the
challenges posed by bank de-risking should be prioritized, as this problem may otherwise grow to
impede the legitimate, needed financial transactions of current and prospective private sector
participants. Lastly, land management and allocation could be used strategically for investments
that foster productivity gains.

41.     Second, a resilient macroeconomic framework provides the foundation for
productivity, participation, and performance. Past cycles and fluctuations in economic activity
have resulted in part from the lack of a consistent institutional framework for macroeconomic
management. Since 2009, Seychelles has advanced in building such an institutional framework.
The process, however, is incomplete, while the macroeconomic stance remains exposed to
setbacks. Multi-year budgeting can help reduce discretion and reduce reliance on ad hoc solutions
that can destabilize the macroeconomic stance over time. Fiscal risks need to be assessed and
mitigating measures taken. Here, progress has been made in building up international reserves, but
SOEs remain a source of fiscal risks despite recent improvements in operational performance. The
tax revenue base needs to be protected and strengthened. Explicit macroeconomic anchors are
needed to guide policy and implementation, such as the public debt/GDP target currently in place,
but could be bolstered to include, for example, the rating of the government debt in international
markets, and the building up of financial buffers to withstand future shocks. Seychelles could
consider setting up a fiscal rule, or instituting a fiscal council, to institutionalize this approach.

42.     Third, public sector spending efficiency is critical both to the productivity agenda and
to the state performance agenda. Alongside attending to sector-specific issues, public sector
spending efficiency can also enhance service delivery and have a further secondary and indirect
impact on both Productivity and Participation (inclusion). Several related constraints need to be
tackled. First, an articulated and realistic National Strategy can help set priorities that guide the
allocation of budgetary resources, policy decisions and institutional improvements. This should
include a sharp prioritization of public investment. Second, the country needs a good monitoring
and evaluation system to track progress on program implementation and impact of the efforts. The
supporting statistical system needs an overhaul and can benefit from the use of modern techniques
to produce timely information. The state agencies provide a good share of the needed information,
and efforts need to be consolidated to integrate and modernize the information base for the state
and country. Third, the state-owned enterprises can benefit from greater efficiency that increases
their capacity to undertake priority investments with their own resources. Fourth, Seychelles needs
to benchmark its most critical development outcomes against relevant comparators. Lastly, a
“smart state” agenda could increase effectiveness in service delivery, and release critical human
resources from the public sector, to advance the productivity drive.

43.    Fourth, taking a more strategic and sustainable approach to social protection is
paramount to meeting the participation challenge. The urgency of this task is evidenced by the
one-off fiscal measures taken in 2016. The constraints that limit inclusion now are well
                                                xviii
documented and can be implemented readily. First, realigning resources from the current focus on
the elderly towards mothers and children will help to prevent the emergence of inter-generational
poverty. Attention to the children of the poor will help reduce the initial learning impediments that
can have lifelong effects. Second, efforts must be made to support mothers by removing barriers
that limit their access to services (transportation, child care, working modalities). This is especially
critical given the high share of working mothers amongst the poor. Third, the current criteria for
eligibility for social assistance could be revised so that those in need are covered. Fourth, the
administrative support for the management of social assistance can improve efficiency by
introducing modern information management tools and integrating data sets to related activities.
Fifth, programs for the elderly can be streamlined and targeted to be more effective.

44.     Fifth, higher quality education and skills development at all levels is fundamental to
meeting the productivity and participation challenges. The opening and widening of
opportunities in a higher productivity economy could leave the local population behind if they do
not have the education and skills required to participate. The shortfalls and key performance
drivers of current educational outcomes are well identified. Addressing the constraints requires a
long-term focus to achieve and sustain the needed transformations, with efforts starting now, as
the government seeks to do. Constraints must be removed in three key areas. First, improving
foundational skills beginning at an early age. Second, providing the population with the relevant
skills for employability. Third, ensuring equal access to skills development. For education to
contribute the most to the Productivity and Participation agendas, it is important to move away
from the current approach of focusing efforts on producing a small and select group of educated
Seychellois, to broadening the presence of highly educated and skilled members of future
generations.

45.     The specific priorities identified are highly interlinked, and many relate to Seychelles’
continuing efforts to strengthen economic governance. The finding of the SCD that there is a
need to improve the enabling environment for the private sector, for example, rests on the evidence
from business surveys and international benchmarking that businesses in Seychelles face
significant operating challenges that government policies and implementation of regulations can
tackle. At a deeper level, however, the strong emphasis on the need to expand and enhance the role
of the private sector relies on evidence and feedback from consultations on Seychelles’ continuing
transition away from the state-centric approach to development. This shift began in the 1990s with
the rise of foreign investment in tourism and fishing, and has gained further momentum in the
reformist post-2008 period. The domestic private sector remains small, however, which points to
remaining constraints that limit opportunities. The contemporary political debate considers how
best to open space for a dynamic domestic private sector to emerge that contributes to the
productivity agenda, and enhances the resilience of the economy and its capacity for inclusion. At
the same time, the agenda to build sturdy macroeconomic institutions is underway, and emphasizes
efficiency gains and greater transparency of the state and its enterprises. This agenda is, in turn,
fundamental to achieving rapid productivity gains and building incomes and employment
opportunities. Table 1 highlights these and other linkages by including numbers (in parentheses)
showing direct interlinkages amongst constraints.

46.     The priorities identified also show the room for continued policy reforms and
institutional improvements to support individuals’ capabilities and abilities to tap economic
opportunities, including the youth. The priorities identified should be placed in the context of
Seychelles’ success to date in building a high-income economy and state services which support a
                                                  xix
high level of human development, overcoming many challenges, including those inherent in the
small size of the country. Yet, conversely, the very smallness of the population places into focus
the need to address urgently the factors that constrain opportunities for Seychellois; every person
constitutes an unusually large share of the citizenry, and their welfare and capacity to contribute
are critical to all. Thus, youth unemployment is a concern, since this is significant at about 14
percent (albeit not exceptionally high by international standards); about half of all the unemployed
are aged 15-24. Furthermore, the low overall visible unemployment rate, of about four percent, is
likely flattened by government employment in the large home-care program (employing about six
percent of the domestic labor force). The prison population is also relatively large, equivalent to
about two percent of the labor force. In addition to these indicators of participation challenges,
income growth appears increasingly concentrated amongst the most highly skilled. Maximizing
individuals’ capabilities and potential is highly interlinked with increasing opportunities and
removing obstacles to them. Amongst the 3Ps, the “participation” pillar captures the interlinked
challenges of providing a solid education for all and strengthening skills, reforming the social
protection system, as well as addressing constraints to accessing high- quality jobs, and reforming
and securing the sustainability of health services.

47.   There are several knowledge gaps which, if filled, could further inform policy reform
and implementation priorities and help assess progress towards achieving the “3Ps”.

48.     First, for effective public policies to back the efficient, sustainable use of Seychelles’
economic factors of production, quantification and scenario analysis of the stocks and flows
of natural (environmental) capital will be essential. A system of permanent monitoring,
including involving the population as active participants, is needed to guide analysis and policy,
as Seychelles continues to base its prosperity on its environmental endowment, especially marine
resources, which are under extreme stress globally. In addition, more data are needed regarding
Seychelles’ other factors of production. An integrated view of labor allocation, migration, and
skills development (for example, a World Bank Skills Measurement Program, “STEP”), can help
meet the challenges of sustaining rapid productivity growth and avoiding bottlenecks due to skills
shortages, while ensuring that Seychellois participate directly in emerging opportunities. Analysis
of the availability of land for sustainable, productive purposes (i.e., Seychelles’ land and property
market functioning), and urban planning priorities including land reclamation strategy, deserves
to be a priority considering the general scarcity of usable land, expanding real estate development
activity, and increasing congestion on Mahé.

49.     Second, for effective overall economic management, there is a need for more primary
and administrative data in both the private and public sectors. This includes enterprise survey
data, market structure (including contracts) and performance analysis, and analysis of how best-
practice sector management could be applied in strategic areas for Seychelles, especially blue
economy (tourism, fisheries), logistics prices and performance (especially of the port), and in
financial sector development. In the public sector, efforts to digitize and consolidate administrative
data and deploy this information to inform policy are also important.

50.     Finally, for evaluating social outcomes, ensuring a high-quality Household Budget
Survey (due for publication in 2018), and consolidated statistics and assessment of the overall
public effort on inclusion, are required, since income inequality is relatively high, but the extent
to which tax incidence and public services and social transfers reduce inequality in overall welfare
is not clear.
                                                 xx
    SEYCHELLES
    SYSTEMATIC COUNTRY DIAGNOSTIC
      PRODUCTIVITY, PARTICIPATION, AND PERFORMANCE




                                             June 2017



1
    Seychelles SCD


    1. Country context




2
    1.1 COUNTRY CONTEXT: A SNAPSHOT OF SEYCHELLES
       Geography & location:
         • Small island state: 115 islands (granitic and coral) with a total land area of only 500 km 2
         • Large ocean state: exclusive economic zone (EEZ) of approximately 1.4 million km 2
            (ocean territory 3000x the size of land territory; 2.5x the size of France)
         • Environmental vulnerabilities due to small island sizes, narrow coastlines
         • Strategic location: at the center of the western Indian Ocean and its tuna migration;
            crossroads of Asia, Middle East and Africa
         • Relatively isolated: 1,500km from nearest neighbors
       Population:
          • 95,000 people of mixed heritage: Creole (African, Asian, European, Indian)
          • Concentrated on inner islands of Mahe (86%), Praslin and La Digue (11% combined)
       History & politics:
          • First inhabited in the 18 th century, French and then British colony
          • Independent since 1976
          • Multiparty democracy since 1993
          • Rising political competition: opposition coalition won parliamentary majority in 2016
       Economy:
          • High income economy (since 2015); only HIE in SSA
          • Per capita GNI of US$14,760 (Atlas method, 2015)
3
    Seychelles in global context: small, land-scarce, and on the
    higher end of the income range amongst small states
    SMALL POPULATION, SMALL LAND TERRITORY, LAND-                                                HIGHER INCOME COUNTRIES/TERRITORIES WITH SIMILARLY
                                       SCARCE (LITTLE ARABLE LAND/PERSON)                                                VERY SMALL POPULATIONS INCLUDE ANDORRA (ADO),
                                                                                                                          ICELAND (ISL), BERMUDA (BMU), ISLE OF MAN (IMY)

                                                Bubble size: arable land/person                                 500




                                                                                                             Thousands
                            10,000
    Population (millions, log scale)




                                                                                                                                    BMU                    LUX




                                                                                         GNI per capita (log scale)
                                       1,000
                                                                                                                                      IMY

                                        100                                                                              50           ADO
                                                                                                                                             ISL
                                                                                                                                                           MAC
                                                                                                                                                   BHS                            TTO
                                                                                                                                                                          CYP
                                         10                                                                                        SYC KNA           MLT
                                                                                                                                                                            ESTBHR
                                                                                                                                             BRB
                                                                                                                                       ATG
                                                                                                                              PLW      GRD          SUR
                                           1                                                                                         VCT        MDV    MNE       GNQ        MUS
                                                                                                                                DMA     LCA
                                                                                                                          5         MHL         BLZ              GUY
                                                                                                                                                                    FJI
                                                                                                                                         WSM
                                           0                                                                                    KIR
                                                                                                                                      FSM    VUT    CPV                     SWZ
                                                          SYC                                                                       TON                SLB
                                                                                                                                                                 BTN
                                                                                                                                                                          TMP
                                                                                                                                         STP
                                           0
                                               0             10          10,000                                                                                  COM

                                                Land area (thousand sq. km, log scale)                                    0
                                                                                                                               0               500                1,000         1,500
                                                                                                                                Population (in thousands, rounded to nearest
                                        Global sample of 214 countries & territories                                                              100,000)
                                        SYC                                                                                Notes: sample of all Small States (populations ≤1m).
                                                                                                                           Sources: WDI.
                                       Sources: WDI.




4
    Seychelles in global context: human development indicators are
    broadly in line with income, extreme poverty is low, but income
    inequality is substantial             POVERTY IS LOW BY INTERNATIONAL
                                                                                                                                                           STANDARDS BUT INEQUALITY IS
                                    HDI IS HIGH AND IN LINE WITH NATIONAL                                                                                         SUBSTANTIAL
                                                  INCOME LEVEL                                                                                    70




                                                                                                        Inequality: latest Gini coefficient estimate
                                    1.0                                                                                                           65
    Human Development Index (HDI)




                                    0.9                                                                                                           60
                                                                                                                                                             SYC
                                                                                                                                                  55
                                    0.8
                                                                                                                                                  50
                                                                                       SYC
                                    0.7                                                                                                           45

                                    0.6                                                                                                           40
                                                                                                                                                  35
                                    0.5                                                                                                                     MUS
                                                                                                                                                  30
                                    0.4
                                                                                                                                                  25

                                    0.3                                                                                                           20
                                          500            2,500    12,500       62,500                                                                  0                    50                   100
                                                         Log of GNI per capita                                                                               Poverty: latest estimated rate at
                                                                                                                                                               international PPP$3.10/day
                                                                                             Notes: “MUS” is Mauritius. Sample of 157 national estimates. Due to differences
                                          Notes: Full global sample, 2015. SYC: 63rd/188.
                                                                                             across countries in the year of estimation and basis of Gini coefficient (income or
                                          Sources: UN HDI.
                                                                                             consumption), this chart provides only an indicative view as to poverty and
                                                                                             inequality in Seychelles in global context.
                                                                                             Sources: PovcalNet.

5
    Seychelles’ historical economic development

    • High income level achieved but growth has been volatile.
    • State-led model ran into constraints that came to a head in
      2008 with a debt default and economic crisis, following
      which Seychelles embarked on major reforms.
    • Now, there are concerns that the less well off are being left
      behind.
    • Seychelles’ environment remains pristine but has fragilities
      (small, isolated islands, with generally narrow coastlines)
      and faces long-term climate-change pressures.




6
    Seychelles’ historical economic development: strong output growth
    in an economy with a long-standing services sector predominance

                           NATIONAL INCOME GROWTH HAS BEEN                                                            SERVICES SECTORS HAVE LONG
                                   STRONG OVER THE LONG RUN                                                            PREDOMINATED IN THE ECONOMY
                                            Annual change
                                                                                                                 90         Primary           Industry           Services
                                            GDP per capita (constant 2005 US$)

                      15,000                                                                                     80




                                                                                    Share of gross value added
                      13,000                                                                                     70
                                                                                                                 60
    Constant (2005) US$




                      11,000

                          9,000                                                                                  50
                          7,000                                                                                  40
                          5,000                                                                                  30
                          3,000                                                                                  20
                          1,000                                                                                  10
                          -1,000                                                                                  0
                                                                                                                   1976 1983 1990 1997 2004 2011
                             Notes: Per capita GDP in constant (2005) US dollars.                                Notes: Industry comprises manufacturing, construction and
                             Sources: WDI.                                                                       utilities. Data have structural break in 2003 (dotted line).
                                                                                                                 Sources: WDI.

7
    Seychelles’ historical economic development: output growth,
    while strong over time, has been volatile
                                                      A HIGHLY VOLATILE GROWTH                                    GROWTH HAS BEEN RELATIVELY STRONG,
                                                                PATTERN                                               BUT ALSO VOLATILE, VS. PEERS
                                                                   Seychelles 1967-2015                                       Average real GDP per capita growth
                                                      20                                                                    (dots) and standard deviations (labelled
     Annual change in real GDP per capita (percent)




                                                                                1977                                                       error bars)
                                                                                                                                             6.1                                 6.7
                                                                                   1978                              10                5.6                           5.9
                                                      15                                                                         4.0                     5.4
                                                                                                                                                   4.5
                                                                                                                           3.2                                                         5.0 6.4
                                                                                                                       8                                       4.0                        4.8
                                                                                                                                                                           3.8
                                                                                                                                                                                                        5.1
                                                      10                                                               6                                                                         4.4
                                                                                          1989 1997                                                                                                    2.9
                                                               1967                                                    4
                                                       5                                                   2011
                                                                        1971           1987
                                                                                          1995                         2
                                                                                                           2014
                                                       0                       1985                                    0
                                                                               1981                 2008
                                                                                                  2007                -2
                                                       -5
                                                                                                                      -4

                                                      -10                                                             -6
                                                            8.0            8.5           9.0            9.5
                                                                                                                      -8
                                                               Natural log of real GDP per capita (constant
                                                                                                                           ATG




                                                                                                                            BLZ
                                                                                                                           VCT

                                                                                                                           LCA
                                                                                                                           MUS
                                                                                                                           KNA

                                                                                                                           SYC
                                                                                                                           GRD
                                                                                                                           DMA




                                                                                                                           BHS

                                                                                                                           BRB
                                                                                                                           GUY




                                                                                                                           SUR
                                                                                                                             ISL

                                                                                                                           TTO



                                                                                                                           JAM
                                                                                2010 US$)

                                                                                                                       Notes: Sample of Seychelles, Mauritius, Caribbean small states,
                                                                                                                       and Iceland. Statistics calculated for full available time series.

                                                                                            Sources: Staff calculations based on WDI data.
8
    1.2 KEY QUESTIONS FOR THE SEYCHELLES SCD


    How does Seychelles:
    • Maintain growth?
    • Address shared prosperity (inclusiveness) concerns?
    • Protect the gains and reinforce social and economic
      resilience?




9
     Seychelles SCD



     2. Growth: the need for more productivity-based growth




10
     2. Growth – the need for more
     productivity-based growth

       2.1 Main finding and implications
       2.2 Overview of growth drivers and key sectors
       2.3 Constraints to more productivity-led growth




11
     2.1 MAIN FINDING AND IMPLICATIONS: HOW CAN
     SEYCHELLES MAINTAIN GROWTH?
      Key finding: growth has been factor-driven (high
      investment and, increasingly, imported labor) with only
      moderate increases in overall productivity.
      If this continues: maintaining current growth rates will
      require ever-increasing investment effort and imported
      labor.
      Implication: there is a need to shift to a more
      productivity-led growth model (Seychelles is now a high
      income economy, and for these economies long-run
      growth is based on productivity gains).
      How? Addressing the constraints that prevent more
      value-addition in tourism and fishing, and to the
      expansion of other private sector opportunities.
12
     Growth has been factor-driven, characterized by high
     investment rates and low total factor productivity growth
              INVESTMENT RATES HAVE BEEN HIGH AND,                                                TOTAL FACTOR PRODUCTIVITY HAS BEEN
                     UNTIL THE 2000S, MUCH OF THE                                                     LOW/NEGATIVE, CONTRIBUTING TO
                INVESTMENT WAS BY THE PUBLIC SECTOR                                                 GROWTH ONLY IN THE LAST FEW YEARS

                      45            Private           Public          Total                            8.0         Contributions to real output
                                                                                                                             growth
                      40                                                                               6.0

                      35                                                                               4.0




                                                                                   Percentage points
                      30
     Percent of GDP




                                                                                                       2.0
                      25
                                                                                                       0.0
                      20
                                                                                                       -2.0
                      15
                                                                                                       -4.0
                      10                                                                                         Total factor productivity
                                                                                                       -6.0      Human capital (inc. labor migrants)
                       5                                                                                         Physical Capital
                                                                                                       -8.0      Output
                       0
                           1983    1991       1996    2001      2008     2013                               1983 1988 1993 1998 2003 2008 2013
                           Notes: Gross Fixed Capital Formation; excludes 1987-9                              Sources: Staff estimates.
                           and 2004-5 due to missing data.
                           Sources: WDI.

13
     Imported labor has increased rapidly, linked with much of the
     output growth achieved since the mid-2000s
      SEYCHELLES HAS BEGUN IMPORTING A                          …ASSOCIATED WITH MUCH OF THE INCREASE
        LARGE AMOUNT OF FOREIGN LABOR…                            IN TOTAL OUTPUT OVER THE LAST DECADE
                                             Total
     100,000                          +14.7% Seychellois                  Decomposition of change in real
                                             population           30%      output per permanent resident
      90,000
                                                                                     population
                                                  Total           20%
      80,000                                      Seychellois
                                                  empoyed         10%
      70,000
                                                  Labor            0%
      60,000                                      migrants
                                                                 -10%
      50,000
                                               +29.5%
                                                                 -20%
      40,000
                                                                 -30%
      30,000

      20,000                                       +540.1%

      10,000
                                                                   Demographics (local workers/population)
           0                                                       Labor migration (total/local workers)
                       2002                   2015
                                                                   Domestic labor productivity (output/local worker)
         Sources: Staff estimates based on data from NHRDC,        Notes: Chart shows associations – not causal relationships -
         Ministry of Home Affairs, UN.                             between changes in real output, local demography, labor
                                                                   migration, and labor productivity.
                                                                   Sources: Staff calculations.
14
     Implication: maintaining strong per capita income growth will
     require a shift towards faster productivity growth
     WITHOUT A RISE IN PRODUCTIVITY, INVESTMENT …AND STRONGER PRODUCTIVITY WOULD
          WOULD EVENTUALLY HAVE TO RISE TO         HELP SHIELD PER CAPITA INCOME
       UNREALISTIC LEVELS TO MAINTAIN GROWTH…     GROWTH SHOULD INVESTMENT RATES
                                                      NORMALIZE TO THE HIE NORM
                                             Investment effort for 3.5% per                                       Per capita income growth with
                                  60%
                                                 capita output growth                                          reduction in investment ratio to high
                                                                                                               income economy average (21%) by
                                            At recent TFP growth rate
                                  50%                                                                3.5%                      2030
                                            (about 0.8%)
      Investment (share of GDP)




                                                                                                     3.0%                  Doubling TFP growth
                                  40%                                                                                      to 1.5% by 2030
                                                                                                     2.5%
                                  30%                                                                2.0%
                                           Doubling TFP growth to 1.5% by 2030

                                  20%                                                                1.5%
                                                                                                                  At recent TFP growth (about 0.8%)
                                                                                                     1.0%
                                  10%
                                                                                                     0.5%

                                  0%                                                                 0.0%
                                    2016 2021 2026 2031 2036 2041 2046                                      2016 2021 2026 2031 2036 2041 2046
                                  Notes: Given large number of assumptions made, these are indicative projections for a stylized economy similar to Seychelles.
                                  Kinks in investment and growth rate paths are due to population projection changes.
                                  Source: Staff calculations using World Bank, DEC/MFM Long Term Growth Model (LTGM).
15
     2.2 OVERVIEW OF GROWTH DRIVERS AND KEY SECTORS

     The following sub-section examines:

     - Export sector: a narrow goods production base; strong tourism

     - Growth contributions: services (tourism but also ICT)

     -   Key sector overview: tourism

     -   Key sector overview: fishing

     -   Key sector overview: SOEs

     -   Overall business environment

     -   Opportunity: ICT

     -   Offshore financial sector

16
     Seychelles’ economy is primarily services-oriented, led in
     recent years by ICT, tourism and real estate activities
     THE ECONOMY IS HIGHLY SERVICES-ORIENTED…                         …SINCE 2009, RECORDED SECTORAL OUTPUT
                                                                          HAS INCREASED THE MOST IN ICT, TOURISM,
             Percent                                                 Percentage     AND REAL ESTATE
                                        Nominal value added
      90                                                             points
             of total                                                               Top 5 sectors’ direct contributions to cumulative
                                        Employment                     8                 real value-added growth, 2009-2014
      80                                                               7
                                                                       6
      70
                                                                       5
      60                                                               4
                                                                       3
      50
                                                                       2
      40                                                               1
                                                                       0
      30




                                                                              ICT




                                                                                                                                             repair of motor vehicles and
                                                                                         Tourism




                                                                                                                 Professional, scientific,
                                                                                                   Real estate




                                                                                                                                                                            All other (19) sectors
                                                                                                                                              Wholesale and retail trade;
                                                                                                                   technical activities
      20




                                                                                                                                                     motorcycles
      10

       0
              Primary         Secondary           Tertiary
        Notes: Latest available figures for output (2014) and
        employment (2015); direct contributions.                    Notes: “Tourism” denotes accommodation & food services.
        Sources: NBS (National Accounts Statistics; Seychelles in   Sources: Staff calculations based on NBS data.
        Figures).

17
     Export sector: Seychelles exports few products (mainly canned tuna);
     tourism makes services exports relatively large for a small island state
                                  SEYCHELLES HAS ONE OF THE MOST                                   …BUT DUE TO TOURISM, SEYCHELLES’
                                 CONCENTRATED GOODS EXPORT BASKETS...                               SERVICES EXPORTS ARE LARGER THAN
                                                                                                       AVERAGE FOR SMALL STATES
                            1
                                                                                                        Luxembourg
                                                                                                               Malta
                                                                                                            Maldives
                           0.8                                                                    Macao SAR, China
                                                                                                          Seychelles
                                                                                                               Palau
      Square root of HHI




                                                                                                             Cyprus
                           0.6                                                                           Cabo Verde
                                                                                                      Bahamas, The
                                                                                                              Belize
                           0.4                                                                                    Fiji
                                                                                                             Estonia
                                                                                                             Iceland
                                                                                                           Mauritius
                           0.2                                                                               Samoa
                                                                                                      Sao Tome and…
                                                                                                             Bahrain
                            0                                                                       Solomon Islands
                                                                                                             Guyana
                                 18                  23                28                    33
                                                                                                           Suriname
                                                     ln GDP (current US$)                         Brunei Darussalam

                                      Non-small states   Small states       Seychelles                                  0     0.5     1      1.5       2

                           Notes: y-axis is Herfindahl-Hirschman index normalized, with higher     Notes: Sample of small states; x-axis is services
                           values indicating more concentration.                                   exports relative to GDP.
                           Sources: UN COMTRADE data.                                              Sources: WDI data.


18
     Tourism: numbers have boomed, due mainly to Seychelles
     tapping new markets and rising airline connectivity…
                                      Europe remains the most important tourism                                               300        …but other markets have been growing
                                       market (share of visitor arrivals, 2015)…                                                                      rapidly…
                                                                                                                              250
           Middle Other




                                                                                                      Thousands of arrivals
                    8%                                                                                                                            EU & Switzerland   Other
           East &
          N. Africa                                                                                                           200
            11%
                                                                           Germany
                   East                                                       13% Italy
                                                                                                                              150
                   Asia                           EU &
                                                                       France      8%
                   7%                           Switzerland                                                                   100
                                                   57%                  14%
          South
          Asia                                                                                                                 50
           3%                                                                             Other EU
                                           Russia,                     UK                   12%
          S. Africa &                     Ukraine &                    6% Switzerland                                           0
            SWIO                           Belarus                            4%
              9%
                                                                                                                                    2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014
                                             5%


                             35     …from diverse sources (visitor origins, excl. EU                                                     …benefitting from rising airline seat capacity
                                                 and Switzerland)…
                                                                            Middle East & N. Africa
                             30                                                                                               2015
     Thousands of arrivals




                                                                            S. Africa & SWIO
                             25                                             All others                                                                                       Air Austral
                             20                                             East Asia                                                                                        Emirates
                                                                                                                              2014                                           Air Seychelles
                             15                                             Russia, Ukraine                                                                                  Ethiopian Airlines
                                                                            & Belarus                                                                                        Kenya Airways
                             10                                                                                                                                              Condor
                                                                            South Asia
                                                                                                                              2013                                           Mihin Lanka
                             5
                                                                                                                                                                             Etihad
                             0
                                  2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014                                                            0    100,000 200,000 300,000 400,000 500,000 600,000

                              Notes: “Market” refers to arrival data on visitors’ “country of residence”.
                              Sources: Staff calculations based on NBS and WDI data.

19
Tourism:…but as small-scale accommodation has boomed, quality
concerns have increased, and spending per tourist (yield) has declined…

     • Small-scale (self-catering)                                                                    Number of beds
                                                                        6000
       accommodation supply has
                                                                        5000                                 2000     2016
       increased rapidly.
                                                                        4000
     • Growth has included an informal
                                                                        3000
       sector of unregistered
       accommodation, including those                                   2000

       marketed directly through shared                                 1000

       economy platforms.                                                            0
                                                                                           Large hotel Small hotel       Guest           Self
     • Service standards are highly                                                                                      house         catering
       variable.
     • Spending per tourist (yield) appears                                               While tourist numbers have surged,
                                                                                                  yields have declined
       to be under downward pressure.                                               300                                                       2,500
                                                                                                     Yield          Tourist arrivals




                                                                                                                                                      Receipts/tourist (US$)
     • The government’s policy focus is
                                                             Arrivals (thousands)
                                                                                                                                              2,000
       now shifting towards preserving                                              200
                                                                                                                                              1,500
       Seychelles’ global brand as an
                                                                                                                                              1,000
       upmarket destination.                                                        100
     • A moratorium on new permits for                                                                                                        500
       large hotels was recently extended                                            0                                                        0
       until 2020.                                                                        2000   2003   2006        2009     2012      2015
                           Yield = gross tourism receipts / tourist arrivals; data begin 2009 and
                           should be treated as indicative only.
                           Sources: Staff calculations based on NBS and WDI data.
20
     Tourism: …and the sector faces a challenge to further enrich
     the tourist experience and address competitiveness shortfalls
     •   International benchmarking points to                 TOURISM COMPETITIVENESS:
                                                   STRONG IN ENVIRONMENT, TOURIST INFRASTRUCTURE;
         key sector strengths being world class         WEAK IN PRICING, CULTURAL RESOURCE USE
         natural assets, infrastructure, and the                     Seychelles           Sri Lanka          Mauritius
         prioritization of travel and tourism.                                      Business
                                                                                   environment
     •   However, the Seychelles is ranked a                Cultural resources
                                                                                   6.0
                                                                                                      Safety & security
         low 123/141 countries for price                                            5.0
                                                    Natural resources               4.0                       Health & hygiene
         competitiveness and 138 for cultural                                       3.0
         and business travel.                      Tourist service                  2.0
                                                                                                                      HR & labor market
                                                    infrastructure                  1.0
     •   The business environment is                                                0.0
         hampered by bureaucracy and high            Ground/port
                                                                                                                      ICT readiness
         costs, particularly surrounding            infrastructure

         recruitment of expatriate staff. There                                                                Prioritization of
                                                     Air infrastructure
                                                                                                              travel & tourism
         are also unofficial trading practices
                                                                Environmental                         International
         and competition issues that create                     sustainability                          openness
                                                                                      Price
         barriers to entry for smaller                                            competitiveness
         enterprises.
                                                   Notes: Subindex scores shown (1-7, best).
     •   More needs to be done in terms of         Sources: World Economic Forum Travel & Tourism Competitiveness
                                                   Report (2015).
         increasing the proportion of protected
         areas, and in increasing the depth and
         breadth of products in natural areas,
         in addition to access to them.

21
Fisheries: there is scope to significantly increase the sector’s value-
added contribution and a need to place fishing on a sustainable footing
Limited local value addition:                               FISH PRODUCTION: ALREADY AT HIGH
• Fish production is dominated by canned tuna                    LEVELS; LITTLE VALUE-ADDITION
   (approximately 90 percent by volume), a low value
   product processed in a free-trade zone.                                             Other
• Limited value is added locally: Seychelles is a major
                                                             50                        Artisanal & semi-industrial
   global tuna hub for the EU fleet, but more than 75% of           Thousand
                                                                    metric tons        Canned tuna
   the fish landed is immediately transshipped.              45
• Asian fleets fish the EEZ for high-value products (e.g.
                                                             40
   sashimi-grade) but have limited links to the economy
   other than paying license fees (fishing license fees      35
   from all sources are approx.1% of GDP).
                                                             30
• The artisanal fisheries value-chains are mostly very
   short and involve minimal handling, processing and        25
   marketing.
                                                             20
Sustainability concerns:
• Yellowfin tuna is being overexploited in the western       15
   Indian Ocean and catches are declining. Yellowfin
                                                             10
   tuna is the leading catch for the industrial purse-seine
   fishery and the second-leading for semi-industrial         5
   fisheries in Seychelles.
                                                              0
• Decreasing catches in some key species of the
                                                               1990 1994 1998 2002 2006 2010 2014
   demersal fisheries (bourgeois, bonite, carangues, sea
   cucumber, lobster) are a worrying sign of                  Sources: Seychelles Fisheries Authority (SFA).

   overexploitation.

22
     State Owned Enterprise (SOE) sector: houses a significant share of
     Seychelles’ financial and human resources, provides basic public
     services, and also includes commercial operations
     •   19 SOEs operate across much
                                               SOE AGGREGATE FINANCIAL STATISTICS
         of the economy: utilities, public
         bus and inter-island transport,       % GDP                    2013                2014                2015
         remote island management,
         port, air (airport & airline),        Assets                  118%                 127%                122%
         wholesale & retail trade,             Liabilities              53%                 60%                  59%
         finance (banking & pension
         fund), oil.                           Net income                2%                  4%                   6%

     •   Employ about 11 percent of           Notes: Results are sector aggregates. There are large differences amongst SOEs.
                                              Sources: PEMC via Ministry of Finance, Trade and Economic Planning.
         the workforce and about 20
         percent of degree-holders    •       Operational and governance performance is variable
         (lower-bound estimate).              but overall the sector currently has a net operating
         Average earnings in SOEs are         surplus, helped by lower energy costs in recent years.
         45 percent above the average
                                      •       Mandates are blurred and oversight has been weak.
         in the private sector.
                                              Some SOEs have diversified their operations
     •   No consolidated, official value-     considerably, and there are important transfers within
         added statistics exist. A crude      and amongst SOEs.
         estimate places the SOE
                                          •   Fiscal risks from government’s explicit and implicit
         contribution to gross value-
                                              contingent liabilities to the sector are significant.
         added at 10-15 percent.


23
     Overall business environment: the economy is less internationally
     competitive than would be expected from income level
     •     Seychelles fares worse in global competitiveness rankings than would be expected
           based on its income level.
     •     Some slippage in recent years: from 76 th rank in WEF Global Competitiveness Index
           when first included in 2012/13, to 97th/140 in 2015/16.
     •     Aside from small market size, Seychelles’ competitiveness is hampered by shortfalls in
           its “efficiency enhancers”, especially finance and skills.
                                                                                                                                  Score
         Seychelles’ comparative performance and subindex scores in                                               Rank/140   (1-7, best)
                                                                                                    Overall GCI         97           3.9
         World Economic Forum Global Competitiveness Index (GCI)                         Basic requirements             52           4.8
                                                                                                  Institutions          61           4.0
              Full sample (140 countries) Seychelles    Small states
                                                                                               Infrastructure           47           4.5
                                                                                        Macro environment               61           4.8
            Per capita income (US$,




              100,000                                                         Health and primary education              92           3.8
                                                                                        Efficiency enhancers           108           3.5
                                 SYC
                                                                               Higher education and training            92           3.8
                    logged)




               10,000
                                                                                   Goods market efficiency              65           4.3
                                                                                    Labor market efficiency             43           4.5
                1,000                                                        Financial market development              106           3.4
                                                                                    Technological readiness             71           3.8
                   100                                                                           Market size           140           1.4
                       3.0            4.0           5.0            6.0 Innovation and sophistication factors            70           3.6
                             Global Competitiveness Index Score                      Business sophistication            62           4.0
                                                                                                   Innovation           87           3.2
         Notes: “Small states” comprise all countries in the sample with populations under 1.5m.
         Sources: Staff calculations based on IMF WEO; World Economic Forum (WEF).

24
     Business environment: key challenges include credit, electricity,
     contracting issues, and labor productivity
               Rankings on Doing Business topics                                                   Distance to Frontier scores on Doing Business topics
                      Overall rank: 93rd/190                                                       Scale: Score 0 center (lowest), Score 100 outer edge
     Scale: Rank 190 center (lowest), Rank 1 outer edge (best)                                                           (best practice)
                                                                                                                             Starting a
                                   Starting a Business                                                                     Business (78.6)
                                          (137)
                                                                                                                                                Dealing with
                                                               Dealing with                              Resolving
           Resolving Insolvency                                                                                                                Construction
                                                            Construction Permits                      Insolvency (52.1)
                   (62)                                                                                                                        Permits (60.2)
                                                                   (146)

      Enforcing Contracts                                                                        Enforcing                                             Getting Electricity
                                                                   Getting Electricity (140)
             (129)                                                                             Contracts (51.3)                                              (54.7)



 Trading across Borders                                            Registering Property
          (84)                                                             (66)                 Trading across                                          Registering
                                                                                                Borders (71.8)                                         Property (68.7)


              Paying Taxes (32)                             Getting Credit (118)
                                                                                                         Paying Taxes                          Getting Credit
                                   Protecting Minority                                                      (32.0)                                 (40.0)
                                    Investors (106)
                                                                                                                             Protecting
                                                                                   Sources: World Bank.                   Minority Investors
                                                                                                                                (50.0)
                 WEF survey results: the most problematic factors for doing business
                                                        0                     5                        10                 15                   20                    25
                              Access to financing
                    Poor work ethic in labor force
               Inadequately educated workforce
            Inefficient government bureaucracy
             Inadequate supply of infrastructure                                                  From the list of factors, respondents were asked to select the
                     Restrictive labor regulations
                                        Corruption                                                five most problematic for doing business in their country and
                                  Policy instability                                              to rank them between 1 (most problematic) and 5. The score
                    Foreign currency regulations
                                   Crime and theft                                                corresponds to the responses weighted according to their
                                          Tax rates                                               rankings.
                 Insufficient capacity to innovate                                                                                              Sources: WEF
                                Poor public health
                    Complexity of tax regulations
                                            Inflation
                   Government instability/coups
25
     ICT: Seychelles is doing well but still below potential
     Seychelles’ ICT successes include that it has multiple operators (4), connectivity to international
     submarine cable (since 2012), its use of PPPs (SEAS consortium) and effective regulation of the sector.
                                                                                                  Seychelles’ ICT challenges and
                                                                                                  opportunities include:
                                                                                                  •   Addressing affordability of voice
                                                                                                      and data services, which
       COMPLEMENTS




                                                                                                      remains a challenge. Bringing
                                                                                                      prices down, especially for
                                                                                                      international connectivity, so
                                                                                                      Seychelles is competitive with
                                                                                                      ICT hub neighbors.
                                                                                                  •   Introducing resilience,
                                                                                                      increasing supply of bandwidth
                                                                                                      and strengthening competition
                                                                                                      by rolling out a second
                                                                                                      international undersea fiber-
                                                                                                      optic cable.
                                                                  Complements: Index of           •   Building Seychelles’ profile as a
                                                                  quality of institutions, skills     center for offshore data storage,
                                                                  and regulations.                    by developing ocean-cooled
                                                                  Technology: Digital                 data centers and promoting
                                                                  Adoption Index - businesses,
                                                                                                      cybersecurity and data
                                                                  people and governments.
                                                                                                      protection.
                 TECHNOLOGY                                                                       •   Addressing regulatory gaps,
                                                                                                      especially in sector competition.
                                                                                                  •   Strengthening IT skills of the
              Sources: World Bank (World Development Report, “Digital Dividends”, 2016).              labor force.
26
     ICT: continued eGovernment reforms are needed for efficient and
     effective delivery of services and addressing social inclusion
• Seychelles is generally performing well in    Indicator                       Rank      %
  ICT rankings.
                                                eGovernment Development      86 / 193    45%
• However in eGovernment, while                 Index 2016
  Seychelles is not slipping back, it may not
  be keeping up with competitive ICT hubs.      eParticipation Index 2016    107 / 193   55%

                                                Networked Readiness Index    74 / 143    52%
• “Next Generation” measures are needed         2015 (NRI)
  and the scope for growth is considerable.
                                                Importance of ICT to         59 / 143    41%
• Priorities are:                               Government vision (NRI)
     • Expanding Government networks and
        connectivity                            Government Online Service    90 / 143    63%
     • Increasing eGovernment delivery of       Index (NRI)
        services                                Government Success in ICT    82 / 143    57%
     • Reducing the Digital Divide and          Promotion (NRI)
        addressing Social Inclusion
     • Establishing adequate cybersecurity      Impact of ICT on Access to   78 / 143    55%
                                                Basic Services (NRI)
        regulations, policies and incident
        response capacity                       ICT Use and Government       55 / 143    38%
                                                Efficiency (NRI)


27
     Offshore financial sector: an uncertain outlook in view of
     global bank de-risking
     •   Seychelles respondent banks are being “de-risked” by US and European
         correspondent banks - notably affecting US Dollar and Euro clearing.
     •   Government is concerned that this has the potential to cause financial stability
         issues and spill over into the real economy.
     •   The drivers of the problem are unclear: whether simply a matter of
         correspondent banks’ internal policy (i.e. given the low volume of business
         from Seychelles), or concern about money laundering risk.
     •   Anti-money laundering (AML) regulations to international standard are not
         being implemented in practice for Seychelles International Business
         Companies (IBCs).
     •   In recent years, Seychelles’ IBCs have been implicated in a number of high-
         profile international corruption scandals and bank frauds.
     •   To be a driver of growth for Seychelles in the global context of higher
         disclosure and compliance requirements to combat crime and terrorism, the
         sector would likely need to shift away from its current “mass market” model of
         registering and providing basic company secretariat services to IBCs. This
         would require a robust domestic regulatory and enforcement system to
         prevent reputational risks to Seychelles.
28
     2.3 CONSTRAINTS TO MORE PRODUCTIVITY-LED GROWTH
     - Credit
        • Do savings flow to Seychelles’ most efficient existing firms or most
          promising new business opportunities?
     - Energy
        • As a key input for many productive activities, is overall waste minimized
          and is it allocated to where it is most needed?
     - Logistics and connectivity costs
        • Can firms get the inputs they need and access international markets?
        • Can workers get to where they are most productive?
     - Private sector enabling environment
        • Does a lack of competition (e.g. due to regulatory constraints or other
          factors) lock existing capital and labor in incumbents, which may have a
          lower level of productivity? If so, reallocating labor and capital to other firms
          would raise TFP.
        • A lack of competitive pressure also may lead to lower levels of TFP growth
          for incumbents (less pressure to be efficient and innovate).


29
     CONSTRAINT: credit
     Constraint:
     High cost and limited availability of credit hampers the                  Low private credit / GDP
     opening and functioning of businesses.                    120          Seychelles     Peer group median
     Evidence for constraint:                                  100
     • Credit is ranked as a top constraint in business
                                                                80




                                                               Percent
        environment surveys.
     • The ratio of private bank credit to GDP is low for the   60
        level of income, interest rates are high, and banks     40
        are very profitable.                                    20
     Drivers of constraint:
                                                                 0
     • Ample opportunities for banks to invest elsewhere –
                                                                    2005      2007     2009     2011    2013
        only 36% of total bank assets are loans and
        advances (as of 2016, though this is up from 28% in    12           High lending-deposit spread
        2011) vs 20% in government securities.                               Seychelles      Peer group median
                                                               10
     • Evidence gap: plausibly, there is a lack of bankable
        projects, due to lack of skills of potential            8



                                                               Percent
        entrepreneurs or, alternatively, due to other           6
        constraints that limit entry in the economy, including
                                                                4
        lack of a wider system to foster entrepreneurship.
        The salience of this supply-side limitation is          2
        corroborated by the limited uptake of existing MSME     0
        support schemes.                                           2005       2007     2009    2011     2013
     • The domestic savings rate does not appear to be a           Sources: Finstat.
        binding constraint, based on the economy’s
        demonstrated ability to sustain high investment rates,
        fueled by strong FDI into tourism.
30
     CONSTRAINT: energy
     Constraint:
     • Electricity prices are high, particularly                          HIGH ELECTRICITY COSTS
       for businesses.
                                                                               Tariff (USc/kWh)     Opex (USc/KWh)

     Evidence for constraint:                                40
                                                                                      Seychelles
     • High fuel and electricity costs                       35
       negatively impact the ease of doing
                                                             30
       business.                                                   Mauritius
     • Costs are high compared even to                       25                                         Madagascar




                                                   USc/kWh
       other small island states in the region.              20

                                                             15
     Drivers of constraint:
     • Seychelles relies mostly on imported                  10
       fuel oils, and hence is vulnerable to                  5
       global price volatility and supply
       disruption.                                            0
                                                                         32                95               164
     • Electricity prices for industry are high              Sources: World Bank, Doing Business Indicators (2016).
       because of cross-subsidies to keep
       prices down to households.
     • The sector is subsidized, which may
       reduce the efficiency of the operator.
31
     CONSTRAINT: transport and connectivity costs
                                                        HIGH INVESTMENT GOODS AND CONSTRUCTION PRICES
 Constraint:                                                      Seychelles                 Mauritius
                                                                  Comoros                    Madagascar
 • Logistics and connectivity costs raise                         São Tomé & Principe        Caribbean islands (avg.)
   domestic prices and reduce opportunities                        120




                                                 Relative prices (world
   to compete in international markets, while                      100
   options to produce for domestic                                  80




                                                       avg.=100)
                                                                    60
   consumption are limited by the small size                        40
   of the market.                                                   20
                                                                     0
 Evidence for constraint:                                                 Gross fixed Machinery and Construction
                                                                             capital   equipment
 • Prices in key production sectors are high                               formation
    relative to world averages and, in some             Notes: Point estimates of price levels relative to world averages.
                                                        Sources: International Comparison Program.
    cases, to those in benchmarked peers.
                                                                          HIGH PORT CHARGES DOMINATE COST TO IMPORT
                                                     Tanzania, Dar
 Drivers of constraint:                               es Salaam
                                                      South Africa,
 • Exogenous: very small market size and                Durban
                                                       Seychelles,
    relatively isolated location.                        Victoria                                   Port charges
 • Total estimated cost to import is not high,       Mozambique,
                                                        Maputo                                      Other border compliance
    helped by the proximity of the port in               Mauritius,
                                                        Port Louis
    Mahe, but the port cost component is high.        Madagascar,
                                                                                                    Documentary compliance

 • ICT, which could play a major role to               Toamasina
                                                                                                    Domestic transport
                                                         Comoros,
    reduce costs, has expanded, but not as                Moroni

    much as it could.                                                    0      500     1000     1500    2000      2500
                                                               Sources: Doing Business (2016).

32
     CONSTRAINT: private sector enabling environment
     Constraint:
     • Aspects of opening & operating a business are difficult (e.g. in the vertically
       integrated tourism sector); limited state capacity to regulate, monitor and evaluate
       strategically where productive resources are allocated, coupled with the historical
       dominance of SOEs, has reinforced the high concentration of resources.

     Evidence for constraint:
     • Low scores and flat or deteriorating trends in Doing Business indicators.
     • Low WEF GCI scores on the business environment.
     • Governance indicators with regard to regulation.

     Drivers of constraint:
     • Vested interests and high vertical integration in some areas: block entry or impede
        operation.
     • Market concentration: market dominance of a few incumbents in some sectors
        reduces the incentives of incumbents to innovate. E.g. in tourism, ICT.
     • Reportedly, SOEs seek to compensate financially for the non-commercial
        mandates, limiting new business opportunities that may limit entry by the private
        sector.
     • Evidence gap: land scarcity, as demonstrated by high-cost reclamation
        developments, but the property market is opaque (e.g. there are no public price
        data).
33
     Seychelles SCD

     Productivity, Participation, and
     Performance


     3. Inclusion: equipping Seychellois to participate in a
        changing, high income economy




34
     3. INCLUSION – equipping
     Seychellois to participate in a
     changing, high income economy
     3.1 Main finding
     3.2 Current situation and dynamics
     3.3 Key constraints to inclusiveness




35
     3.1 MAIN FINDING: HOW CAN SEYCHELLES ADDRESS
     INCLUSIVENESS?

       Key finding: the growth path and policies have eliminated
       poverty by international standards. But earnings are
       distributed unevenly, placing a heavy burden on social
       policy and public expenditure to counter inequality.
       Implication: strengthen the focus on expanding
       opportunities for, and capabilities of, the least well-off.
       How? Strengthen education quality, improve jobs
       flexibility, raise the effectiveness of social assistance,
       improve the efficiency of healthcare.




36
     3.2 Current situation: extreme poverty has been eliminated. Poverty as
     officially defined is high, consistent with significant income inequality
 • Extreme poverty as defined                                                    ESTIMATED POVERTY RATES USING
                                                                                 SEYCHELLES’ NATIONAL POVERTY LINE
   for international
   comparisons is statistically                                                 100
   negligible: Seychelles has




                                     Poverty rate at Seychelles' line ($13.03
                                                                                90
   eliminated extreme poverty
                                                                                80
   at the $1.90/day (headcount:
                                                                                70
   1.1%) and $3.10/day
                                                                                60



                                                   2011 PPP)
   (headcount: 2.5%)                                                                                        Costa Rica

   international lines.                                                         50                             Chile


 • Seychelles’ national                                                         40        Latvia           Seychelles
                                                                                30                            Greece
   definition of poverty is                                                           Hungary
   broadly in line with those of                                                20        Lithuania
                                                                                                                      Portugal
                                                                                                                                         United States
   other High Income                                                            10
                                                                                              Estonia Czech Rep.
   Economies (HIEs) and does                                                     0
   not imply that poverty in                                                          0            500        1,000        1,500        2,000        2,500
                                                                                       Average monthly per capita income (intl $ at 2011 PPP)
   Seychelles is unusually                                                      Notes: As of latest available HH survey data (2013, for Seychelles), for
   prevalent.                                                                   156 countries available in PovCalnet.
                                                                                Sources: World Bank staff calculations based on PovCalnet.


37
     The poorest households in Seychelles…
                             …have higher dependency ratios…                                                       …have heads who are less likely to be full-time
         0.8                                                                                                          employed, and more likely to be self- or un-
                          0.71*** 0.69*** 0.71***
                0.68***                                                                                  Full-time for wage/salary  employed…
         0.7
                                                    0.58                                        100      Self-employed
         0.6                                               0.52                                                                                                                            80.45    80.33
                                                                                                 80      Unemployed
         0.5                                                      0.46
                                                                         0.41
 Ratio




                                                                                                                                     54.75                      57.32        58.29
         0.4                                                                    0.36             60         53.77***50.19***
                                                                                                                            47.79***                  47.42




                                                                                                %
                                                                                        0.26        41.80***
         0.3                                                                                     40
         0.2
                                                                                                 20      13.64***   9.68**    7.38       7.54                         3.98
         0.1                                                                                             5.12***    2.47**     1.99      1.14
                                                                                                                                                 5.21
                                                                                                                                                    1.48
                                                                                                                                                           4.65
                                                                                                                                                              1.42      0.66
                                                                                                                                                                                6.02
                                                                                                                                                                                       0
                                                                                                                                                                                              3.95
                                                                                                                                                                                                 0.95
                                                                                                                                                                                                         4.86
                                                                                                                                                                                                            0.38
          0                                                                                         0
                  0 - 10 - 20 - 30 - 40 - 50 - 60 - 70 - 80 - 90 -                                       0 - 10 - 20 - 30 - 40 - 50 - 60 - 70 - 80 - 90 -
                 10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 100%                                               10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 100%
                                    Income decile                                                                                               Income decile


                           …are unlikely to have heads with                                                 …are even more likely than usual to be female-
                           university/postgraduate education                                                                  headed…
                                                                                                 70     66.13**65.40**                65.63**                        65.54
         30                                                                                                                                                63.12
                                                                                        26.12                                58.34               59.49                         57.35
                                                                                                 60                                                                                         53.01
         25
                                                                                                 50                                                                                                     43.72
         20                                                                     17.59
                                                                                                 40
                                                                                                %
%




         15                                                                                      30
                                                                         8.91                    20
         10                                                       6.92
                3.43
                                  4.37                                                           10
         5                2.14                             2.17
                                          1.02      1.58
                                                                                                    0
         0                                                                       0 - 10 - 20 - 30 - 40 - 50 - 60 - 70 - 80 - 90 -
               0 - 10%        20 - 30%        40 - 50%   60 - 70%               10% 20% 30% 40% 50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 100%
                                                                            80 - 90%
                                               Income decile                                            Income decile
  Notes (all charts) : significance levels in bottom 40% groups indicate the differences between mean value
  and that of the upper 60% group. * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1% level.
  Sources: World Bank staff calculations based on HBS data.


38
     Employment earnings are important even for the poorest households,
     which also benefit from social protection and access to housing
•     Employment is the single most
                                                                             Share of total reported gross income by HH
      important source of income even for                                                    income decile
                                                           100
      the poorest 10% of households…
                                                                        75
•     …and is progressively more                                        50
      important for wealthier households -                              25

      high employment earnings are the                                  0
                                                                              0-    10 -   20 -   30 -   40 -   50 -   60 -   70 -   80 - 90 -
      key to progressing from the B40.                                       10%    20%    30%    40%    50%    60%    70%    80%    90% 100%
                                                                         Rental income                          Other
•     Strong access to housing plays a                                   Imputed rental value of housing        Social protection income
      major role in supporting the living                                Employment income

      standards of households at the                                    15      Mean reported gross income per adult
      bottom of the income distribution                                           equivalent, by HH income decile


                                              Thousands SCR per month
                                                                                   Renting
      (high share of imputed housing value                                         Imputed housing rental value
                                                                        10
      in mix of reported incomes at the                                            Social protection & welfare
      bottom of the distribution).                                                 Employment
                                                                         5
•     Social protection income, while an
      important income source for the
                                                                         0
      poorest households, is not targeted                                      1       2      3      4      5      6      7      8      9
      (social protection and welfare income                                  Notes: In chart 2, top decile is excluded for visual clarity.
      in absolute terms rises across the                                     Sources: World Bank staff calculations based on HBS (2013).

      first 7 HH income deciles).
39
     Worst-off households are less likely to be involved in tourism
     •   The worst-off HHs are less      THE WORST-OFF HOUSEHOLDS ARE LESS LIKELY TO HAVE HEADS
         likely to have heads in the         EMPLOYED IN TOURISM, AND MORE LIKELY TO HAVE HEADS
                                                     EMPLOYED IN AGRICULTURE & FISHING
         large, and recently fast-
         growing, tourism sector.                     Percentage of Households by heads' job sectors
                                           18
     •   The worst-off HHs are more        16
                                                                        15.7     15.7     15.7                                15.4
                                                                                                                     14.6              14.1
         likely to have heads                                                                      13.4
                                           14
         employed in agriculture and                           11.5
                                           12                                                               11.1
         fishing.
                                           10


                                          %
     •   However, low primary                 8      5.8**
         sector incomes do not drive          6
                                                  5.7**
         poverty overall, as only a                          3.4                        3.6               3.2
                                              4                       3.1
         small share of workers are                                            1.9               1.9
                                                                                                                                     1.3
                                              2                                                                    1.0      0.9
         employed in the primary
                                              0
         sector (about 3 percent).                  0-       10 -     20 -       40 - 50 - 60 - 70 - 80 - 90 -
                                                                               30 -
                                                   10%       20%      30%        50% 60% 70% 80% 90% 100%
                                                                               40%
     •   Having a head working in
                                                                               Income decile
         other sectors (e.g. industry,                   Agriculture and fishing       Hotels and food service
         other services) is not           Notes (all charts) : significance levels in bottom 40% groups indicate the differences
                                          between mean value and that of the upper 60% group. * significant at 10%; **
         associated statistically with    significant at 5%; *** significant at 1% level.
         being at the bottom of the       Sources: World Bank staff calculations based on HBS data.

         HH income range.
40
     Dynamics: inequality is substantial but recent poverty and
     inclusion trends are unclear…
     • Welfare data from the two most recent Household Surveys (2006/07
       [consumption] and 2013 [gross income]) cannot be reliably compared.

     • However, incomes of the B40 do not appear to have kept up with overall
       growth of the economy. Survey imputation methods do not support that the
       incomes of households in the bottom quintile were significantly higher in real
       terms in 2013 (the latest available data), compared with 2006/7, a period
       during which real output per capita rose by 30 percent.

     • At the same time, ownership of assets (as measured by the number of
       assets held in 10 categories, not the value of assets) has become more
       equal over the two years, in part due to increased ownership of dwellings
       and household appliances for the bottom quintile.




41
     …and there are growing concerns about youth issues and
     crime, against the backdrop of a high incarceration rate
                       RECORDED CRIMES                                         THE 25 COUNTRIES AND TERRITORIES WITH THE
                                                                                   HIGHEST PRISON POPULATIONS (PER 100,000)
             Other
             Public order offenses                                                                            0   200   400   600   800   1000
             Arson & criminal damage                                                             Seychelles
             Murder & serious violent offences                                                         USA
             Robbery, burglary & theft                                                    St. Kitts & Nevis
             Drugs                                                                           Turkmenistan
             TOTAL, including traffic accidents since 2012                            Virgin Islands (USA)
                                                                                                El Salvador
     25000                                                                                            Cuba
                                                                                              Guam (USA)
                                                                                                     Russia
     20000                                                                                         Thailand
                                                                                                   Rwanda
                                                                                                   Panama
     15000                                                                             Virgin Islands (UK)
                                                                                                   Grenada
                                                                                                   Maldives
     10000                                                                                           Belize
                                                                                       Antigua & Barbuda
                                                                                  American Samoa (USA)
     5000                                                                    St. Vincent & the Grenadines
                                                                                     Cayman Islands (UK)
                                                                                                  Bahamas
         0                                                                                  Bermuda (UK)
                                                                                                Costa Rica
                                                                                        Puerto Rico (USA)
                                                                                Saint Martin (Netherlands)
             Notes: Disaggregated figures unavailable after 2011.   Notes: foreign prisoners constitute approximately 8% of the Seychelles total.
             Sources: NBS CJS Report (2012); NBS SIF (2016).        Sources: World Prison Brief, Institute for Criminal Policy Research.


42
     Education access is universal and a high proportion of
     Seychellois go on to participate in the labor market…
         EDUCATION ACCESS IS UNIVERSAL                                 LABOR MARKET PARTICIPATION IS HIGH
                                                                            AND UNEMPLOYMENT IS LOW
     •    Universal access to education: pre-
          primary, primary and secondary, with
          boys and girls enrolling at the
          appropriate age.
     •    Levels of enrolment up to secondary
          education are comparable to those of
          most middle-income countries and those
          of many high-income countries.

                              NER Primary NER Secondary
                  Chile                 93.94                  93.04
           Costa Rica                   96.13                  78.12
               Finland                  99.43                    94
             Malaysia                     94.6                  69.1
               Mexico                     95.6                 67.41
         Rep of Korea                   96.31                  96.15
          Seychelles                    94.69                  74.57   Sources: Calculations based on LFS (2014).

              Turkey                    86.69                   92.9
         Notes: “NER” stands for Net Enrolment Rate.
         Sources: UNESCO Institute of Statistics and Edstas.
43
     …however, while Seychelles’ visible unemployment rate is very low,
     this disguises obstacles to people participating in the economy and
     accessing high quality jobs, and youth unemployment is significant…
LOW UNEMPLOYMENT BY INTERNATIONAL STANDARDS                                                    Low unemployment belies:
   BUT YOUTH UNEMPLOYMENT IS SIGNIFICANT AND A                                                 • Social ills and exclusion from the
     LITTLE HIGH RELATIVE TO TOTAL EMPLOYMENT
      60                                                                                         labor force: the relatively large prison
                                                                                                 population significantly reduces the
                                50                                                               potential available workforce, and is
      Youth unemployment rate




                                                                                                 consistent with widespread concerns
                                40                                                               around social ills (notably drug use). The
                                                                                                 prison population of 752 compares with
                                30                                                               an estimated domestic labor force of
                                         SYC
                                                                                                 about 45,000 (i.e. about 2%).
                                20                                                             • Some likely underemployment,
                                                                                                 including due to the government’s large
                                10                                                               home care program which employs over
                                                                                                 2,500 people (about 6% of the local
                                 0
                                     0         5          10     15        20            25
                                                                                                 workforce). As recognized by current
                                                   Total unemployment rate                       efforts towards professionalizing this
                                                                                                 program, there is some under-
                                Notes: Full WDI sample, excluding outliers with
                                unemployment rates higher than 25% (for visual clarity).         employment in this program, and without
                                Dotted line shows best-fit linear relationship between total     this the visible unemployment rate would
                                and youth unemployment rates.
                                Sources: ILO modeled estimates via WDI (2014); Seychelles:       likely be higher.
                                as calculated from LFS (2014).


44
     …and there are concerns over both the quality and equity of
     education outcomes…
THE EDUCATION SYSTEM DELIVERS VERY                              EDUCATION ATTAINMENT IS HEAVILY
     FEW HIGH-SCORING GRADUATES                                  AFFECTED BY PARENTS’ EDUCATION
                                                                           AND WEALTH
        National secondary-school leaving (P6)
        exam results by subject and grade – 2015
                                                                                700                             Reading                   Mathematics
                                                                                600




                                                                SACMEQ Scores
                                                                                500
                                                                                400
                                                                                300
                                                                                200
                                                                                100
                                                                                  0




                                                                                                                                               Q1

                                                                                                                                                    Q2

                                                                                                                                                         Q3

                                                                                                                                                              Q4
                                                                                        No school

                                                                                                      Primary

                                                                                                                 Secondary

                                                                                                                             University
                                                                                                    Mother's education                          Household weath

 Along with the evidence that only a small proportion of
                                                                                In addition to the score gap for children from less
 Seychellois leave secondary education with high scores…
                                                                                educated and wealthy households, attendance
                                                                                historically dropped for lower income groups after
 …there is some evidence that education quality is behind
                                                                                compulsory education, with 25% of students still
 upper MIC, and certainly high income economy,
                                                                                not getting a secondary education diploma.
 comparators. Seychelles did not participate in PISA+.
 Benchmarking cross-regional comparisons of PISA + results,                     Sources: World Bank, Seychelles Programmatic
 however, suggests that Seychelles may score lower than upper                   Expenditure Review Policy Notes: health, education and
 middle income peers such as Malaysia, Costa Rica, and Chile.                   investment management (2014).


45
     …and, as is the case globally, the labor market is increasingly
     demanding and rewarding skilled workers
      HIGH RETURNS TO EDUCATION – BUT                              AMIDST A SHIFT IN LABOR DEMAND
         ONLY FOR THOSE WITH DEGREES                                 TOWARDS HIGHER SKILLED JOBS

      80%       Average incremental (total)
                 return over primary level                        .8
                                                                                        Relative change in
      70%                                                                               employment (by occupation),
                                                                         .675
      60%
                                                                                        2011 and 2014
                                                                  .6
      50%

      40%
                                                                  .4
      30%
                                                                                                                     .273
                                                                                          .238
      20%
                                                                  .2              .14                       .125
      10%                                                                                          .103
                                                                                                                             .064
       0%                                                         0
                                                                                                                                      -.012    -.033
                                                                                                   ort                          l
                                                                      gers onals ians pp                        ales ltura rkers ators ntary
                                                                    na     si      nic          su e & S                cu        Wo ope
                                                                                                                                           r      e
                                                                  Ma rofes      ech       ic al       i c          Ag ri      de         t   Elem
                                                                              T         r          rv            d         ra           n
                                                                       P             Cle         Se        k ille aft/T             Pla
                                                                                                          S        Cr
                                                                  Notes: Increase (+) or decrease (-) relative to 2011.
      Sources: World Bank staff calculations based on HBS data.   Sources: Calculations based on LFS.


46
     Social protection: reduces poverty but at a high cost, suggesting a
     need to improve efficiency, equity and sustainability
•     Social Protection (SP) has a wide reach: reaches 49% of the population, directly or indirectly.
•     It reduces poverty (as measured by the official poverty line) from 48% to 39.3% percent.
•     However, the cost of SP is high: 4.3% of GDP in 2015.
•     The majority of SP spending is on social assistance (SA): 3.3% of GDP, and after recent increases in
      benefits (universal pension and home care program) SA alone will absorb 4.3% of GDP in 2016 (estimate).
•     The composition of SP spending is skewed to the elderly and away from the youth and poor which raises
      equity and efficiency concerns:
           • 79% of total SP spending was on the elderly in 2015.
           • The only poverty focused program (Social Welfare Assistance, SWA) accounts for only a small share
              of spending (0.3% of GDP).
           • Only 8% of the poor are covered by SWA; less than 40 percent of the beneficiaries of universal
              pension are poor.
•     Aging of the population raises sustainability concerns (both contributory and non-contributory programs).
•     The SP system could have a greater impact on poverty
      by focusing on the poor and by improving effectiveness          SHARE OF BENEFICIARIES AND BENEFITS, ALL NON-
      and equity.                                               50%
                                                                                    CONTRIBUTORY PROGRAMS
•     Increasing SWA coverage and benefit levels to include 40%
      the really needy could increase poverty impact and        30%
      linking SWA to market labor participation will promote 20%
      productive inclusion.                                     10%
•     Improved efficiency in homecare program and further
                                                                 0%
      reforms on contributory pension scheme will improve                 Children (0-17 years)            Elderly (63 years and older)
      fiscal sustainability.                                             Share of Population
                                                                         Share of Beneficiaries All Non-Contributory Programs
•     Modernizing the MIS system will increase efficiency.               Share of Benefits All Non-Contributory Programs
                                                                                   Share of Benefits SWA
                                                                                   Share of Beneficiaries SWA
                                                                            Sources: World Bank staff
                                                                                  calculations.
47
     Health: indicators are strong but rising non-communicable diseases
     and ageing pose sustainability challenges
 Health outcomes are strong                                                   Selected health indicators
 • The state provides free primary and                                                  Cabo
    universal access to healthcare.                     Indicator               Fiji    Verde Seychelles Mauritius Maldives
 • Over the years, Seychelles has
    developed a robust primary care system.     Population                    886,450 513,906      91,400 1,260,934   401,000
                                                GNI per capita, Atlas
 • Life expectancy is high but still below      method (current US$)            4,870   3,450      14,090    9,720      6,470
    income-level peers, due to the wide         Health expenditure per
    women–men life expectancy gap.              capita (current US$)             204     173         494       482      1,165
                                                Health expenditure, total
                                                (% of GDP)                        4.5     4.8         3.4       4.8      13.7
 Cause of death has shifted to non-
                                                Life expectancy at birth,
 communicable diseases                          total (years)                      70     73           73       74        77
 • Cardiovascular, respiratory diseases and     Mortality rate, neonatal
    cancer account for about 60% of deaths.     (per 1,000 live births)           9.8    12.6         8.8       8.7       5.2
 • Amenable cancers constitute a third of all   Maternal mortality ratio
                                                (per 100,000 live births)          31     44            0       54        69
    cancer deaths, which implies the role
                                                 Sources: WDI
    primary prevention and early detection
                                                            Trends in Causes of death as percentage of all deaths
    could play in reducing cancer mortality.
                                                100%

 The population is aging                         80%

 •  A clear shift in the age structure of the    60%
    population is evident from the censuses
                                                 40%
    of 1994, 2002, and 2010 and mid-2015
    population estimates.                        20%

                                                  0%
                                                    2003 2004 2005 2006        2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015
                                                   Cardio-vascular            Cancers
                                                   Respiratory system         External causes
                                                   Infectious and parasitic   Other causes
                                                   Sources: Staff calculations based on Ministry
48                                                 of Health data.
     3.3 KEY CONSTRAINTS TO INCLUSIVENESS


     - Problems of education and skills

     - Problems of job flexibility and access

     - Social assistance

     - Health




49
     CONSTRAINT: education and skills development
     Constraint:
     • The education system produces a large share of the youth lacking in necessary
        academic, soft, and vocational skills, and there are insufficient opportunities for
        continuing education.
     Evidence for constraint:
     • Wage inequality is high and use of imported labor has been rising, consistent with a
        shortage of local supply of the needed skills, and business surveys emphasize worker
        quality concerns.
     • Many workers are “caught in the middle”: the movement of local workers up the wage
        scale is impeded by the limited set of private sector economic opportunities, and
        unequal access to quality appropriate skills, while migrants’ share of unskilled work
        has grown.
     • Learning outcomes are unequal already at the end of primary level (P6).
     • Progression along the education system, especially up to tertiary level, is linked to
        income.
     Drivers of constraint:
     • Supply side: as a result of the quality and equity challenges in the education system, it
        delivers a small number of foreign-educated graduates (most of them from the highest
        income levels), while the rest of the population has lesser job-relevant skills formation.
     • Inadequate supply of continuing education (both public and private).
     • Demand side: “ossified” insider/outsider labor market, reducing incentives to invest in
        skills.

50
     CONSTRAINT: job flexibility is limited, while the structure of the
     labor market constrains opportunities.
     Constraint:
     • Accessing current jobs is encumbered by transportation and working schedules affecting women,
        single mothers in particular.
     Evidence for constraint:
     • Levels of part-time work and more flexible work contracts are very low, and there are signs that this is
        impeding employment access and earnings especially for youth and women:
           • High tenure premia: older workers with longer job tenure benefit from a tight labor market that
               benefits other individuals of similar characteristics; a small minority of long-serving employees
               are compensated with higher wages.
           • Low flexibility in work hours and conditions: as indicated by part-time and casual work being very
               rare (3.4% and 2.6% of reported workers in 2014).
           • There is a significant and increasing gender wage gap across the wage distribution – with men
               earning wages that are 9% higher than women at the 10th percentile and 19% higher at the 90th
               percentile (controlling for other characteristics).
     Drivers of constraint:
     • Exogenous: small domestic workforce.
     • Rigid employment rules and norms (e.g. work hours, contractual arrangements).
     • Some jobs are difficult to access especially for women, given labor market norms emphasizing full time,
        regular-hour work.

      World Bank Labor Market Study findings:
      • Wage inequality estimated at 0.47 (Gini), a high level.
      • [Findings indicate…] a lifetime employment structure coupled with seniority-based wages,
        where individuals with increasing experience and tenure, controlling for other
        characteristics, are compensated with higher wages.

51
     CONSTRAINT: social protection
     Constraint:
     • Social assistance is misaligned, focused on the elderly and not on children and their carers, and is not supporting
        accessing economic opportunities for those who could work, potentially affecting the structure of incentives.

     Evidence for constraint:
     • High overall spending on SP and skew of spending in favor of the elderly
           • Corollary: the SP system could do more to support youth and single mothers facing difficulties improving
                their skills, accessing work opportunities, and supporting children.
     • Longer-term sustainability challenges of the current system.
     • The SCD explored but did not uncover hard evidence that the current structure of SP is having negative impacts on
        incentives to invest in education and work, but there are some signs that this is a concern which should be explored
        further and factored into any SP reforms:
           • Labor force participation (LFP) and employment are high in aggregate, suggesting prima facie that
                reservation wages are not above market-clearing levels. However, high LFP in particular masks
                considerable variation by educational attainment and age, being much lower for those with the least
                education (57.8% for those with primary education), the youngest (15-24 year-old: 57.4%) and oldest (55-65
                year old: 64.8%) cohorts. This pattern is consistent with reservation wages being high relative to wages for
                those with lower current earnings power due to inexperience or less education, and the older with access to
                the universal pension.
           • “Low wages in available jobs” was the 4th most commonly selected reason for not being in work in a recent
                (2015) Youth Employment Survey.
           • Employers have widespread concerns (reported in surveys such as the WEF GCI, and anecdotally) about
                low workforce motivation and commonly link this to Seychelles’ historical “cradle to grave” welfare policies.
     • Concerns in consultations were raised over the emergence of multi-generational welfare dependency reinforced by
        peer effects in housing estates, and unequal educational outcomes.

     Drivers of constraint:
     • Historically universalist SP policy.
     • Limited evidence base for understanding the poverty profile.
     • Concentration of spending on the elderly.
     • High spending on home carers program, without commensurate skills development.

52
     CONSTRAINT: Health
     Constraint:                                                                                                                      Men’s life expectancy (69) lags
     • Rising non-communicable disease prevalence                                                                                              women’s (78)
        is weighing on life expectancy (especially for                                                                      85




                                                                                           Men's life expectancy at birth
        men), and healthcare spending risks becoming
        unsustainable.                                                                                                      80
     Evidence for constraint:                                                                                               75
     • High usage of health services: on average, the
        population visits health facilities 6 times a year,                                                                 70
        and in most cases (4 of the 6 visits) is seen by                                                                                                            SYC
                                                                                                                            65
        a doctor. This number is very high by any
        standard.                                                                                                           60
     • The cost of health care provision can be                                                                                  60           70               80                  90
        expected to continue to trend upward:                                                                                             Women's life expectancy at birth
            • Growing non-communicable disease                                            Notes: Sample of all 183 countries with WHO data.
                 burden                                                                   Sources: WHO.
            • Population is starting to age;                                                                        Total Health Expenditure by Funding Sources
            • Low economies of scale; and




                                                                                                                                                                                   government expenditure
                                                                                                                                         Rest of the world




                                                                                                                                                                                    Health as % of general
            • Advances in technology, rising public                                      750                                             Private                             12%
                 expectations for high quality care, and      Million Seychelles Rupee                                                   Government
                                                                                         600                                                                                 10%
                 expanding investment.
     Drivers of constraint:                                                                                                                                                  8%
                                                                                         450
     • Over-use of health services and drugs                                                                                                                                 6%
        because they are free (primary healthcare is                                     300
                                                                                                                                                                             4%
        free under the constitution).
                                                                                         150                                                                                 2%
     • Rising non-communicable diseases, due to
        lifestyle habits linked to rising prosperity,                                      0                                                                                 0%
        coupled with lack of health awareness.                                                                                   2009        2013            2014   2015

                                                          Sources: NHA 2009, 2013, 2014 and 2015.
53
     Seychelles SCD

     Productivity, Participation, and
     Performance



     4. Sustainability: enhancing state performance to support
        productivity and participation, and to meet environmental
        and economic risks




54
     4. SUSTAINABILITY - enhancing
     state performance to support
     productivity and participation,
     and to meet environmental and
     economic risks
     4.1 Main finding and implications
     4.2 Environmental and economic vulnerabilities
     4.3 The role and effectiveness of the public
         sector
     4.4 Key constraints


55
     4.1 MAIN FINDING AND IMPLICATIONS: HOW CAN
     SEYCHELLES SECURE SUSTAINABILITY?
     Key finding: high economic volatility, including in the past due to unsustainable
     growth of the scope and cost of the state, undermines development efforts and
     poses a continuing risk to inclusive, sustained growth.

     If this continues:

     •   The economy will be more vulnerable to external shocks.

     •   Unsustainable patterns in state activities and spending could re-emerge.

     Implications:

     •   Maintain macro-fiscal policy stability focus.

     •   Strengthen public sector planning and efficiency.




56
     4.2 Sustainability: environmental vulnerabilities…
 •    Seychelles’ location, topography and                              DISASTER RISK PROFILE
      landscape make it vulnerable to strong
      winds, tsunamis, storm surge, extreme
      rainfall, flooding, landslides, rockslides
      and forest fires.
 •    Frequent flooding is a particular
      concern, especially around the capital
      and the central islands of La Digue and
      Praslin.
 •    Tropical cyclones (TC) pose a low-
      frequency but high-impact risk, as was
      illustrated by TC Felleng in 2013
      affecting the main islands and TC
      Fantala in 2016 affecting the outer
      island of Farquhar.
 •    Average Annual Losses are estimated          Notes: *Average annual losses (AAL) is a long term measure of loss that,
                                                   on average, can be expected to be experienced annually. It is computed
      at US$2.8 million, mainly due to             by summing all of the aggregate loss estimates for each year for all of
                                                   the events and dividing the total by the number of years the
      residential and commercial building          environmental risks catalog considers.
                                                   Sources: World Bank.
      damage from flooding.


57
     …are exacerbated by climate change, which both raises acute
     disaster risk and poses long-term adaptation challenges

                  Rising temperatures: the Seychelles’ region has witnessed an average warming of 0.25°C
                  over 1972-1997. The number of very warm days and nights is increasing dramatically, while the
                  number of very cool days and nights are decreasing which led in 1998 to a loss of 90% of its
                  coral reef.




                  Rainfall extremes: annual rainfall anomaly trends on Mahe for the period 1972-2006 are
                  upward by 13.7 mm per year, indicating a wetter climate. Fisheries have suffered some of the
                  greatest economic losses, for example accounting for 45% of the total estimated monetary
                  losses from extreme rainfall events in 1997-1998 and 1998-2000. This was followed by
                  agriculture (28%), tourism (12%), industry (7%), construction (5%), and forestry (3%). At the
                  same time, droughts are becoming more frequent: in 2010 Seychelles suffered its worst
                  drought in decades, followed by flooding. It is projected that the climate will likely be
                  characterized by extreme dry (i.e. prolonged dry spells) and hot episodes.



                  Sea level rise and storm surges: from 1993 to 2009, the mean elevation of the coastal plateau
                  of the granitic islands was 2-10m, whereas the coral islands varied from 1.8 meters to 9 meters
                  above sea level. Attributing rising sea level to climate change has become much clearer
                  following recent research showing that for the 1993-2003 period, the contributions from thermal
                  expansion (1.6 ± 0.5 mm/year) and loss of mass from glaciers, ice caps, and the Greenland and
                  Antarctic Ice Sheets together reach 2.8 ± 0.7 mm/yr. This exacerbates the risk that Seychelles,
                  with its narrow coastal belts and mid-oceanic location, faces from cyclones (although rare for the
                  central islands) and storm surges. The 2013 Cyclone Felleng caused flooding and landslides
                  that led to damages and losses exceeding $8.4 million, or 0.8% of GDP.



58
     Sustainability: macroeconomic vulnerabilities
     •   GDP growth has been volatile even relative to peers.

     •   The high growth volatility and experience of a lengthy build-up of imbalances
         leading to the 2008 crisis shows the need for a strong macro and fiscal stability
         focus:
         o Exchange rate: flexibility, to prevent creeping overvaluation and as a shock
           absorber
         o FX reserves: as a crisis buffer
         o Fiscal: use of an appropriate anchor to maintain counter-cyclicality and
           safeguard priority spending despite potential revenue volatility




59
     Seychelles had an economic crisis and debt default in 2008. The root
     cause was a long build-up through to the early 2000s of domestic
     macro imbalances
                                GOVT. EXPENDITURE GROWTH                                             …RESULTING IN UNSUSTAINABLY HIGH
                            CONSISTENTLY OUTPACED REVENUES…                                              EXPENDITURES AND NET BORROWING
                                                                                                                                 Fiscal balance
                        2.0                           Fiscal balance                             70                              Revenue
                                                      Expenditure                                                                Expenditure
                                                      Revenue                                    60
                        1.5                                                                      50
     Real change, percent




                                                                                                 40




                                                                                    Percent of GDP
                        1.0                                                                      30
                                                                                                 20
                        0.5                                                                      10
                                                                                                     0

                        0.0                                                                 -10
                                                                                            -20
                                                                                            -30
                 -0.5
                              1981 1986 1991 1996 2001
                              Notes: HP filter-based trend.                                              Sources: Reinhart & Rogoff, This Time is Different.
                              Sources: Reinhart & Rogoff, This Time is Different.

60
     …leaving the economy vulnerable to the 2007-8 global food
     and fuel price shocks, and credit crunch
         IMPORTS SURGED AS THE ECONOMY GREW                                       •   Domestic and external imbalances built up
         UNSUSTAINABLY AND GLOBAL PRICES SPIKED                                       over many years, driven especially by
                                                                                      unsustainable government borrowing…
                                  Exports (goods & services)
                                  Imports (goods & services)                      •   …leaving the economy acutely vulnerable
             130%                                                                     to the global shocks beginning with food
                                  Current account balance
             110%                                                                     and fuel prices in 2007…
                      90%
     Percent of GDP




                      70%                                                         •   …and leading to crisis by 2008:
                                                                                        • Foreign currency (FX) reserves
                      50%
                                                                                           exhausted
                      30%                                                               • FX shortages disrupting real activity
                      10%                                                               • Rapid external arrears
                                                                                           accumulation
                -10%
                -30%                                                              •   From the first SSA (ex-SA) sovereign
                -50%                                                                  bond, issued in 2006, to default in 2008.
                            2000 2002 2004 2006 2008
                      Sources: World Bank staff calculations based on CBS data.




61
     The government responded with a major reform program…

     •   Exchange rate regime: fundamentally liberalized, eliminating all exchange
         restrictions and floating the Seychellois rupee.

     •   Monetary policy: new framework adopted, focusing on liquidity management
         based on indirect instruments (reserve money target).

     •   Fiscal policy: tightened, backed by a reduction in public employment and
         replacing indirect subsidies with a social safety net.

     •   Structural measures: role of the state reduced, through privatization,
         enhanced fiscal governance, and a review of the tax regime.

     •   International support: IMF Stand-by Arrangement (November 2008); Paris
         Club debt restructuring agreement (April 2009); resumption of World Bank DPLs
         (November 2009).




62
     …with highly successful macroeconomic stabilization results

                                    Real effective exchange rate                                                                                   Current account balance
140                                                                           0                                              600
                                    USD/SCR (rhs)                                                                                                  International reserves




                                                                                      USD/SCR, inverse scale
                                                                              3                                              400
120




                                                                                                               USD million
                                                                              6                                              200
100
                                                                              9                                                 0
 80
                                                                              12                                        -200
 60                                                                           15
                                                                                                                        -400
          2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014
                                                                                                                                    2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014


                              Fiscal balance        Government debt (rhs)                                                             Average Lending Rate     Inflation (average)
                       10                                                 250                                                   40
                        5                                                 200
      Percent of GDP




                                                                                   Percent of GDP
                                                                                                                                30
                        0
                                                                          150
                        -5                                                                                            Percent   20
                                                                          100
                       -10                                                                                                      10
                       -15                                                50
                                                                                                                                 0
                       -20                                                0                                                           2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014
                             2000    2003   2006   2009    2012    2015                                                         -10

                       Sources: CBS.


63
     The public sector continues to house a high proportion of
     Seychelles’ resources, notably human capital
      EMPLOYMENT IN GOVERNMENT AND SOES AS A                SECTORAL ALLOCATION OF LABOR FORCE
             SHARE OF TOTAL POPULATION                             BY EDUCATION CATEGORY

                                General government   SOEs    Government         Parastatal       Private      Other
      16%
      14%                                                   100%
                                                             90%
      12%
                                                             80%
      10%
                                                             70%
        8%                                                   60%
        6%                                                   50%
        4%                                                   40%
        2%                                                   30%
                                                             20%
        0%
                                                             10%
                                                              0%




     Notes: Data for 2010 except Mauritius (2008).            Notes: Data from 2014. “Other” is a broad category including
     Sources: World Bank (November 2015).                     employment in households, sector not reported etc.
                                                              Sources: World Bank, Seychelles Labor Market Report.


64
     Recently, there has been some renewed upward pressure on fiscal
     expenditures, and a growing private-public earnings gap
                                                                                                   Earnings
         60%                                                                                       premium:
                                                                                                   parastatal over
         50%
                                                                                                   private
         40%                                                                                       Public sector share
                                                                                                   of wage bill
         30%
                                                                                                  Earnings premium:
         20%                                                                                      government over
                                                                                                  private
         10%

          0%

        -10%

        -20%
                 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2012 2013 2014 2015
           Notes: wage bill and earnings premia are proxy indicators based on the products of average earnings
           and employment headcounts.
           Sources (all charts): World Bank staff calculations based on NBS data.



65
 Government effectiveness and regulatory quality trends are
 positive, but “voice & accountability” moves sideways…




                                               Sources: Kaufmann D., A.
                                               Kraay, and M. Mastruzzi
                                               (2010), The Worldwide
                                               Governance Indicators:
                                               Methodology and Analytical
                                               Issues.



66
     …and Seychelles still lags its peers in key governance indicators
     World Bank’s Worldwide Governance Indicators: Seychelles’ ranking compared (2015)
                             Seychelles    Mauritius      Botswana       Cape           Maldives     Barbados   Iceland
                                                                         Verde

               Voice & 49.3                73.4           61.6           76.4           37.4         91.6       94.1
          accountability


     Political Stability & 60.2             71.4          85.4           59.7           78.6         97.6       93.2
             Absence of
     Violence/Terrorism
     Govt Effectiveness 68.3                82.7          64.9           55.3           41.8         87.0       90.9



     Regulatory Quality 43.3                80.8          72.1           52.9           39.9         63.5       88.0



             Rule of Law 62.5               78.8          74.0           72.6           36.5         81.7       90.9



               Control of 66.9              67.8          76.0           76.8           54.8         81.7       94.2
              Corruption


     Sources: Kaufmann D., A. Kraay, and M. Mastruzzi (2010), The Worldwide Governance Indicators:
     Methodology and Analytical Issues.




67
     4.3 Governance: Seychelles recognizes the need to strengthen
     state performance…
     This is occurring amidst political change culminating in cohabitation since Sep-16
     between the party of government and the opposition coalition in the National
     Assembly
     Close to a decade of structural change…                      …grappling with hard questions:
                                                        •     How can the post-2008 improvement in
                                                              macroeconomic stability be maintained and what
                                     Second-                  does this mean in terms of managing the size and
                                     generation               performance of the public sector?
                                     reforms:           •     Government is already moving towards greater
                                     • Limiting or            performance through integrated Results-Based
                                       further                Management (RBM):
                  First                reducing the             o Strategic planning,
                  generation           size of the              o Program-based performance budgeting
                  reforms:             public sector,
                                       and focusing             o Performance management; and
      2008 crisis • Restoring          on improving             o Performance Monitoring & Evaluation.
                    macro-fiscal       public sector
                    balance                               •   How can wagebill management, PIM and SOE
                                       performance
                  • Reducing the                              performance be further addressed?
                                     • Making public
                    size of the        service            •   Moving beyond the supply side, how can the
                    state by           delivery more          government strengthen the demand side of
                    focusing it on     efficient,
                    core                                      governance, working with other partners, particularly
                                       effective and
                    functions                                 parliament, now led by an opposition party coalition,
                                       accountable in
                                       the context of a       as well as with the civil society?
                                       Small Island
                                       Developing
                                       State (SIDS)
68
     …governance, as in all small island developing states (SIDS),
     remains a major challenge
 •     Seychelles has shown commitment to strengthening public sector governance,
       including taking on the most challenging performance reforms.
         • Seychelles is a leader in the region in implementing an integrated RBM reform
            process and is considered an example by others in the region.
         • In a SIDS context, implementation can often be more agile and move at a fast-track
            if political commitment is there and a strong set of dedicated reformers is in office.
 •     With a small population, maintaining a smaller public service is sometimes easier,
       service-delivery challenges can be more manageable and there can be good
       opportunities to harness ICT solutions for governance and eliminating the
       disadvantage of remoteness.
 •     Yet there are also significant risks to governance for SIDS like Seychelles:
         • Given the small population size, and close community and extended family ties,
            strengthening pubic sector accountability in a SIDS is a greater challenge than in
            other countries; and Seychelles is no exception.
         • Challenges in ensuring broad access to public office and the public service, creating
            risks of elite capture.
         • Risks of conflicts of interest between public and individual interests, due to the
            reduced transparency and limited access to information.
         • Collusion between the public and private sectors, limiting competition (for example,
            causing procurement problems) and opening opportunities for corruption.


69
     Constraints to sustainability

     -   Macro and fiscal policy stability

     -   Public (government and SOE) spending efficiency

     -   Governance: transparency, and accountability of public action

     -   Ability to absorb environmental and global economic shocks

     -   Water




70
     CONSTRAINT: Macro and fiscal policy stability
     Constraint: Macro and fiscal policy stability
     • Challenge to prioritize public expenditure (investments and social spending) within
       a consistent and sustainable macroeconomic framework, and avoid the build-up of
       fiscal pressures and risks, including from SOEs.

     Evidence for constraint:
     • Build-up of macroeconomic imbalances that led to the 2008 crisis.
     • High volatility of growth even relative to other small island economies.
     • High government absorption even relative to other small island economies.
     • Ongoing fiscal risks from SOEs.

     Drivers of constraint:
     • Exogenous: shocks inevitable for small island economy.
     • Endogenous: public expenditure pressures arising from the uneven distribution of
        wealth and the state-driven approach to development, notably through SOE
        investments, have historically undermined macroeconomic stability.
     • The fiscal discipline fostered by the 2008/2009 crisis and its successful
        management may be weakening:
          • Ad-hoc piecemeal responses to political challenges, renewed growth of public
             institutions and mandates.
          • Analytical work has identified weaknesses in the procedures and mechanisms
             for deciding on the capital budget and for coordinating policy and actions
             across public enterprises.

71
     CONSTRAINT: Public spending planning and efficiency
     Constraint:
     • Public (government and SOE) spending efficiency: capacity to track and
       monitor the efficiency of government programs and sustain a path of
       continuous improvements.

     Evidence for constraint:
     • In general, the efficiency and efficacy of public expenditure matter for
       welfare, given a situation where the government is playing a significant
       direct and indirect redistributive role. This is the case in Seychelles, where
       the need to enhance public spending efficiency and service delivery is well-
       recognized by the government.

     Drivers of constraint (as identified by ongoing analytical work):
     • Weak alignment between sector allocations and national strategy.
     • Allocation misalignments within major sector programs, such as in social
       assistance.
     • Limited historical investment in M&E.
     • Lack of benchmarking of sector programs.




72
     CONSTRAINT: accountability and transparency of public
     action
     Constraint:
     • Transparency and accountability of public action.

     Evidence for constraint:
     • Governance indicators: Seychelles’ governance rankings
       place the country well below relevant peers in terms of
       income per capita.

     Drivers of constraint:
     • Being a small country presents intrinsic challenges to
       governance, especially to accountability with potentially
       destabilizing consequences.
     • Highly “networked” society raises concerns about
       accountability and transparency.
73
     CONSTRAINT: Environmental and global economic shock resilience
     Constraint:
     • Absorbing environmental and global economic shocks: financial and
       technical capacity to manage global economic and environmental risks, and
       the growing impact of climate change.

     Evidence for constraint:
     • High volatility of growth even relative to other small island economies.
     • Land use planning and urban development does not incorporate disaster risk
       assessment.
     • Industrial production infrastructure is exposed to natural and man-made
       hazards.

     Drivers of constraint:
     • Exogenous: as a very small open economy, Seychelles is buffeted by global
       economic and financial volatility. And its small island geography in the open
       ocean renders it vulnerable to environmental and climatic risks.
     • The fragile environment will increasingly come under threat from climate
       change, potentially impacting the sources of welfare (e.g. through the crucial
       tourism sector).
     • Should suspected hydrocarbon resources be confirmed, this would call for
       balancing environmental concerns and economic gain.
74
CONSTRAINT: water and sanitation
                                                           Wa t e r a n d s a n i t a t i o n c o v e r a g e
Constraint:
                                                                 Water Coverage (%)          Sewerage Coverage (%)
•    Sanitation coverage is predominantly on-site         100      100
                                                                 100                                       98        100
                                                    100                           90        94
     and seasonal water scarcity is increasing.      90                  80                      78
                                                     80
                                                     70
Evidence for constraint:                             60                                               53                   55
                                                     50
                                                     40
•    Piped sewerage coverage is very low and         30     15                         20                       21
                                                     20                       3
     although the impact of limited wastewater       10
                                                      0
     management on the environment has not
     been formally assessed (an evidence gap),
     improved centralized sewerage would
     confer environmental and land-use benefits             Total water consumption (l/person/day)
     compared to the current widespread use of      400
     small-scale and home treatment tanks.          350
                                                    300
•    There is universal piped water coverage but    250
                                                    200
     due to low tariffs/cost recovery, water use    150
     per capita is very high, and Seychelles        100
                                                     50
     faces an increasing seasonal water scarcity      0
     challenge given a rising concentration of
     rainfall in December and January, and few
     feasible dam sites.
                                                    Sources (both charts): IBNET Blue Book 2014. No data
                                                    available for sewerage coverage in Malaysia, Mauritius, and
                                                    Mozambique.


75
     Seychelles SCD

     Productivity, Participation, and
     Performance




     5. Summary and prioritization of constraints identified



76
     5. Constraints: summary and
     prioritization
     5.1 Three overarching challenges
     5.2 Prioritization of constraints




77
     Key challenges identified (“3 Ps”)

     • Productivity: steer the economy towards a higher
       productivity growth path, while benefiting from being
       under the shield of the solid expected medium-term
       growth rate (base case)
     • Participation: bring the benefits of economic growth to
       the B40, and position Seychellois to contribute to and
       benefit from a higher productivity path
     • Performance: provide an agile, efficient and effective
       (state) platform to anchor the productivity and
       participation agendas, and manage risks




78
     Prioritization criteria

1. How much does the constraint impact on the Twin Goals?
    • For Seychelles, with low absolute poverty, the focus is on
      increasing shared prosperity by addressing the “3Ps”:
      productivity, participation, and (state) performance
    • Includes how complementary addressing the constraint
      would be, to support the resolution of other constraints
2. How strong is the evidence base on the nature and
   magnitude of the constraint? Or are more data and analysis
   needed (knowledge gaps)?
3. Attainability of removing constraints (cost, time scale and
   technical difficulty)




79
     Five priority constraints

     • Tackling shortfalls in the private sector enabling
       environment
     • Macroeconomic and fiscal policy stability
     • Public (government and SOE) spending efficiency
     • Education and skills development
     • Social assistance




80
     Tackling shortfalls in the private sector enabling environment
     Strong evidence, high impact on the three challenges, and a medium level of
     attainability.

     •   Reduce administrative costs of opening and operating a business

     •   Generate and maintain an even playing field for economic activity (i.e. tighten
         SOE mandates to preclude predatory behavior, break vertical integration in
         tourism, evaluate market structure/competition issues in sectors such as ICT,
         banking)

     •   Deliver regulatory certainty to open opportunity to investment and innovation in
         new activities. Avoid ad hoc policies (e.g. in the Blue Economy)

     •   Take regulatory and enforcement steps to address the challenges posed by
         bank de-risking

     •   Use strategically critical assets such as land to guide moves towards higher
         value added activities

                  For a dynamic and fair private sector

81
     Macroeconomic and fiscal policy stability
     Strong evidence, high impact on the three challenges, and a medium level of
     attainability.

     •   Reduce expenditure discretion through multiannual budgeting anchored in
         sector strategies

     •   Protect the revenue base

     •   Sharpen SOE mandates and monitor their compliance with commitments

     •   Monitor overall fiscal risks

     •   Anchor macro sustainability in precise targets (e.g. public debt to GDP, net
         public sector wealth, investment rate)

     •   Broaden monetary policy instruments and maintain the flexible exchange rate




              To avoid economic crises and weather external shocks

82
     Public (government and SOE) spending efficiency

     Strong evidence, critical for Performance, important for Participation, efforts already
         underway (attainable).

     •   Anchor state action and public expenditure on a vision and a strategy

     •   Monitor budget outcomes and impact

     •   Promote increases in SOE sector operating efficiency to reduce reliance on the
         state, create buffers against uncertainty, and strengthen service delivery

     •   Sharpen public investment budgeting (project selection, integration of national
         objectives, framework for PPPs)

     •   Review and simplify state structure and functions


            For a lean and effective state, that reinforces economic stability


83
     Education and skills development
     Sufficient evidence, potential high impact on Productivity and Participation, attainability
         combines long-term challenges and potential quicker wins.

           •   Quality foundation skills from an early age:
                • Implement the Strategic Framework for Early Childhood Development, ensuring
                  a strong multisector approach
                • Invest in teachers’ academic and professional development

           •   Relevant skills for employability:
                • Develop socio-emotional skills from an early age and build on this through the
                   establishment of the centers of excellence and overall secondary, TVET, and
                   post-basic education reform
                • Consider labor market needs and returns to education

           •   Equal access to skills development:
                • Use an equity lens while improving the efficiency of expenditure, and
                  refurbishing secondary education and TVET reform
                • Overall gains in education must not increase gaps among the population


                        To transform the skills base of the population


84
     Social assistance

     Strong evidence and impact on the three challenges

     •   Prevent emergence or reinforcement of inter-generational poverty cycle

     •   Review and revise eligibility criteria to assist those in need (improved targeting)

     •   Realign public resources accordingly for greater efficiency (welfare spending
         envelope)

     •   Seek greater efficiency (ICT tools, linkages with other information sets)




           To break the social assistance silo by focusing on the health and
                 education of the poor, and facilitating access to jobs


85
     Five additional priorities

     Credit: important for Productivity and Participation, relatively less clarity on extent
        to which it is a constraint or a symptom, or on feasibility of addressing issues

     Energy: important for growth and sustainability, less binding at present for
        addressing the key challenges (3Ps)

     Labor market functioning: critical for Participation, issues may reflect other
        constraints

     Health: critical for Productivity and Participation, already a strong base for further
        improvements

     External economic and environmental shock resilience: important for growth
        and sustainability, will be helped substantially by progress on other constraints
        linked to Performance

86
     Three likely priorities

     Transport and other input costs: high logistics, and domestic and
        international connectivity, costs, impede tapping international markets,
        while options to produce for the domestic market are limited by its small
        size. Amongst other input costs, land and property pricing and market
        functioning have been identified as knowledge gaps

     Water & sanitation: More evidence is needed on the sustainability of
       Seychelles’ water investment requirements in light of intensifying
       seasonal water scarcity, and on the environmental and other benefits
       vs. costs of sewering

     Governance: improving transparency and accountability is a clear priority
       of government and can contribute to addressing the constraints
       identified above to strengthen state performance




87
     Cross-cutting constraint: limited evidence base to
     inform policies
•    Significant data limitations were encountered in                                  STATISTICAL CAPACITY SCORE IS AROUND AVERAGE

     the SCD exercise, including in:                                                         FOR SMALL STATES; LOW RELATIVE TO INCOME

       •   Key sectors (tourism, fisheries value-                                       SYC                              All countries
           added), overall national accounts (incl. for
                                                                                        Small states                     Linear (All countries)
           SAM estimation), key prices (e.g. land
                                                                                       100
           and housing, logistics costs)
       •   Systematic and comparable HH survey                                          90
           data for growth incidence and inclusivity




                                                          Statistical capacity score
                                                                                        80
           analysis; lack of enterprise survey data
                                                                                        70
       •   Lack of consolidated statistics to quantify
           key trends such as expatriate contribution                                   60
           to sectoral and aggregate labor force
                                                                                        50
•    Seychelles could benefit significantly from
     more investment and capacity-building in                                           40
     primary data collection and use (surveys and                                       30
     administrative data capture), and digitization:
                                                                                        20
       •   Necessary for effective public expenditure                                        0        5,000      10,000 15,000           20,000
           planning and M&E                                                                                   GNI per capita
                                                                                             Sources: WDI (Seychelles score adjusted as per
       •   Confers efficiency and “arms length”                                              new methodology).
           (regulatory transparency and
           consistency) benefits
88
     Towards the 3Ps: priority knowledge gaps to fill
•    For effective public policies to back the efficient, sustainable use of Seychelles’ economic
     factors of production:
       •   Environmental sustainability data and analysis (e.g. wealth accounting including
           natural capital)
       •   Integrated view of, and policies regarding, labor allocation, migration, and skills
           development (e.g. STEP survey)
       •   Land and housing markets, for growth (scarcity of land; real estate activity growth)
           and inclusion (high home ownership rate, supported by state housing provision and
           mortgage subsidies)
•    For effective overall economic management:
       •   Analytical work to develop appropriate recommendations to anchor fiscal policy, such
           as for a fiscal rule or to institutionalize a fiscal council
       •   Market structure (including contracts) and performance analysis, and application of
           best-practice sector management in strategic areas, especially blue economy
           (tourism, fisheries), logistics prices and performance (especially of the port), financial
           sector development
•    For social outcomes: consolidated statistics and assessment of the overall public effort on
     inclusion (i.e., income inequality is relatively high, but the extent to which tax incidence
     and public services and social transfers reduce inequality in overall welfare is not clear)

89
     Summary: priorities for meeting Seychelles’ Productivity,
     Participation, and Performance challenge
           Five top priorities
           •   Private sector enabling environment
           •   Macro and fiscal policy stability
           •   Public spending efficiency
           •   Education & skills development
           •   Social assistance

           Five additional priorities
           •   Credit
           •   Energy
           •   Labor market functioning
           •   Health
           •   External economic and environmental shock resilience

           Three likely priorities
           • Transport & other input costs
           • Water & sanitation
           • Governance


90
     Seychelles SCD

     productivity, participation and
     performance




     6. Data appendix


91
     DATA APPENDIX
     •   Demographics
     •   Gender snapshot
     •   Labor allocation by education level
     •   Health
     •   Sea and air connectivity
     •   Financial sector
     •   Water
     •   Environmental risks assessment
     •   Macroeconomic and development indicators at a glance
     •   Map



92
     Demographics: Population is likely close to peaking (~100k)




       Sources: United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division
       (2015). World Population Prospects: The 2015 Revision.
93
     Demographics: ageing beginning to push up dependency ratio




         Sources: United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division (2015).
94       World Population Prospects: The 2015 Revision.
  Seychelles society and the role of women
       Seychelles is a matrilineal society. The majority of households are female-headed (58%) (NBS: 2013).
       The high female headship rate is linked to the small share of married households: about 1/3. Most male HH-
        heads are married or co-habiting but over half of female HH-heads are not living in union (i.e. are single,
        separated, divorced or widowed) (NBS, 2013).
       Mothers are the most visible figures in the family and are heavily involved in household chores and child care
        (Ministry of Social Development and Culture, 2011).
       The participation of women in the market labor force is also very high (77%).
       Gender equality indicators are generally excellent, consistent with the integral role and relative prominence of
        women in society in Seychelles.
       Yet the gender dimension is relevant to understanding and responding to Seychelles’ development challenges:
        •    Teenage childbearing: relatively high, raising the vulnerability of young women to getting less education
             and ultimately being excluded from better jobs and incomes, linked also to…
        •    …the labor market: persistent traditional gender divisions in industry representation and roles; rigid work
             hours / challenging hours given childcare responsibilities (e.g. in tourism).
        •    Male welfare and health outcomes:
                o Youth: concern over high incarceration rates and drug and alcohol abuse.
                o Elderly: men’s life expectancy at birth (68.4 years) is a decade less than women’s, a very wide gap.
                                                                                                   Caribbean
                                                                      Seychelles Mauritius         small states Upper-MIC   High income
  Adolescent fertility rate (births per 1,000 women ages 15-19)            57.9          28.6          57.1        32.3        14.6
  Labor force participation rate, female (% of female
  population ages 15-64)                                                   76.8          43.7          54.0        56.7        52.1
  Proportion of seats held by women in national parliament                 43.8          18.8          17.2        23.0        25.8
  School enrollment, secondary, male (% gross)                             73.9          96.9          81.9        90.9        104.3
  School enrollment, secondary, female (% gross)                           75.3          99.0          95.0        93.4        104.0
  Life expectancy at birth, female (years)                                 78.3          77.6          75.7        76.8        83.3
  Life expectancy at birth, male (years)                                   68.4          71.0          70.2        72.2        78.0
   Notes: Labor statistics for Seychelles are World Bank staff estimates, all other countries are modeled ILO
   estimates.
95 Source: WDI, latest available year.
 Allocation of skills mix by sector: a high proportion of the most educated
 work in government
                                 No                 Second-     Ad-                   Poly-                Post-      Un-        All labor
                              schooling   Primary     ary     vanced    Vocational   technic   Degree    graduate   specified   force (LF)

                Government        17.6%     18.4%     17.9%     25.0%       18.0%      26.2%     30.9%      39.8%      15.0%       21.0%

                Parastatal         2.5%      6.2%      8.1%      9.3%       12.6%      11.2%      8.1%      10.4%       5.8%         9.3%

                Private           41.6%     37.4%     43.6%     40.6%       45.6%      38.6%     30.7%      27.1%      49.5%       41.3%
                With a
                cooperative        0.0%      0.4%      0.4%      0.0%        0.0%       0.4%      0.0%       0.0%       0.0%         0.3%
                NGO / non-
     Employed




                profit             0.0%      0.0%      0.3%      0.4%        0.0%       0.4%      1.1%       0.5%       0.0%         0.3%
                Embassy or
                intl. org.         0.0%      0.1%      0.1%      0.0%        0.0%       0.0%      0.4%       0.0%       0.0%         0.1%
                Private
                household          3.0%      3.9%      2.1%      0.6%        1.3%       0.5%      0.6%       0.4%       1.7%         1.7%

                Elsewhere          0.0%      0.4%      0.4%      0.0%        0.5%       0.1%      0.0%       0.5%       0.0%         0.3%

         Unspecified              23.8%     15.3%     13.3%      7.9%        9.4%      10.5%     11.2%      13.5%      17.7%       12.2%
         Not allowed to
         answer                    8.5%     13.0%      9.3%     12.8%        8.2%       8.4%     15.9%       7.6%       3.4%         9.6%
     Unemployed
                                   3.1%      5.0%      4.5%      3.3%        4.6%       3.7%      1.1%       0.3%       6.9%         4.1%

     All labor force
                                 100.0%    100.0%    100.0%    100.0%     100.0%      100.0%    100.0%    100.0%      100.0%      100.0%

Sources: World Bank, Seychelles Labor Market Report (data from 2014).

96
     Shipping and air connectivity: rising shipping network
     integration; increases in airline seat numbers
       LIMITED BUT RISING INTEGRATION INTO              RISING AIRLINE SEAT CAPACITY, MORE THAN
          GLOBAL LINER SHIPPING NETWORKS                  KEEPING PACE WITH PASSENGER NUMBERS

      35
              Liner shipping connectivity index,                 Total seats       Total Passengers
                     annual, 2004-2016
      30                     2004    2016              600,000

      25                                               500,000
      20
                                                       400,000
      15
                                                       300,000
      10

       5                                               200,000

       0                                               100,000

                                                            0
       Notes: Subsample of regional neighbors shown.
                                                                    2013          2014     2015
                                                                 Sources: SCAA.
       Sources: UNCTAD.



97
     Domestic connectivity: strong infrastructure but questions on
     maritime pricing; rising traffic congestion
         Maritime transportation:
            • Plays a key role for people circulation in the archipelago, with most traffic being amongst the
                inner island population centers of Mahe, Praslin and La Digue.
            • Future work could explore maritime transportation regulation and its impacts on reportedly
                high fares, and costs of goods.
        Land transport:
            • Infrastructure is well-established:
                 • More than 95% of roads are paved.
                 • Vehicle ownership is 180 per 1,000 people, at the same level as Singapore and Hong
                      Kong SAR, China.
            • Negative externalities – congestion, traffic safety and pollution – are emerging concerns.
            • Government has sought to address these, e.g. the introduction in 2014 of a 50% increase in
                the levy on imported private vehicles.
            • Given increasing motorization, the provision of a high quality alternative in the form of
                efficient public transport is increasingly important, both for the majority non-car owning
                population, but also to deter private driving. Currently, the Seychelles Public Transport
                Corporation (SPTC), a State Owned Enterprise, operates a network of some 40 routes with
                1,100 trips.
            • Future work could include a broad benchmarking of road use, assets and their management,
                and performance; benchmark public transport use and review public transport operations
                and financial performance, particularly for public buses (SPTC) and ferries. Although the
                road condition seems acceptable, cost and efficiency of public spending on road investment
                and maintenance could be further examined.

98
     Financial sector: high banking sector penetration
     Accounts Per Thousand Adults, Commercial Banks                                                                 Number of Branches Per 100,000 Adults, Commercial Banks

                                Accounts Per Thousand Adults, Commercial Banks                                                             Number of Branches Per 100,000 Adults, Commercial Banks
       3,000.0                                                                                                           60.0

       2,500.0                                                                                                           50.0

       2,000.0                                                                                                           40.0

       1,500.0                                                                                                           30.0

       1,000.0                                                                                                           20.0

         500.0                                                                                                           10.0

            0.0                                                                                                           0.0
                   2005     2006        2007       2008    2009    2010     2011    2012     2013        2014                     2005    2006        2007       2008     2009    2010     2011    2012     2013    2014



                                Value Observed                            Expected median                                                      Value Observed                             Expected median




     S01CGP0                     2005     2006      2007    2008   2009     2010   2011    2012   2013     2014     S02CGP0                    2005     2006       2007    2008   2009     2010    2011   2012     2013    2014
     Seychelles                  1,620 1,658 1,601 1,620 1,675 1,677 1,736 2,055 1,978 2,068                        Seychelles                 39.9      40.3      39.8    46.2    45.8     45.9   47.0   48.0     50.0    54.8
                                   -           -      -      -      -        -      -       -       -           -                                -           -      -        -      -        -      -       -       -       -
                                   -           -      -      -      -        -      -       -       -           -                                -           -      -        -      -        -      -       -       -       -
     HIC Non-OECD Average        1,287 1,385 1,515 1,584 1,481 1,483 1,525 1,587 1,614 1,564                        HIC Non-OECD Average       24.9      24.7      25.8    26.5    26.8     26.5   25.4   24.9     24.1    23.6
     HIC Non-OECD Median         1,231 1,336 1,399 1,529 1,219 1,279 1,338 1,379 1,377 1,348                        HIC Non-OECD Median        22.5      21.0      22.2    22.9    23.6     22.8   21.3   22.0     19.3    19.8
     HIC OECD Median             2,002 1,975 2,226 2,230 2,219 2,290 2,269 2,285 2,215 2,366                        HIC OECD Median            28.2      27.6      29.6    31.5    32.0     29.5   28.7   28.7     28.5    28.0
     Peer Group Average          3,109 3,216 3,467 3,587 3,587 3,583 3,707 3,781 3,844 3,918                        Peer Group Average          47.9     37.5      37.7    39.7    39.3     38.8   33.4   33.3     32.2    30.7
     Expected 25th percentile    1,406 1,462 1,549 1,590 1,631 1,745 1,764 1,766 1,745 1,652                        Expected 25th percentile    21.0     21.0      23.2    24.8    24.9     25.3   25.2   25.5     25.7    25.3
     Expected median             1,705 1,750 1,954 2,072 2,102 2,153 2,146 2,132 2,285 2,513                        Expected median             25.4     26.2      28.1    29.8    30.0     30.4   30.4   30.4     30.0    29.4
     Expected 75th percentile    1,923 2,019 2,100 2,247 2,351 2,466 2,595 2,617 2,744 2,745                        Expected 75th percentile    38.8     37.5      40.0    44.5    44.1     45.6   44.7   43.6     43.1    42.3


     Number of countries used for the regional and income group benchmarks (not the OECD benchmark)                 Number of countries used for the regional and income group benchmarks (not the OECD benchmark)
     S01CGP0                     2005     2006      2007    2008   2009     2010   2011    2012   2013     2014     S01CGP0                    2005     2006       2007    2008   2009     2010    2011   2012     2013    2014
     Regional benchmarks           -           -      -      -      -        -      -       -       -           -   Regional benchmarks          -           -      -        -      -        -      -       -       -       -
     Income group benchmarks       10      10        10     11      13       14    14       14      14          -   Income group benchmarks      22      23         24      24     25       25     25       25     25       -

     Sources: World Bank Finstat database.


99
      Financial sector: strong banking sector soundness indicators
    Regulatory Capital to Risk-Weighted Assets (%)                                                          NPLs to Total Gross Loans (%)

                               Regulatory Capital to Risk-Weighted Assets (%)                                                            NPLs to Total Gross Loans (%)
       30.0                                                                                                       10.0
                                                                                                                   9.0
       25.0                                                                                                        8.0
                                                                                                                   7.0
       20.0
                                                                                                                   6.0
       15.0                                                                                                        5.0
                                                                                                                   4.0
       10.0                                                                                                        3.0
                                                                                                                   2.0
        5.0
                                                                                                                   1.0
        0.0                                                                                                        0.0
                2005    2006     2007     2008    2009     2010      2011    2012      2013   2014                        2005    2006    2007   2008       2009    2010   2011    2012    2013    2014


                  Value Observed           Income Group Average              Peer Group Average                           Value Observed         Income Group Average             Peer Group Average


   S01FSI0                      2005    2006   2007   2008    2009    2010      2011   2012   2013   2014   S03FSI0                    2005   2006   2007    2008   2009   2010   2011    2012    2013    2014
ue OSeychelles                    -     19.6   15.4   12.0    21.6    21.5      24.2   26.3   26.1   21.6    Seychelles                  -     4.4    2.3     2.0    3.8    5.5    8.1     9.0     9.2     8.0
 iona                             -       -      -      -       -       -         -      -      -      -                                 -      -      -       -      -      -      -       -       -       -
 iona                             -       -      -      -       -       -         -      -      -      -                                 -      -      -       -      -      -      -       -       -       -
ome HIC Non-OECD Average        16.2    15.9   15.1   14.4    16.8    16.9      17.0   17.3   17.3   17.3   HIC Non-OECD Average        4.0    3.2    2.4     2.9    6.3    6.1    5.7     5.7     6.4     6.6
ome HIC Non-OECD Median         15.9    15.2   15.4   14.8    16.7    16.9      16.0   16.9   16.5   16.8   HIC Non-OECD Median         4.0    3.1    2.3     2.2    3.9    5.3    5.5     5.3     4.1     3.7
h IncHIC OECD Median            12.2    12.4   12.0   11.9    13.9    14.2      14.0   14.9   15.5   16.3   HIC OECD Median             1.2    0.8    0.9     1.9    3.3    3.5    3.6     3.4     3.1     3.1
 r Gr Peer Group Average        17.1    15.0   12.3   11.5    15.3    14.8      15.5   16.1   16.5   14.7   Peer Group Average          7.4    5.9    5.9     5.5    5.8    7.0    7.1     7.8     8.9     9.0
ecteExpected 25th percentile    13.7    13.8   13.5   13.5    15.1    15.2      15.6   16.0   15.9   16.1   Expected 25th percentile    1.5    1.4    1.1     1.4    2.3    2.0    1.6     1.7     1.8     1.6
ecteExpected median             16.0    15.8   15.2   15.4    16.8    17.6      17.5   18.1   18.0   17.8   Expected median             2.7    2.3    1.8     2.2    3.8    3.7    3.0     3.1     3.2     3.0
ecteExpected 75th percentile    18.1    18.4   17.5   17.5    19.5    19.6      19.5   19.8   19.7   20.1   Expected 75th percentile    6.1    5.0    3.8     4.3    6.1    6.6    6.3     6.5     6.1     5.8

     Number of countries used for the regional and income group benchmarks (not the OECD benchmark)          Number of countries used for the regional and income group benchmarks (not the OECD benchmark)
    S01FSI0                     2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014                           S01FSI0                     2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014
 ionaRegional benchmarks          -       -       -      -      -      -      -       -     -     -          Regional benchmarks           -      -       -      -      -      -      -       -     -     -
ome Income group benchmarks 14           14      15     18     19     20     20      20    20     -          Income group benchmarks 14          14      15     18     19     20     20      20    20     -



       Sources: World Bank Finstat database.


100
  Environmental and natural disaster risks
      Average Annual Loss distribution in Seychelles by sector (left) and by peril (right)




      Mean return periods associated caused by tropical cyclones, non-tropical cyclone
      floods, and earthquakes




                                                           Sources (all charts): World Bank.



101
Seychelles' historical macroeconomic indicators at a glance
                                                             1990        1995        2000         2005      2010      2011     2012     2013     2014    2015
National Accounts
            Real GDP (% change)                                 7.5         0.5         4.3          9.0       5.9      5.4      3.7      5.0      6.2    4.3
             Agriculture (% of GDP)                             4.8         4.2         2.8          3.3       2.3      2.2      2.0      2.5      2.3      ..
             Industry (% of GDP)                              16.3        22.7        29.0         16.4      14.0      13.7     13.3     12.9     12.3      ..
             Services (% of GDP)                              78.9        73.2        68.2         63.2      66.9      66.8     67.9     70.2     71.1      ..
            Total investment (% of GDP)                       30.5        30.3        27.6         35.7      36.6      35.0     37.4     37.9     37.3   33.7
            Nominal GDP (USD million)                          369         508         615          919       970     1,018    1,059    1,316    1,349      ..
            GDP per capita (USD)                             5,303       6,749       7,579       11,093    10,805    11,647   11,998   14,626   14,769      ..
General Government budget (% GDP)
            Revenue and grants                                58.0        50.5        40.7         39.4      35.1      38.0     38.8     35.9     35.4   34.2
            Expenditure                                       46.1        53.1        55.4         39.0      34.6      34.7     36.1     35.6     31.9   33.1
            Budget balance                                    11.9        -2.6       -14.7          0.4       0.5       3.3      2.7      0.3      3.5    1.1
            Government debt                                   80.4       133.5       172.6        144.1      81.9      73.9     77.1     64.1     65.3   64.5
Balance of Payments (% GDP)
            Current account balance                           -3.5         0.3        -7.0        -18.9     -19.1     -21.6    -19.9    -11.5    -21.0   -15.2
             Exports (GFNS)                                   15.3        10.5        75.5         78.3      93.8      95.8     92.8     85.5     83.1       ..
             Imports (GNFS)                                   50.5        45.8        81.9        100.0     108.1     111.4    109.4     92.8     98.2       ..
             Balance of trade in goods & services            -35.2       -35.4        -6.4        -21.7     -14.3     -15.6    -16.6     -7.4    -15.1       ..
            Net direct investment*                            -5.2        -5.7        -2.2         -8.5     -15.8     -12.7    -37.5     -8.9    -13.0       ..
            Total reserves (incl. gold, current US$m)           17          27          44           56       256       279      308      426      465       ..
Monetary
            Lending interest rate (%)                         15.6        15.8        10.7          9.8      12.7      11.2     12.2     12.3     11.6      ..
            Domestic credit to private sector (% of GDP)       7.3        11.4        16.6         24.9      24.4      22.2     20.0     20.1     23.6      ..
            Nominal exchange rate (average, USD/SCR)           5.3         4.8         5.7          5.5      12.1      12.4     13.7     12.1     12.7   13.3
Prices (% change)
            GDP deflator                                       6.4        -2.1         1.3          0.5       -4.2      4.5     10.5      3.2      3.1     2.1
            Consumer price index (average)                     4.0         0.5         6.3          0.6       -2.4      2.6      7.1      4.3      1.4     4.3
Others
            Intl. visitor arrivals (thousands)                            121         130           129       175      194      208      230      233        ..

Notes: *The negative sign indicates net FDI inflows.
Sources: IMF; World Bank; Seychelles National Bureau of Statistics; Central Bank of Seychelles


102
Seychelles' development indicators at a glance
                                                                            1990     1995     2000     2005     2010     2011     2012     2013     2014     2015
 Demographics
      Population (thousand)                                                   70      75.3     81.1     82.9     89.8     87.4     88.3     89.9     91.4       ..
      Population growth rate (%)                                              0.9      1.8      0.9      0.5      2.8     -2.6      1.0      1.8      1.7       ..
      Fertility rate (births per woman)                                                         2.1      2.2      2.1      2.4      2.4      2.4      2.3       ..
      Dependency ratio (% of working-age population)                         74.0     62.1     57.2     47.1     42.5     42.6     42.6     42.7     43.0       ..
 Labor Force
      Labor force participation rate, total (% of pop. ages 15+)                ..       ..       ..    72.1        ..    65.0        ..       ..       ..      ..
         Male                                                                   ..       ..       ..       ..       ..    68.3        ..       ..       ..      ..
         Female                                                                 ..       ..       ..       ..       ..    61.9        ..       ..       ..      ..
      Employment in agriculture (% of total)                                    ..       ..       ..       ..       ..     3.6        ..       ..       ..      ..
      Employment in industry (% of total)                                       ..       ..       ..       ..       ..    17.9        ..       ..       ..      ..
      Employment in services (% of total)                                       ..       ..       ..       ..       ..    78.2        ..       ..       ..      ..
      Unemployment, total (% of labor force)                                    ..       ..       ..     5.5        ..     4.1        ..       ..       ..      ..
 Poverty and Income Distribution
      Poverty headcount ratio at $1.90 a day (2011 PPP)                         ..       ..       ..       ..       ..       ..       ..      1.1       ..      ..
      Poverty headcount ratio at $3.10 a day (2011 PPP)                         ..       ..       ..       ..       ..       ..       ..      2.5       ..      ..
      National poverty line (Rupees/month per adult equiv.)1                    ..       ..       ..       ..       ..       ..       ..   3,945        ..      ..
      Poverty (% of population below national poverty line)                     ..       ..       ..       ..       ..       ..       ..    39.3        ..      ..
      Poverty (% of population below national food poverty line)                ..       ..       ..       ..       ..       ..       ..    24.3        ..      ..
      Gini index (income-based)                                                 ..       ..       ..       ..       ..       ..       ..    45.9        ..      ..
 Health and Nutrition
      Physicians (per 1,000 people)                                             ..       ..       ..     1.3      1.2      1.2      1.1        ..       ..      ..
      Neonatal mortality rate (per 1000 live births)                         11.3      9.5      9.2      9.1      9.0      9.0      9.0      8.9      8.8     8.6
      Infant mortality rate (per 1000 live births)                           14.2     12.5     12.3     12.3     12.2     12.2     12.2     12.1     11.9    11.7
      Life expectancy at birth (years)                                          ..       ..       ..    72.1     73.2     72.7     74.2     73.1     73.2    73.6
         Male                                                                   ..       ..       ..    67.4     69.1     67.7     69.3     69.9     68.4    69.1
         Female                                                                 ..       ..       ..    77.1     77.5     78.0     79.4     76.5     78.3    78.2
      Total health expenditure (% of GDP)                                       ..     5.0      4.6      3.9      3.6      3.4      4.1      3.6      3.4       ..
      Public health expenditure (% of GDP)                                      ..     4.2      3.8      3.6      3.2      3.2      3.8      3.3      3.1       ..
 Education
      Pre-primary gross enrolment rate, both sexes (%)                      100.0    101.4    100.2    100.6    105.9    101.0     99.2     93.2     93.0       ..
      Primary gross enrolment rate (%)                                          ..   102.8    105.5    109.1    110.7    110.4    108.8    106.0    104.1       ..
      Secondary gross enrolment rate (%)                                        ..   113.0     72.9     81.8     74.1     76.4     80.9     73.7     74.6       ..
         Female secondary gross enrolment rate (%)                              ..   113.0     76.4     84.8     75.9     78.6     80.5     76.1     75.3       ..
      Tertiary gross enrolment rate, (%)                                        ..       ..       ..       ..       ..     2.4      1.3      3.1      6.5       ..
      Adult literacy rate (%)                                                   ..       ..       ..       ..    94.0        ..       ..       ..       ..      ..
      Public spending on education (% of GDP)                                   ..     7.7        ..       ..       ..     3.6        ..       ..       ..      ..
 Basic utilities & connectivity
      Access to an improved water source (% of population)                   95.7     95.7     95.7     95.7     95.7     95.7     95.7     95.7     95.7    95.7
      Access to improved sanitation facilities (% of population)             98.4     98.4     98.4     98.4     98.4     98.4     98.4     98.4     98.4    98.4
      Access to electricity (% of population)                                96.6              99.4             100.0             100.0        ..       ..      ..
      Mobile cellular subscriptions (per 100 people)                          0.0      0.1     32.5     67.5    128.9    137.9    147.8    147.3    162.2       ..
      Fixed broadband subscriptions (per 100 people)                            ..       ..       ..     1.1      7.4     10.3     11.5     13.4     12.7       ..
 Others
      UN Human Development Index (current ranking: 64/188)                      ..       ..   0.715        ..   0.743    0.752    0.761    0.767    0.772       ..
      Proportion of seats held by women in national parliament (%)           16.0        ..    23.5     29.4     23.5     43.8     43.8     43.8     43.8    43.8
 Notes: 1 Measure based on earlier definition and applied to gross income
 Sources: World Bank WDI; UN; Seychelles National Bureau of Statistics
103
104
                      II.   SUPPLEMENTARY TOPICAL NOTES

51.    This Section provides supplementary information in the form of six short topical
notes. These notes were carefully selected to enrich and complement the analysis of the SCD, as
presented in the slide deck.

The first topical note concerns tourism, Seychelles’ main economic sector, and discusses some of
the key challenges facing the industry, and the reasons for these challenges.

The second topical note examines the “blue economy” concept as it pertains to Seychelles, where
it is an emerging policy paradigm, and discusses how further development of the blue economy
could support shared prosperity.

The third topical note describes Seychelles’ SOE sector in more detail, as merited by the sector’s
considerable importance in the economy, for public financial management, and in the national
debate over development strategy.

The fourth topical note turns the focus to Seychelles’ social protection system, describing it in
greater detail than is possible in the slides, and outlining reform possibilities.

The fifth topical note provides methodological detail on the effort made in the SCD to assess
rigorously recent growth incidence, and explains the limitations of the two most recent household
surveys to examine the recent inclusiveness of growth.

Finally, the sixth topical note summarizes the findings of a report on the labor market, which was
commissioned for the SCD. The findings of this report, to be published separately as a working
paper, helped to fill a key knowledge gap that was confronted by the SCD: the structure and
performance of the labor market, particularly given Seychelles’ high employment rate, and the key
role of labor income in the mix of household income across the distribution, according to
household survey data.




                                               105
       1. Topical Note: Tourism in the Seychelles - recent trends and key issues

Sustainability of the current tourism model in the Seychelles
52.     The Seychelles’ traditional model of low volume, high value tourism based upon attracting
wealthy visitors, particularly couples and elite visitors, along with the category of “once in a
lifetime dream holiday” guests, enjoying a simple, tranquil, natural beach idyll, shifted in recent
years to a lower-value, higher-volume model. Tourist numbers have surged and source markets
have diversified considerably (Figure 3).

53.     A recently published, independent “Tourism Carrying Capacity Study” 19, commissioned
by the Government, recommended a moratorium on additional accommodation provision across
the islands, concluding that: “current tourism development has for certain aspects reached levels
which lead to a destabilization of the overall tourism sector, as well as having an impact on the
good reputation of Seychelles as a leading tourism destination”. Following this report, the
Government announced in early 2017 that it would extend its moratorium on hotels having 25
rooms or more until the end of 2020.

54.      However, in the short-term, due to approved existing planning applications, hotels already
under construction, and additional beds planned in existing hotels, bed stock is projected to rise
faster than increases in arrivals, further increasing pressure on currently declining occupancy rates.
The study estimates that to achieve the 60 percent occupancy rate that is considered financially
sustainable at the current average visitor length of stay of around 10 days, a 40 percent increase in
visitor arrivals over the 2015 figure would be necessary.

55.    The path of tourism development in the islands has resulted partly from global economic
and business factors, notably:

56.     Market composition has changed in response to global drivers, notably (1) economic crises
in Europe and Russia affecting these traditionally higher-spending markets; and (2) demographic
changes in emerging markets such as China and India, with a new generation of middle class
travelers with disposable income, and the growing importance of “Millennials” (now 20 percent
of tourists globally 20), a high-spending segment with non-traditional travel preferences.

57.      Increases and composition shifts in airline seat availability, most significantly, the entry
and expansion of Emirates and Etihad airlines (Figure 4), which can cross-subsidize the Seychelles
leg from more profitable routes. This includes the Air Seychelles-Etihad partnership, including a
direct flight from Paris. Together, these airlines provided 81 percent of the available seats in 2015.
In addition, European point to point services have changed, with the exit of British Airways and
entry of the budget carrier, Condor (Berlin). 21

58.    Trends in online, digital, social and mobile consumer behavior and the growth of the
“shared economy”.




19
     Iris Richter, 2016, “Carrying Capacity Study for the Inner Islands of the Seychelles. Final Report”.
20
     Source: UNWTO.

                                                           106
59.    However, the growth and diversification of visitors has also reflected planned strategic
choices: the Government, aware of the need to improve inclusivity and redistribute gains from the
tourism industry more widely among the population, promoted participation in Micro, Small and
Medium Enterprises (MSMEs), allied with a political shift to a “more affordable Seychelles” – a
deliberate departure from the high-yielding, traditional high-end tourism model.

 Figure 3: Visitor arrivals in the Seychelles by                Figure 4: Airline share of air passenger numbers in
 market (selected major markets)                                the Seychelles, 2015
              France                     Italy                                  Ethiopian
              Germany                    United Kingdom                          Airlines Mihin Lanka
              South Africa               Russia                                    4%         3%
              Switzerland                United Arab Emirates              Condor                             Air
              USA                        China                              3%                             Seychelles
     50,000                                                                                                  30%
                                                                     Etihad
                                                                     Airways
     40,000                                                           10%

     30,000
                                                                                                                     Kenya
     20,000                                                                                                          Airways
                                                                                                                       4%
     10,000
                                                                                                                 Air Austral
                                                                                                                     2%
         0                                                            Emirates
                                                                       41%                                Chartered Private
              2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016
                                                                                                            plane   plane
                                                                                                             1%      2%
 Source: NBS                                                    Source: Seychelles Civil Aviation Authority (SCAA)

The growth of smaller-scale offerings and associated regulatory and quality
concerns
60.    A fast-track initiative for change of use from                            Figure 5: official numbers of beds in
residential to tourist accommodation has facilitated the                         Seychelles by accommodation
rapid growth of small-scale lodgings (although this rate                         category
slowed on La Digue after 2012, when a carrying capacity                           Self catering
study for that island 22 recommended a moratorium on                                                      2016     2000
construction of additional accommodation). In addition,                           Guest house
government encouragement of self-employment in small
tourism enterprises was backed up by subsidized credit                             Small hotel
from the Development Bank of the Seychelles.
                                                                                   Large hotel

61.     As a result there has been a huge expansion in the                   0      2000   4000   6000
number of smaller-scale businesses – 150 car hire firms,
around 500 taxis (of which around 480 are in Mahé) 23, an Source: Marquise and Richter, 2012,
                                                                 “Carrying Capacity Study for La Digue”
unknown number of excursion providers (many of which
are unregistered), and retail outlets, and 200 percent and 1,700 percent increases in bed and
breakfast and self-catering bed stocks, respectively, during the 2000-16 period, which now account
for a significant share of supply (Figure 5). 24 These suffer from a lack of regulation and common
standards; while some smaller accommodations are excellent, others offer poor levels of amenities


22
   Marquise David and Iris Richter (2012). Carrying Capacity Study for La Digue. Final Report.
23
   World Bank survey data.
24
   NBS data.
                                                             107
and service. Among the more serious issues is that most small tourism businesses do not purchase
public liability insurance and visitors experiencing problems have little recourse.

Synthesis: four main implications of the above trends and factors

62.    In addition, long-term issues with unregistered accommodation on boats, estimated at
1,000 “floating beds” (also termed “liveaboard”), and other unofficial small establishments have
been intensified by the ease of direct marketing through platforms such as AirBnB. An estimated
12 percent of arrivals are not captured by official accommodation statistics. 25

63.     1. Downward pressure on yields: although the hard evidence is fragile, it appears that
spending per tourist (yield) has not been keeping pace with rising tourist numbers (Figure 6).
Industry actors consistently report that visitors are spending less, and this anecdotal evidence is
consistent with National Bureau of Statistics (NBS) spending data. However, these spending data
do not include credit card payments, and this may at least partly explain the declining yield trend.
Similarly, official data suggest that the newly dominant markets are among the most frugal (Figure
7), but collection is patchy and more nuancing is required – the Chinese market, for example, is
composed of visitors who tend to spend less than average, alongside high spenders.

64.     What is clear, however, is that it is now possible to fly from Europe to the Seychelles via
Middle Eastern hubs for around €600, stay in self-catering accommodation for as little as €40 per
night, eat cheap, imported convenience foods purchased from supermarkets and other retail outlets,
and use low-cost, subsidized public transport to travel around the islands. Consistent with this, the
arrival of backpackers has been noted in recent years.

 Figure 6: Yield per visitor (gross expenditure                                        Figure 7: Average daily visitor expenditure by
 divided among arrivals)                                                               market in 2015
                                     2.5                                                   1000
                                                                                            900
                                                                                            800
     Avg. visitor expenditure (USD




                                      2                                                     700
                                                                                            600
                                     1.5                                                    500
                thousand)




                                                                                            400
                                                                                            300
                                      1                                                     200
                                                                                            100
                                                                                              0
                                     0.5


                                      0
                                           2010   2011   2012   2013   2014   2015

 Source: Staff calculations based on NBS data                                          Source: NBS

65.    2. There are signs of a downward spiral in room rates and quality: Premium service
providers are often forced to discount their rates (which, due to elevated operating costs, are
generally higher than competitors’ equivalent products, Table 2, Table 3). Although large hotels,
for example, are not usually in direct competition with lower-priced establishments, the recent

25
     Seychelles Tourist Board (STB) estimate.
                                                                                     108
expansion of bed availability at very cheap rates causes ripples up the hierarchy, with each
category’s margins being squeezed by those below it. This combines with very high operating
costs to reduce profits and limit the capital available for reinvestment in improved and modernized
stock. The resulting offer is often worn and represents poor value in comparison to that of
competing destinations. In turn, international tour operators downgrade the Seychelles, placing
further downward pressure on rates.

 Table 2: World Economic Forum Travel and             Table 3: Spot room price comparison for international
 Tourism Competitiveness 2015 Rankings for            hotel chains in Maldives, Mauritius, Seychelles and Sri
 Seychelles, Mauritius and Sri Lanka for              Lanka
 indicators under the Price Competitiveness
 pillar
                                                                   Maldives    Mauritius   Seychelles   Sri
                   Seychelles   Mauritius   Sri                                                         Lanka
                                            Lanka      Banyan      690                     900
  Ticket taxes,    89           90          129        Tree
  airport                                              Constance 1,107         273         512
  charges                                              1
  Hotel prices     101          95          35         Constance 1,128         575         854
  Purchasing       84           69           11        2
  power parity                                         Constance 1,118         424         683
  Fuel prices      82           94           56        ave.
 Notes: Maldives was not included in the Index.        Four                    510         806
 Rankings of 141 countries. Overall rankings for       Seasons
 Price Competitiveness: Seychelles = 123, Mauritius    Meridien                230         273
 = 114, Sri Lanka = 68.                                Hilton 1                267         478         157
                                                       Hilton 2                            370         170
                                                       Hilton                  267         424         164
                                                       ave.
                                                       Avani 1                             317         121
                                                       Avani 2                                         136
                                                       Avani ave.                          317         129
                                                       Berjaya 1                           171         80
                                                       Berjaya 2                           199
                                                       Berjaya                             185         80
                                                       ave.
 Source: Staff calculations based on NBS data.        Notes: Booking.com; spot cost of double occupancy room
                                                      for 1 September 2016 on 8 April 2016

66.    3. The Seychelles brand has diversified and, because it has been a partly unplanned
process, this is not an entirely positive phenomenon. In particular, there is a clear brand risk and
potential negative longer-term environmental implications of the rapid growth of unregulated
small-scale operations.

67.     4. The islands’ current product mix suffers from a lack of innovation, diversity and quality.
At present, there is a relative lack of local content and high quality, distinctive products and
services. This risks rendering the destination unattractive to the important Millennial segment, for
example, which seeks adventure, exploration and activity-based holidays with custom travel
experiences and good value for money. A concerning sign in this respect is that the Seychelles’
strong performance in terms of visitor numbers masks a low repeat visit rate of around 12 percent

                                                      109
(contrasting with 28 percent for the Maldives, 37 percent for Mauritius and around 50 percent for
Aruba). 26

Constraints to innovation and product development
Impediments to the development of a fuller tourist experience include:

68.    Evidence base: the NBS lacks the capacity to collect high quality market intelligence. For
example, official data suggesting that the Chinese market is among the highest spending are
contrary to the wide experience of industry actors – a more detailed, nuanced understanding of
Seychelles’ markets and their requirements is required.

69.     Labor supply and norms: there is a widespread view that younger Seychellois are reluctant
to enter the industry and that wider societal attitudes and constraints to working irregular hours
also hamper its development.

70.     Lack of innovation in the MSME sector, in turn likely reflecting scarce know-how and start-
up capital: a “copycat” culture has resulted in numerous, undifferentiated small businesses in all
sub-sectors of the industry, including accommodation, transport, retail and excursions. Short-term
gains are often prioritized over quality and distinctiveness, as exemplified by the plethora of
vendors selling low-end imported goods in preference to developing unique, high quality products
with strong local content.

71.    Difficulty in keeping pace with shifting global tourist tastes for a richer visit experience:
the industry has been slow to respond to the global shift away from the traditional Seychelles
(“sand, sea and sun” enclave) product; engagement with online, mobile, digital and social trends
has been limited and the emergence of the sharing economy is commonly viewed as a threat rather
than an opportunity. However, in a sign that this may be changing, the Seychelles National Parks
Authority has acknowledged that the islands’ natural endowment is underexploited and is
developing strategies to monetize its assets through product development. Similarly, the
Seychelles Heritage Centre is developing ambitious plans to improve local content and diversify
products offered at the sites it manages.

72.     Historical lack of urgency around reforming sector policies and lack of competitive market
pressures to drive innovation and change: There has been a culture of inertia and complacency in
addressing issues that have been debated, often passionately, by the industry for some time. For
example, there has been no industry champion to drive change, and the recommendations of a
previous value chain study were largely not taken up. Recognized operators appear content to offer
standard products, relying upon a relatively narrow range of established vendors to supply
outsourced components. Barriers to entry are considerable, with high capital requirements to
qualify for the provision of services at international standards. In addition, informal barriers to new
entrants exist in the form of vertical integration and a culture of substantial kickbacks and
commissions required by buyers from would-be suppliers of products and services.

73.     Recognizing many of the above challenges, government policy is now shifting towards an
increased focus on protecting and reinforcing Seychelles’ “brand” as an upmarket tourist
destination. To deliver the unique, high quality visitor experience this increasingly requires, and

26
     Average from NBS visitor exit survey data, weighted by the number of responses.
                                                         110
to increase the role played by the sector to generate high quality earnings opportunities, this will
likely require unbundling the high vertical integration that has evolved in the industry, and creating
a supportive environment for more sophisticated, innovative complementary services (beyond
accommodation and transport) to emerge.




                                                 111
     2. Topical Note: Developing the “Blue Economy” for shared prosperity 27

Current situation and policies: Seychelles aspires to make better, and more
managed, use of the marine resources that underpin its economy
74.     Seychelles’ economy is based on exploiting its abundant marine natural resources (Table
4). The tourism sector, centered on Seychelles’ beaches and ocean-based recreational activities,
contributes directly about one quarter of gross valued-added. Tourism’s contribution is much
greater considering also its indirect contributions, since it also generates additional demand for
goods and services from across the wider economy—generating by one estimate over half of GDP
expenditures. 28 Tourism is also the primary source of foreign currency earnings. These foreign
earnings are complemented mainly by those from two other marine-related sources, arising from
Seychelles’ strategic location on the tuna migration and shipping routes through the western Indian
ocean: exports of tuna, as well as re-exports of oil by its fuel bunkering industry.

Table 4: Marine-related activity contributions to Seychelles' economy
                      Tourism                    Fishing industry                           Oil re-exports
 Contribution to:
 GDP                     23% (2014)                  1.1% (2013; artisanal & semi-          n.a.
                                                     industrial only)
 Including indirect      57% (2014)                  8% (2013; (all fisheries-related       n.a.
 GDP contributions                                   output)
 Employment              19% (2015)                  10% (2014; fishermen, fish             n.a.
 (formal)                                            processing workers, shipping &
                                                     equipment jobs etc)
 Exports of goods & 35% (2015)                       22% (2015) (tuna exports)         13% (2015)
 services
 Government             34% (2015; directly-    3% (2015; license fees)                n.a.
 revenues               attributable taxes)
 Sources: Ministry of Finance, Trade & Economic Planning; National Bureau of Statistics; Seychelles Fisheries
 Authority; World Travel & Tourism Council

75.     Seychelles supports some of the world’s most pristine, diverse and productive marine
ecosystems. Seychelles’ large (1.4 million km2) marine Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) ranks
7th/221 on the Ocean Health Index. 29 Most of Seychelles’ 115 islands are surrounded by coral
reefs. Large sea grass beds exist and are an important nursery for reef fish, invertebrate sea turtles
and manatees. Fishing grounds are abundant and include a wide variety of species.

76.     There are growing concerns about sustainability. No comprehensive evaluation of the
impact of current or projected economic activity on the marine environment has yet been made,
but in Seychelles, as globally, there are growing concerns about sustainability. In tourism, the
Government has frozen new approvals for large establishments (with 20 rooms and above) through
2020, reflecting concerns about the impact of the recent rapid pace of development. In the
industrial fishing sector, some species are deemed overfished, and the Indian Ocean Tuna

27
   Prepared by Alex Sienaert (Senior economist), Luis Alvaro Sanchez (Senior consultant), and Ben Garnaud (Senior
natural resources management specialist).
28
   Current national accounts statistics compilation methods are insufficient to quantify sectors’ indirect contributions
to total expenditures, but estimates by the World Travel & Tourism Council place tourism’s overall GDP and
employment contributions at well above 50 percent (WTTC, 2015, “Travel & Tourism: Economic Impact 2015,
Seychelles”).
29
   http://www.oceanhealthindex.org/region-scores/scores/seychelles
                                                         112
Commission (IOTC) has placed an annual ceiling on yellowfin tuna to protect the stock. The IOTC
ceiling implies a sharp reduction in Seychelles’ quota of the catch. Catch rates of many of the other
main species of fish are declining, reflecting pressures from overfishing in the artisanal,
recreational and sport fishing sub-sectors, and from an increasing environmental footprint of the
tourism industry. The artisanal, recreational and sport fisheries are open-access, which impedes
measures to limit the fishing effort and ensure sustainability.

77.     Going forward, Seychelles’ marine natural resources will continue to support
livelihoods, and can help to generate additional shared prosperity, if preserved. The challenge
for Seychelles is to develop the institutional setup that further develops marine-dependent
economic activity, while protecting and enhancing the stock and quality of marine assets. The
opportunity for Seychelles is to consolidate its regional, and even global, leadership status in the
management and sustainable use of these resources.

78.     The Government is well aware of this challenge and opportunity. A Department of the
Blue Economy, situated in the Office of the Vice-President, is preparing a National Blue Economy
Roadmap, which will aim to protect and recover ocean ecosystems and biodiversity; ensure that
existing ocean industries (e.g. shipping and bunkering) cause minimal environmental impact and
meet the highest sustainable practice standards; integrate cross-sectoral spatial planning and
implement coastal zone management; increase sustainable use of bio resources (biotechnology,
marine ecosystems services); plan for natural disasters and adapt to climate change; increase
surveillance of offshore waters; brand Seychelles as a “blue tourism” destination; and, foster
knowledge development. These goals are fully aligned with the UN Sustainable Development Goal
14: “Conserve and sustainably use the oceans, seas and marine resources for sustainable
development”.

79.    The prospect of hydrocarbon discoveries in Seychelles’ marine territory would pose
a particular potential policy challenge, and the country has begun to prepare for this. The
Government has encouraged exploration in the EEZ and is working with Mauritius to develop
exploration in their Joint Management Zone (JMZ, of 400,000 km2). In anticipation of
hydrocarbon discoveries and extraction, the state-owned regulator (PetroSeychelles) has revised
its Model Petroleum Agreement, complementing provisions in the Petroleum Mining Act and the
Petroleum Taxation Act. Seychelles is a candidate country to join the Extractive Industries
Transparency Initiative (EITI), to which it has committed to submit its first report in 2017.


Prospects for Seychelles’ blue economy to boost shared prosperity
80.    Further development of the blue economy can support shared prosperity. Three main
channels for this can be considered, pointing to the policy levers for making further development
pro-poor: direct effects on livelihoods through better jobs and Micro, Small and Medium
Enterprise (MSME) development, indirect effects on livelihoods through food supply and
macroeconomic effects, and redistribution through the public sector of increased ocean resource
rents.

First, direct poverty reduction and shared prosperity effects through higher earnings in the blue
economy will center on the extent to which local labor market participants are able to obtain better
jobs, and MSMEs are able to access opportunities, especially in tourism.

                                                113
81.     The policy challenge to guide blue economy development for inclusion should be seen
in the light of Seychelles’ already services-oriented, full employment economy. This means
that the challenge for the development of the blue economy, and of the private sector more
generally, is to equip the local workforce with the skills to participate in supplying higher value-
added services, and to ensure that other enabling factors for market work and MSME development
are in place (e.g. childcare options, public transport, credit).

82.     In fishing, blue economy measures such as those to sustainably raise the value of
artisanal fishing catches can be expected to have a beneficial direct impact on the small share
of households which rely on this as their main source of income. The poverty rate amongst
households whose heads work in the primary sector, including fishing, is higher than that of
households headed by workers in any other sector: 55.5 percent, as defined by the national poverty
line (2013). 30 However, only about 3 percent of the domestic workforce in Seychelles are recorded
as having their main employment in the primary sector. Consequently, the aggregate poverty
impact through this direct employment channel will be small.

83.     More important direct employment effects can occur through the tourism industry,
which offers a wide range of jobs, including high-earning opportunities, but fills many
vacancies from abroad. Average tourism sector monthly earnings are considerably higher than
the national average (Rs. 15,650 vs. Rs. 9,544) 31, consistent with strong derived labor demand
growth from what in recent years has been a fast-growing sector. Yet, the high sector average
masks significant earnings dispersion, including a wide gap between male and female wages. 32
There is a range of jobs in the industry, including many which are less desirable because of heavy
manual workloads and difficult hours. A predominant share of the increased labor demand
generated by the growth of the tourism industry has been met by importing foreign workers. Total
recorded employment in tourism was about 9,000 in 2015, while the number of new and renewed
temporary expatriate worker permits (Gainful Occupation Permits, GOPs) issued for tourism was
3,081 in 2015, rising to 4,028 in 2016. 33

84.     Opportunities for small businesses in the blue economy, for example to provide
ancillary services in the fisheries and tourism sectors, could be expanded. Enterprise survey
data are lacking but there is a concern that the market structure of the tourism sector in particular
discourages competition, despite a range of government programs to support MSMEs, such as the
provision of credit guarantees. The market share and vertical integration of the main operators are
high, likely limiting opportunities for small-scale providers of goods and services for tourists.
Coupled with the limited pool of local start-up knowledge and capital, and skills, the result has
been limited innovation and a largely undifferentiated offering of accommodation, transport, retail
and excursion options by small-scale providers. Overall, the existing industry model has been
successful in developing the tourist sector over the past two decades. The time now looks ripe,
however, for fresh analysis of the approach, and especially for the identification of potential

30
   The national poverty line defines poverty expansively compared with poverty lines developed for the purposes of
international poverty comparisons.
31
   As of 2015. Source: NBS, “Seychelles in Figures”, 2016.
32
   Unconditional difference in average earnings of 128 percent in the 2011 LFS. Source: World Bank, Seychelles
Labor Market study (forthcoming).
33
   Official statistics providing a consolidated picture of the sectoral labor force (combining local and expatriate
workers) are not available. Sources: official employment: NBS, 2016, “Seychelles in Figures”; GOPs: Ministry of
Home Affairs.
                                                       114
measures to reduce barriers to entry, and stimulate competition and innovation. This need is
reinforced by the fast pace of change and innovation in tourism globally, and the emergence of
new competitors to Seychelles.

Second, further blue economy development can support shared prosperity through its food
security, living cost and macroeconomic effects.

85.     Seychellois have one of the highest levels of fish consumption per capita in the world,
approximately 57 kg per annum, with fisheries products accounting for up to 50 percent of
the total protein consumed. Most of this is supplied by Seychelles’ artisanal fishery, which lands
about 4,000 tons of fish per year. This fishery is largely limited to catching the bottom-dwelling
(demersal) fish inhabiting the Mahé Plateau, an area of around 41,000 km2 up to approximately
50m deep that surrounds the central islands and population centers. The plateau is fished by 140
whalers and schooners and at least 400 outboard vessels, as well as sport and recreational fishing
boats. These vessels go to sea for a day to a week and use hook and line, and traps. The continued
sustainability of this demersal fishery is critical to food security in Seychelles. Were the local
supply to deteriorate and prices to rise, poorer households would be hardest hit, as they spend the
greatest share of their income on food, including fish. Food items constitute just under 16 percent
of the Consumer Price Index. One survey, albeit now dated (2011), found at that time that about
one fifth of households did not have the ability to buy sufficient meat and fish. 34

86.     In addition to securing the domestic fish supply for food, further sustainable
development of the blue economy would strengthen Seychelles’ external balances and
support macroeconomic resilience. This would operate, first, through reduced food import
demand, an import substitution effect which with further development of sustainable seafood
production could be significant, as Seychelles imports about US$70m worth of food annually,
constituting 9 percent of total goods imports, including to supply hotels. 35 Second, increased
export-oriented production of maritime products (e.g. crab, sea cucumber, seaweed, shrimp, and
sponge-based biotech products), including through mariculture, could raise and diversify foreign
currency earnings which are currently highly concentrated in tourism and tuna sales. In all cases,
ensuring environmental sustainability will be critical, requiring appropriate regulations and
enforcement capability to be in place, and, in light of Seychelles’ delicate and pristine ecology,
likely meaning that production would need to be oriented to small, high value products supplied
into the local tourism industry or to niche international markets.

Third, a larger blue economy can support public revenues, to the benefit of the poorest depending
on the allocation and quality of public spending.

87.    Seychelles’ high economic dependence on its abundant marine natural resources
places into focus not only the preservation of these resources (i.e. sustainability), but also
how the benefits from their use are shared. Government revenues and absorption of total
expenditures are already relatively high, averaging 34 percent and 37 percent of GDP over 2011-
2016, respectively. 36 The tourism sector contributes directly about one third of total taxes. As the
blue economy develops further and contributes more taxation revenues, the incidence of fiscal

34
   Muller, C., 2011, Living Conditions Survey (2011) and Poverty Digest, NBS.
35
   Source: Calculations based on CBS data for 2016. Figures exclude tuna imports for re-export.
36
   Includes preliminary estimates for 2016, IMF.
                                                       115
policy will change, and will need to be assessed and, if merited, adjusted. This, and a continued
focus on raising the quality of public service provision, can help ensure that Seychelles’ blue
economy not only drives economic growth, but increases shared prosperity.

Policy priorities for Seychelles’ blue economy to drive shared prosperity
88.   The blue economy is a conceptual framework that encapsulates much of the existing
economic activity in Seychelles, which is already marine-oriented, but places a new public policy
emphasis on managing and ensuring the sustainability of the resources, and deepening the
economic value that they provide.

89.      The first prerequisite for this inclusive growth strategy to work is to strengthen the
evidence base for policy reform and implementation. Examples include the need for improved
satellite accounts for both tourism (where visitor spending figures are currently unreliable), and
fisheries (where beyond estimation of the landed catch, large parts of the value chains for non-tuna
fisheries lack systematic data collection, and there is little statistical capture of charter sport and
recreational fisheries). These data could be used to apply analytical techniques such as the adjusted
net savings approach to determine the sustainability with respect to preserving natural capital of
Seychelles’ growth path. Seychelles’ participation in the Fisheries Transparency Initiative is an
example of the government’s commitment to improve the measurement and transparent
management of its fisheries. 37 Investment in more regular, standardized household surveys
(including of the subset of households whose livelihoods depend on fishing), and enterprise
surveys, would also shed light on inclusiveness.

90.     Second, planning, and regulatory requirements and enforcement, need to be further
developed and streamlined. Coordination with relevant sector plans and regulatory bodies will
be required due to the fundamentally multi-sectoral nature of the blue economy. In particular,
Seychelles’ blue economy development strategy will need to be integrated with sectoral and
national policy planning frameworks, including for sustainable development (land-focused, in the
Ministry of Environment, Energy and Climate Change) and overall national development strategy
(in the Ministry of Finance, Trade and Economic Planning). Regularity, clarity and consistency
would support private sector investment (including in potentially high-returning, but unproven and
hence riskier, projects), and are needed to ensure fair, transparent access to the benefits from
further development of the blue economy.

91.      Finally, making Seychelles’ further blue economy-based growth trajectory inclusive
requires that local labor force participants are able to obtain the skills they need to access new,
higher-earning opportunities in the sector. It will also require addressing general challenges to
small business development (such as the high cost of credit), and, in the public sector, calibrating
fiscal incidence to an evolving revenue base, while continuing to strengthen the quality of public
services.




37
     See http://fisheriestransparency.org/about-the-initiative.
                                                             116
     3. Topical Note: The role of SOEs in growth, inclusion and sustainability 38

Introduction and overview
92.     The State Owned Enterprise (SOE) sector in Seychelles has been a driving force in
economic development, consistent with the country’s historically state-centric vision of
development, but it has also generated problems, contributing to the build-up of debt and economic
distortions that culminated in the 2008/9 economic crisis. This note provides an overview of the
sector, through the lens of its importance to economic growth, inclusion and sustainability.

93.     The central relevance of the sector to Seychelles can be gauged by the significant scope
and scale of its activities and operations. Moreover, the SOE sector is entwined with the rest of the
public sector in various ways that further expand the scope of its relevance and its key position in
the economy. Clarifying this complex web of relationships will help to strengthen economic
management by informing policymakers of the benefits, costs and risks of SOE activities, and this
process is still at an early stage.

94.     The scope of the SOE sector can be appreciated by taking stock of the areas in which the
public enterprises operate (these are listed in Table 5). SOEs provide electricity, water and
sanitation, and have undertaken ambitious land reclamation works that have expanded urban space
for business and residences in Mahé (the largest island where close to 90 percent of the population
lives). State-owned companies run the airport and port. In domestic transportation, the sector
delivers public transportation services. It is the main provider of inter-island transport, and controls
access to, and the use and development of, the remote islands. In domestic air transport, the
position of state is strong, but the national airline (Air Seychelles), which has a foreign partner,
faces competition. There is likewise a notable state presence in banking, jointly with private banks.
The state is the only importer of oil, and the State Trading Company (STC) is responsible for
approximately 80 percent of food and consumer goods imports. The state pension fund is central
to the welfare of the elderly, and through its investments is a powerful player in the real estate
market. Besides state-owned enterprises, the state maintains investments like in the tuna cannery,
the largest single employer on Mahé. In contrast, the state has divested almost completely from
the tourist sector. It is not present in telecommunications.

95.     Adding to their scope, the SOEs are linked to public policy in several ways. Tariffs for
electricity and water services are subsidized for residential consumers. STC sells specific basic
consumer good at a fixed price. Domestic transportation is likewise subsidized. The price of oil is
managed. Land is made available to SOEs on a preferential basis. The costs of mandates such as
these are not explicitly budgeted, nor have their impacts on the welfare of the population been
assessed. These mandates are financed mostly through cross-subsidies internal to the enterprises.
The practice implies higher tariffs or prices for some categories of consumers, such as in electricity
where tariffs for business and commerce are high, and indeed very high by international standards.
Overall, the public sector accounts do not elucidate public expenditures (net transfers and
subsidies), as is common also in many other countries, obscuring the true size of the state sector.

96.   State enterprises compensate for their non-commercial mandates, or seek to do so, through
expanding into alternative, profitable activities. Companies like STC, the Port Authority, and the

38
  This SCD topical note builds on analytical work that the World Bank and the IMF have undertaken recently, with
the support of the authorities, as well as SCD consultations interviews, and data gathered.
                                                      117
Seychelles Petroleum Company operate as hybrid concerns. The STC, besides importing basic
goods for wholesale, also operates other business lines, and opened a retail hypermarket in Victoria
in 2015. The Port Authority derives income from fees and services; it leases land; and, it is engaged
in expanding capacity to process tuna and other fish species. SPC operates a profitable oil
bunkering line of business that takes advantage of the strategic location of the island. There are
also linkages across enterprises. For instance, the state oil company supplies oil at cost for the
generation of electricity and for the public transport company (SPTC).

97.     In small island economies like Seychelles, with small factor and product markets, situations
of natural monopoly and concentration of activity are common. The commercial activity of SOEs
is not necessarily a problem, being in some cases closely linked to companies’ core mandates and
perhaps unlikely to be provided by the private sector. The concern, however, is if SOE activities
crowd out the private sector (reducing fair competition and economic opportunities, and reducing
efficiency and potentially innovation), or cause economic distortions (for example, due to moral
hazard causing inefficient investment decisions, arising from the government’s financial backstop
to SOEs, which in turn can generate serious fiscal risks).

98.     Several indicators capture the size of the SOE sector in the economy. The book value of
SOE assets stood at 122 percent of GDP in 2015. 39 If the SOE sector was a Holding Company, it
would be by far the largest domestic holding. This is partly because of the limited presence of
private domestic companies, which in many other countries are anchored in trade, construction
and banking. The sector in aggregate is producing an operating surplus, which is increasing, aided
in part by the sharp drop in oil prices in international markets in recent years. The increase in the
operating surpluses, to an estimated 6 percent of GDP in 2015, is buttressing public finances. 40

99.     The sector employed 5,700 people in 2015, 12 percent of the workforce. Only the
Government employs more people (9,300 in 2015, or about 20 percent of the workforce). The
average wage in parastatals is 45 percent higher than the average wage in the private sector. 41
Jointly with government, the SOEs can be seen as wage setters in the labor market. Indeed,
reportedly, the labor market rules in place and covering the overall economy are geared towards
public and SOE practices.

100. The high public sector wage premium reflects partly that the public sector is capturing a
higher bundle of skills than the private sector. SOEs demand technical skills and are important as
a source of job opportunities for graduates of technical fields. Approximately 20 percent of
Seychellois with degrees or higher qualifications work for SOEs. Some, like SPC, have active and
substantial training programs. SOEs are sensitive to and affected by the quality of the country’s
vocational institutes. The substantial (unconditional) average earnings premium over the market
may reflect this effort, and also the attempt to retain personnel in the context of Seychelles’ small
skilled labor pool.

The importance of SOEs to economic performance and fiscal management

39
   A formal estimate of the value added contributed by the SOE sector is not available. An indirect calculation
suggests that the value added generated by the sector exceeds 10 percent of GDP, which would be a modest value-
added relative to assets.
40
   The return on assets (at book value), stood at 5.3 percent in 2015, but this aggregate ROA masks significant
variation by enterprise.
41
   Labor statistics from NBS, 2016, “Seychelles in Figures”.
                                                      118
101. Given the size and scope of the sector, the efficiency of the state owned enterprises matters
beyond their economic and financial performance, because they affect key prices and the quality
of basic services available when operating in Seychelles. The small size of the economy means
low economies of scale and high unit costs of production, but it is difficult to benchmark correctly
with other countries. Comparisons show that in Seychelles tariffs for productive services are higher
than is the case in other relevant small economies (for example, port charges and electricity prices).
In some cases, these costs translate into higher costs of services that are absorbed by the high end
of the tourism market. Still, the contribution of higher service costs to businesses’ cost structures
weighs on the competitiveness of the tradeables sector, as well as impacting on the cost of living
of the local population. The likelihood is that there is scope for efficiency improvements in the
delivery of basic services.

102. The SOEs are exposed to various risks. In the past, for instance, increases in the
international prices of foodstuffs and oil have affected them directly and then, indirectly, spilled
over into government finances. The price of oil affects directly the airline, the oil company (SPC),
the utilities company (PUC) and the public transport company (SPTC). To a certain extent some
of the enterprises play a price stabilizing role, but such a role can be asymmetrical. There are no
reported mechanisms in place to manage fluctuations, such as accumulating precautionary savings
during downturns in input prices (especially food and fuel). Some SOEs have foreign currency
debt and sell in the domestic market, so they are exposed to exchange rate depreciation. These
represent a constituency with a narrow interest in maintaining an overvalued exchange rate, and
as a consequence, some reportedly lobby against the flexible exchange rate.

103. The SOEs carry out the bulk of the sizable public investment program, in recent years
reaching up to 7 percent of GDP. The central government transfers grants for investment, but
SOEs’ internal resources and borrowing also contribute to financing investments. Enterprises
borrow with or without the guarantee of the government. For example, the oil company does so as
part of the operational process and does not require a guarantee of the government. Currently the
combined borrowing of the enterprises stands slightly above 30 percent of GDP, equivalent to
about half of the total borrowings of the public sector. SOE borrowing does appear to have
increased in recent years, though systematic, consolidated tracking of SOE debt is lacking. Overall,
the SOE sector does generate a fiscal risk that needs to be properly factored into the accounts of
government. A review of these fiscal risks has recently been prepared by the IMF.

104. Given the size and strategic importance of the SOE sector, government oversight, and
policy coordination between the government and the SOE sector, needs to be strengthened. There
is a reform agenda aimed at improving monitoring of financial performance and compliance with
the mandate of each of the companies, which remains to be completed. The Public Monitoring
Enterprise Commission (PEMC) could be strengthened, with respect to its legal mandate, and its
technical and enforcement capacity. In some areas, multiple oversight mandates are in place.

105. Tracking fiscal performance of the enterprises and assessing their fiscal risks, are only one
aspect of what is needed. A broader task is aligning the mandates and performance of the SOE
sector with the country’s development priorities. The government has instruments in place;
government representatives are present on the Boards of the companies, and efforts are being made
to improve their relevance and technical capacity. But mandates appear fuzzy and extend the
opportunity to Boards and management to act creatively and pursue opportunities.


                                                 119
106. Government transfers, as well as the extension of guarantees for loans, can be used to
accelerate the most needed public investment projects. Seychelles could benefit, however, from a
more systematic approach to investment prioritization and planning. Infrastructure investment
needs are large, including in electricity, water, sanitation, the port, airport, road network, urban
development, land, and second undersea cable. Many of these needs will go to replace obsolete
infrastructure (consultations singled out the port and electricity infrastructure). The potential size
of these investments can tax the absorptive capacity of the state (financial and technical) but, and
importantly, will signal development priorities and affect opportunities going forward.

Summary: the cross-cutting importance of SOEs for growth, inclusion and
sustainability
107. SOEs are relevant to growth in various ways. First, as the supplier of basic infrastructure
services, notably utilities, and passenger and goods transport. Tariffs for these services appear
high, particularly for businesses, which increases the costs of producing in Seychelles. This is not
only the result of Seychelles’ small scale; management and equipment quality also matter. Second,
SOEs affect growth through their impact on the competitive environment for private investment
and business activity. The combination of flexible mandates, access to scarce resources (financial
and, crucially given Seychelles’ small talent pool, human capital), and preferential treatments and
mutual support systems (e.g. lower input prices and access to land), can give a potential
competitive edge to public enterprises. This reduces the contestability in markets, even where
potential entry by SOEs is latent. Third, they have access to valuable assets, such as land, and they
hold a substantial reservoir of skills. To the extent that these scarce resources are not being used
as efficiently in the SOE sector as they would be in the private sector subject to competitive forces
which drive efficiency, there is opportunity cost and waste in the economy. Finally, SOE
performance affects the delivery and effectiveness of the other policies, such as enhancing credit
availability to MSMEs (government provides banks with guarantees for this credit).

108. SOEs are relevant to the inclusion objective directly as well, as providers of basic services
on which the population relies, notably water, sanitation, electricity, and public transportation.
They also support inclusion because they are charged with social mandates, such as guaranteeing
inter-island transport. They also play an important role in the acquisition and transmission of
critical skills (e.g., management and technical skills).

109. Likewise, SOEs are relevant to sustainability through the combination of debt and their
exposure to global economic risks. In as much as some SOEs play a buffering role, it would help
to factor this explicitly into mandates and operational processes, requiring provisioning (e.g. in
oil). The same applies to exchange rate fluctuations that could affect the companies, and require
provisioning. SOEs will play a key role in climate change mitigation and adaptation measures,
including major environmental policies such as increasing renewable energy use.

110. The need to revisit the role of the SOEs, sharpen oversight, improve efficiencies and public
investment planning, and manage the fiscal risks generated by government’s explicit and implicit
contingent liabilities to the sector, is well-recognized in Seychelles. Constraints to reforming the
SOE sector, in Seychelles as elsewhere, are considerable, however. These range from technical
capacity (as required for forensic auditing, for example) and data availability (consolidated sector
statistics), to resistance to change from SOE management, and political sensitivities arising from
powerful special interests.

                                                 120
Table 5: SOEs by sector, assets and turnover (2015)
                                                                                               % of                       % of
                                                                                                        Turnover
                                                                                Total Assets    total                     total
   Sector and SOE                       Supervisory Ministry                                              (SCR
                                                                               (SCR million)   SOE                        SOE
                                                                                                         million)
                                                                                               assets                   turnover
 Financial Sector
 Development Bank     Ministry of Finance, Trade and Economic Planning
 of Seychelles                                                                          698     2.98%           56        0.53%
 Housing Finance      Ministry of Finance, Trade and Economic Planning
 Company                                                                                539     2.30%           43        0.40%
 Seychelles Pension   Ministry of Finance, Trade and Economic Planning
 Fund                                                                                  2,352   10.05%          208        1.94%
 SIBA/FSA             Ministry of Finance, Trade and Economic Planning
                                                                                        194     0.83%          158        1.48%
 Seychelles           Ministry of Finance, Trade and Economic Planning
 Commercial Bank                                                                        981     4.19%           92        0.86%
 SIMBC/Nouvobanq      Ministry of Finance, Trade and Economic Planning                 5,341   22.82%          433        4.05%
 Total Financial                                                                      10,105   43.17%          990        9.25%
 Energy Sector
 Public Utilities     Ministry of Environment, Energy and Climate Change
 Corporation                                                                           3,132   13.38%        1,500       14.01%
 Petro Seychelles     Ministry of Finance, Trade and Economic Planning
                                                                                          14    0.06%               4     0.03%
 Seychelles           Ministry of Finance, Trade and Economic Planning
 Petroleum
 Company                                                                               5,770   24.65%        4,428       41.38%
 Total Energy                                                                          8,917   38.10%        5,931       55.42%
 Services & economic development
 National             Office of the Vice-President
 Information
 Services Agency                                                                          29    0.12%           26        0.24%
 Islands              Office of the Vice-President
 Development
 Company                                                                                204     0.87%          277        2.59%
 Property             Ministry of Habitat, Infrastructure and Land Transport
 Management
 Corporation                                                                            792     3.39%           59        0.55%
 Seychelles Postal    Ministry of Finance, Trade and Economic Planning
 Services                                                                                 30    0.13%           24        0.22%
 Société              N/A
 d'Investissement
 Seychelloise                                                                           451     1.93%          115        1.08%
 Total: Services &
 Development                                                                           1,507   6.44%           501        4.68%
 TRANSPORT SECTOR
 Seychelles Civil     Ministry of Tourism, Civil Aviation, Ports and Marine
 Aviation Authority                                                                     544     2.33%          351        3.28%
 Seychelles Public    Ministry of Habitat, Infrastructure and Land Transport
 Transport Corp                                                                          133    0.57%          153        1.43%
 Air Seychelles Ltd   Ministry of Tourism, Civil Aviation, Ports and Marine            1,477    6.31%        1,674       15.64%
 Seychelles Ports     Ministry of Tourism, Civil Aviation, Ports and Marine
 Authority                                                                              336     1.44%          140        1.31%
 Total: Transport
                                                                                       2,491   10.64%        2,318       21.66%
 Trading and Retail

 Seychelles Trading   Ministry of Finance, Trade and Economic Planning
                                                                                        387     1.65%          962        8.99%
 Company
 Grand Total                                                                          23,405                10,702
Source: PEMC via Ministry of Finance, Trade and Economic Planning.




                                                                 121
       4. Topical Note: Social protection - challenges and potential reforms 42

Challenges

111. Overall, the social protection system reaches nearly one half (49 percent) of Seychellois,
directly or indirectly and the system has succeeded in reducing poverty. In the absence of all social
protection programs, the poverty headcount would increase from 39.3 percent to 48 percent and
ultra-poverty would increase from 24.3 percent to 35 percent (as measured by the official poverty
line). The Government of Seychelles has embarked on reforms in the past years but the persistently
high poverty levels and the increasing fiscal cost of the social protection system speak to the need
to further strengthen the impact and ensure the sustainability of the social protection system.

112. Total spending on social protection including non-contributory and contributory programs
was 4.3 percent of GDP in 2015. Contributory pension outlays by the SPF accounted for 1.0
percent of GDP in 2015. Non-contributory social assistance programs absorb 3.3 percent of GDP,
up from 2.8 percent in 2012. Social Assistance spending is higher than average for both high and
upper middle income countries and also higher than in most other small island states at similar
income levels. As a result of the recent increases in benefits (universal pension and home care
program), social assistance alone is expected to absorbed 4.3 percent of GDP. 43

113. Social Protection spending in Seychelles is highly skewed towards the elderly, with 79
percent of total social protection spending going to the elderly. Two programs – the Retirement
Pension and the Home Care Program (both targeted to the elderly) account for 71 percent of social
assistance spending. The Retirement Pension is the most expensive by far and absorbs 1.8 percent
of GDP (54 percent of the safety net budget), while the Home Care Program accounts for 0.6
percent of GDP (17 percent of the safety net budget), respectively. In contrast, poverty targeted
Social Welfare Assistance receives 0.3 percent of GDP (9.7 percent of the safety net budget).
When SPF expenditures are included, total spending on the elderly accounts for 3.4 percent GDP
or 79 percent of total social protection spending.

114. Household survey data indicates that 22 percent of the beneficiaries (direct and indirect) of
all non-contributory programs are elderly and 42 percent of benefits accrue to the elderly, although
the elderly account for only 9 percent of the population. On the other hand, 26 percent of the
population are children, but children account for 23 percent of beneficiaries while only 13 percent
of all social protection benefits go to children. Social Welfare Assistance (SWA) does a better job
of reaching children (40 percent of SWA beneficiaries are children and 29 percent of SWA benefits
accrue to children), but SWA is not able to reach very many poor households.

115. The social protection system currently supports households that are not needy, while most
of the households in need get no assistance. Eligibility criteria create inequities through a complex
system of exclusions and deductions. Less than 40 percent of percent of beneficiaries of the
Retirement Pension are poor, while almost 12 poorest are from the wealthiest. At the same time,
only 8 percent of the poor are covered by social welfare, with a benefit that contributes about 16
percent to the household budget.



42
     Prepared by Melis Guven (Senior Social Protection Economist).
43
     Preliminary estimate.
                                                        122
116. The social protection system may not be sustainable given existing program parameters
and population projections. In the absence of parametric reforms, expenditures on the Retirement
Pension and the Home Care Program can be expected to climb rapidly. While the SPF is projected
to run a surplus until 2027, the fiscal balance beyond this will be negative without further
parametric reforms such as increasing the contribution rate and retirement age. It also needs to
continue efforts to improve management of its investments. The approach to services for the
elderly is fragmented. A more holistic approach with an emphasis on financial sustainability and
coordination in the provision of the range of services required by an aging population is needed.
Government has empowered the Council for the Elderly to become the operational body
responsible for administering the residential homes for the elderly and for developing the new
Elderly Policy. This should contribute to the articulation of a more coherent approach to services
for the elderly.

Policy Options

117. The SP system could have a greater impact on poverty by focusing on the poor to improve
effectiveness and equity. Targeting of untargeted programs to increase the overall poverty impact
of the system. Untargeted programs limit the overall impact of the system on poverty reduction.
Targeting the Retirement Pension and diverting the same amount of resources to poverty targeted
programs could significantly reduce poverty in Seychelles and would make very little difference
to the overall budget of wealthier households. Pension testing (excluding SPF pensioners from
receipt of the Retirement Pension) would be fairly easy to administer. A sliding scale for
contributory pension income and Retirement Pension reduction could be explored.

118. Sustainable financing options for the Home Care Program could be developed.
Demographic and fiscal trends raise the question of whether tax-financed home care (and all long-
term care for that matter) is sustainable and how financing needs can be smoothed during the
demographic transition. The factors that will drive costs in the future are the policy choices
regarding targeting; the definition and application of cost-sharing arrangements between the
individual, the family, and the state; and the composition and balance of service provision. To
manage costs in the short term, eligibility for the Home Care Program (and Residential Care) could
be revised with greater emphasis accorded to income, savings and assets. Efficiency gains could
also be realized in the short term through strengthening the assessment of incapacity, redesign of
the care package to reflect the diverse needs of clients, and implementation of the training for
caregivers that is currently being planned. Finally, the benefit (measured as the contribution of
earnings from the Home Care Program to the budget of the household receiving care) contributes
less than 5 percent for Quintile 4 and less than 4 percent for Quintile 5. This suggests that cost
sharing between Government and beneficiary households would not place an undue burden on
wealthier beneficiaries.

119. Increasing the SWA coverage and benefit level could be considered. Ninety-two percent
of poor households and about 90 percent of ultra-poor households are not covered by SWA and
this represents a gap in the system. Resources saved by targeting currently untargeted programs
could be redirected to SWA with greater impact on poverty. Linking SWA beneficiaries to jobs
would promote labor market inclusion. However, existing labor market programs do not seem to
be addressing the needs of SWA beneficiaries. By providing subsidized day care may help to
address one of the common barriers to work among poor mothers. The means test could also be
revisited to evaluate any access barriers to SWA.
                                               123
120. The safety net could do a better of promoting education outcomes for children from poor
households. Parenting and early childhood initiatives have been shown to improve cognitive
development among poor children and would build on Government’s new initiatives with respect
to early childhood development (ECD). Social intermediation services that link poor households
to necessary services could be developed, with a specific focus on linking poor households with
parenting education and children with ECD services and with linking poorly performing poor
children with appropriate remediation services.

121. The Agency for Social Protection (ASP) requires a single robust management information
system and a dedicated monitoring and evaluation unit to support a more results focused
orientation. MIS upgrading for SWA has progressed; however, processes are not fully automated
and the SSF and SWA systems are not fully integrated and this hamstrings its ability to measure
performance and achievement of results. Instituting a Monitoring and Evaluation Unit at the ASP
would improve in-house capacity to monitor and evaluate its own programs.

122. Further reforms are needed to improve long-term fiscal sustainability of the SPF. These
reforms could include increasing the contribution rate and retirement age. This would apply to the
SPF contributory and ASP non-contributory pensions. Increasing the retirement age, would be
consistent with international trends and with the increasing life expectancies among Seychellois.
In the short-term, Government could also consider revoking the Social Security (Retirement Age)
Regulation of 2011 that allows SPF pensioners who retire at 60 to collect the non-contributory
Retirement Pension. Current recipients of the Retirement Pension who are under age 63 could
continue to receive the benefit; however, employees who take early retirement in the future would
not be eligible.




                                               124
       5. Topical Note: Historical welfare trends in Seychelles 44

123. Analyzing welfare trends in the Seychelles is extremely difficult given data problems with
the 2013 survey, which make it impossible to estimate consumption, as well as the lack of
comparability between the two years’ surveys with respect to how income is captured.
Comparability is compromised for the following reasons:


       1. Whereas both gross and net income from salary and wages were asked in the 2006/07
          survey, only salary and wages from employment was asked in the 2013 survey. In 2013,
          there was no explicit statement or separation between gross or net income concepts. The
          NBS has stated that it believes enumerators asked for and that on the whole respondents
          provided gross salary/wage income; however, we cannot be sure.
       2. The question regarding salary and wage income collected in 2013 asked enumerators to
          exclude irregular overtime pay, tips, and commissions, and in 2006/07 respondents were
          asked to include these, and bonuses.
       3. In 2013 much more detail was asked regarding social transfers than was asked in 2006/07
          – with the possible result that 2006/07 data are more comprehensive.
       4. The comparability of business income data is doubtful. In particular, expenses associated
          with gross business income were collected in a more detailed manner in 2006/07. In 2013
          only “gross” business income, “total expenses” were collected. Some categories of
          business income, therefore, may not have been captured in 2013. Perhaps for this reason,
          the top quintile of business income reportedly showed higher average business income in
          2006/07 than in 2013, even when large outliers are excluded.

124. The World Bank attempted three methods for discerning trends in income between 2006/07
and 2013, the two most recent years for which a household budget survey has been implemented.
First, we compared an assets index over the period; second, we compared gross income and wage
income as captured in the two surveys; and finally we conducted survey-to-survey imputations of
gross income, using both 2006 and 2013 measures of gross income to impute the other year. If the
three methods had given consistent results, we could have inferred trends with some confidence.
However, the results are not consistent across methods, and therefore give us little confidence in
estimated trends over the period. While some comparisons show a decline in income for this
segment of the population and increased inequality, this depends upon the precise method used.
Therefore, we have very little confidence in these income trends/comparisons given the lack of
data comparability. The most one can say is that they broadly suggest relatively modest if any
income growth for the bottom 40 percent of the income distribution between the two years.

Specifically, the three methods show the following:

       1. Assets Index

125. An asset “index” was constructed, which is simply a count in the number of assets the
household owns in each year, of nine assets appearing in both surveys. We excluded assets that
were only collected in 2013 or 2006/07, and those that went through technology change over time
like fixed-line telephones, mobile phones, computer and internet. The result shows growth in asset
44
     Prepared by Chuqiao Bi under the guidance of Theresa Osborne (Senior Poverty Economist).
                                                       125
ownership between the two years for all quintiles, and these differences are statistically significant.
There was a major expansion in social housing over this period and there are various measures to
subsidize durable asset purchases; therefore, asset ownership may not reflect underlying income
or welfare trends more broadly.


     2. Comparison of gross income as captured in both surveys:

126. We also compared various components of income from the 2006/07 and 2013 surveys. The
results broadly suggest that incomes have remained flat or declined for the bottom 40 over the
period (Figure 8).


Figure 8: Assets Index by Household and Quintile of Income Distribution

 7
                                                     5.21***       5.46**
 6                                     4.89**
         4.52***      4.85***                      4.85         4.65
 5                  4.52
       4.03                       3.98
 4
 3
 2
 1
 0
         Q1           Q2               Q3            Q4              Q5
                                 Quintile
                                2006        2013
     * significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%


     3. Sample-to-sample imputation

127. The imputations are performed for both years, that is, we first used data of 2013 to impute
the income of 2006/07, then vice versa.


Our projection model is:
                                                            ′
                                             ln ℎ = ℎ  + ℎ (1)
                                                                                             ′
where ln ℎ refers to a natural logarithm of household per adult equivalent income, ℎ   is a
( × 1) vector of poverty correlates of household h, β is a vector of ( × 1) coefficients of
poverty correlates,  is the number of variables45, and ℎ is a projection error.
Using the method of Yoshida et al. (2015), the imputation is conducted with the following steps:
      1. Checking descriptive statistics of independent variables across years.
      2. Cross-validation:
              This step is to choose a proper projection model for equation 1 while avoiding over-
              fitting problem. More specifically, it follows:
              (a) Set 10 grids for P-value, ranging from 0.005 to 0.1, with a grid of 0.005;
45
  In our case,  ≤ 38, which is the total number of covariates in Appendix. Table 1 plus squared household size and
squared head age.
                                                               126
            (b) Randomly divide household level data into 10 folds;
            (c) For each p-value, sort out fold of data, and run stepwise regression (that all
                 coefficients need to be significant at this selected p-value) for the rest 9 folds,
                                                          ′ ̂
                                              �
                 then do linear prediction ln ℎ = ℎ  for the sorted-out fold, then compute the
                 squared differences (errors) between ln ℎ and ln     �ℎ for this fold. Next compute
                 the mean of squared errors for this fold. Repeat this step for all 10 folds of data.
            (d) For each p-value, compute the mean of mean squared errors (MMSE) across all
                 10 folds.
                 Choose the p-value that minimizes MMSE 46. That is the optimal p-value that we
                 use to do stepwise regression for the whole sample for equation 1, which is used
                 to projection. The optimal p-value is .065 using 2006/07 dataset, while .085 using
                 2013 dataset.
     3. With the p-value selected, we run the stepwise regression with the whole dataset
        (separately for 2006/07 and 2013), then impute the natural log of income of the other
        year 47, then transform it to level. Remark we assume the projection error ℎ following
        normal distribution. For stability, we produce 20 times of the sample size for the imputed
        dataset. Within each of the 20 replications, we define quintiles. Then compute the mean of
        income by quintile for all replications. Last, we compare the imputed results with actual
        data by quintile.

128. The trend via imputation depends upon whether 2013 data are used to impute 2006
or vice versa. This is shown by a comparison between Figure 9 and Figure 10. This suggests that
the parameters (or returns) have shifted too much over the timeframe to say with much confidence
what the actual direction of change is. There is therefore no robust way of knowing income trends
in the bottom 40, but that the available methods suggest that they were relatively flat.


References:

Yoshida, N., R. Munoz, A. Skinner, C. Kyung-eun Lee, M. Brataj, W. Durbin, D. Sharma, and
C. Wieser. (2015). SWIFT Data Collection Guidelines version 2. The World Bank.




46
  In the guidance note of Yoshida et al. (2015), another criterion to choose the optimal p-value is to use the
minimized difference between actual and imputed poverty rate, however I found that the optimal p-value changes at
each time we rerun the code, because imputation results change with the seed in the imputation command, therefore
this method appears not to be robust.
47 All imputations are done by Stata command “mi”.
                                                      127
Figure 9: Comparison of Actual Reported and Imputed Gross Income per Adult Equivalent 2006/07-2013,
                                           2013 Imputed
                                                                     25000                                                          23180

                                                                     20000




                                          2006 SCR/adult eq./month
                                                                     15000                                                               12486
                                                                                                                                       9838
                                                                     10000                                      5276
                                                                                  1030      2051      3271   3244
                                                                                                   2372    3556
                                                                      5000     1053       1772   2577
                                                                             1104      1856
                                                                        0
                                                                                  1           2             3             4              5
                                                                                                       Quintile
                                                                                         2006 actual        2013 actual


Figure 10: Comparison of Actual Reported and Imputed Gross Income per Adult Equivalent 2006/07-2013,
                                           2006 Imputed
                                         25000                                                                                                  23180


                                         20000
              2006 SCR/adult eq./month




                                         15000
                                                                                                                                                         9838
                                         10000                                                                                               6956

                                          5000                                                                          335035563244
                                                                                       148818561772    222525772372
                                                                        803 11041053
                                                                0
                                                                             Q1            Q2               Q3                 Q4                   Q5
                                                                                                        Quintile
                                                                                          2006 Imputed           2006 actual        2013 actual




                                                                                                      128
     6. Topical Note: Labor market profile of Seychelles 48

129. The report summarized by this note provides a detailed overview and profile of the
Seychelles labor market based on the 2011 and 2014 labor force survey (LFS) data.

130. Major labor market data limitations should be recognized. First, the analysis in the report
relies on the standard ILO classification of the working population (individuals aged 15-65),
whereas the official estimates of the National Bureau of Statistics report on individuals aged 15
and above, without applying an upper bound limit. This causes important differences between
many of the official statistics and those reported and analyzed in the report. Second, changes in
the classification of variables between 2011 and 2014 resulted in the creation of an unspecified
category in the 2014 data, for example with respect to the sector of employment, where 9 percent
of the employed in 2014 were categorized as unspecified. This modification renders it difficult to
fully compare results between the two survey years. Finally, data collected by the LFS exclude
migrant labor who reside in employer-provided housing. The small proportion (less than 4 percent
of the workforce) of migrant labor that is captured relates to those individuals who reside in
sampled households and constitutes only a small fraction of the total expatriate labor population
(which stood at approximately 16,000, equivalent to about one third of the domestic workforce, in
2016). Notwithstanding these data limitations, a number of themes emerged from the analysis.

131. The analysis reveals that growth of Seychelles’ economy stems from output expansion in
the transport and storage, finance, and “Community, Social and Personal Services” (CSP) sub-
sectors. Consistent with this rise in the share of GDP, the employment shares of these areas of the
economy grew, constituting essentially all of the substantial net new jobs created in the Seychelles
between 2011 and 2014. Overall, tertiary sector jobs increased over the period by 3 percentage
points as a share of total jobs, to 78 percent. In contrast, the secondary and primary sectors
contracted in terms of employment share and contribution to overall GDP.

132. This structural shift is accompanied by a deepening skills intensity of employment that has
resulted in increasing demand for higher skilled and higher educated individuals. As a share of
employment, we observe that the proportion of managers, technicians and skilled agricultural
workers increased over this period, while all other occupations experienced a contraction.
Unskilled workers, as measured by the “elementary” workers survey category, shrank as a share
of the workforce, by 1.5 percentage points, to an estimated 15.3 percent of the domestic workforce.

133. The labor market is characterized by a high share of formal, full-time employment. Over
70 percent of the working population in Seychelles work as employees on a full-time basis. About
10 percent of workers report operating their own business (without employees), and about 4
percent operate a business with regular, paid employees. In terms of working conditions, the
Seychelles’ labor market is not highly unionized, with only 2 percent of workers indicating that
they belong to a trade union. The share of workers working part-time is small overall, and
concentrated amongst workers in small firms; 20 percent of workers in small firms (those
employing less than 10 workers) work full-time compared to over 90 percent in the medium to
large businesses. We observe that 30 percent of the working population has been employed for a



48
  Working paper (forthcoming) by Haroon Bhorat, Arabo Ewinyu and Derek Yu, Development Policy Research
Unit (DPRU), University of Cape Town.


                                                  129
period greater than ten years. Furthermore, this category of workers has seen the largest increase
in absolute numbers over the 2011-2014 period.

134. Seychelles has an overall unemployment level of approximately 4 percent, with less than
2,000 individuals being unemployed. In sharp contrast, youth unemployment (for individuals
ranging in age between 15 and 24) is thrice as high as the official national unemployment rate, and
is higher relative to the other age cohorts. Additionally, there was a significant increase in the
number of unemployed post-secondary school workers between 2011 and 2014, whose
unemployment rate in 2014 was a significant 11.5 percent, compared with low levels (5 percent or
less) for workers with other education categories. This suggests that there is a concern around the
relevance of skills offered at the post-secondary level.

135. Wage inequality is significant, with an estimated wage income Gini coefficient of 0.46.
The best paid workers are typically male, working in the tertiary sector (specifically in the transport
and finance sectors), with a job tenure of ten years or more. The worst paid workers are
overwhelmingly female, working in the agriculture or manufacturing sectors, and mostly
employed in low-skilled jobs.

136. Labor market inequality in Seychelles appears to be associated with a lifetime employment
structure coupled with seniority-based wages, where individuals with increasing experience and
tenure, controlling for other characteristics, are compensated with higher wages. Young people,
initially faced with higher unemployment probabilities, further encounter low wages, as
individuals with greater tenure realize significantly higher conditional returns. Individuals with
longer tenures earn wages that are 30 percent higher than individuals with a single year of
experience, holding all other individual characteristics constant. There is also some evidence of
gender disparities in earnings; the econometric evidence suggests that on average, men earn a wage
premium of 16 percent relative to women, controlling for key factors such as education level and
sector of employment.

137. Returns to education and skills are highly differential and appear to be increasing. On
average, higher skilled or educated individuals earn a premium of 48 to 70 percent relative to
uneducated workers. Specifically, highly skilled individuals earn on average, over 50 percent more
than “elementary” workers. The highly differential returns to skill reinforce the notion that
Seychelles is an economy defined by a skills-biased labor demand trajectory, in that there is a
growing relative demand, and in turn a high premium being offered, for high skilled workers and
highly educated workers. The shift towards services-led growth, as the structural equivalent of this
labor market shift, is evident in the sectoral earnings premium found in the transport and storage
sector, although notably not as strong for the remaining services sectors.




                                                 130
                            III.    SCD SUPPLEMENTARY ANNEXES

   1. Annex: Data diagnostic
Section 1: General Information about the Statistical System

Legal status of NSO                                          Independent government agency
Statistical Legislation (latest)                         National Bureau of Statistics Act, 2010
NSDS/Statistical masterplan                                     Strategic Plan, 2014-2020


                                                                                 Data
                                            Second                           Accessibility
                                   Latest   Latest   Representativeness         (open
Type of census/survey
                                   (Year)   (Year)   (national, regional,    access/with
                                                        urban/rural)         permission/
                                                                              no access)

Censuses
Population census                  2010      2002          National            No access
Agriculture census                 2011      N.A.          National            No access
Business/establishment
census                             N.A.      N.A.           N.A.                 N.A.
Surveys
Household Survey on
income/consumption                 2013      2007          National            No access
Household survey on
education (e.g., MICS)             N.A.      N.A.           N.A.                 N.A.
Household survey on health
(e.g., DHS, MICS)                  N.A.      N.A.           N.A.                 N.A.
Labor force Survey
(LFS, household survey on
labor only)                        2014      N.A.          National            No access
Business/establishment
survey                             N.A.      N.A.           N.A.                 N.A.




                                                     131
 Section 3: Macro data
 Does the country subscribe to the IMF SDDS or participate in the
                                                                                        SDDS
 eGDDS? [Yes]
                                                                            Periodicity        Timeliness
 If eGDDS                                                                  SDD Count
                                                                                           SDDS          SYC
                                                                            S     ry
 National accounts: Gross Domestic Product by Production and Expenditure    Q        Q         1Q         1Q
 at Current and Constant Prices.
 Consumer price index                                                        M     M           1M         7D
 Central government operations                                               M     M           1M         15D
 Balance of payments                                                         Q      Q          1Q         1Q
 External debt                                                               Q      Q          1Q         1Q
 Merchandise trade                                                           M     M           8W         3W
 Production index                                                            M     M           6W         4W
 Employment                                                                  Q      Q          1Q         3M

 Unemployment                                                                Q      Q          1Q         3M

 Producer Price Index                                                        M     M           1M         8W

 Section 4: Compliance with WBGs core data standards
                                                                                 Compli    Actual yearly
                                                    WBG Standard                   ant     interval or %
                                                                                  (Y/N)
 Household survey of income or                     One every 3 years                Y           2-3 Yrs
 consumption
 PPP price survey                                   One every 3 years              N             5 Yrs
 CRVS                                    • 80% of births registered
                                         • 60% of deaths registered with cause
                                           of death

 Section 5: STATISTICAL CAPACITY INDICATORS
 Method                                   80.0
 Source Data                              70.0
 Periodicity                              60.0
 Overall (Memo: overall average all IBRD) 70.0 (IBRD 75.3)

Rationale behind the Score of Seychelles
138. Seychelles received a score of 70.0 out of 100 with the 2016 Statistical Capacity Indicator
(SCI), using the existing methodology. The country scores relatively balanced across the three
dimensions: Methodology (80.0), Source Data (70.0) and Periodicity (60.0).

139. The World Bank is in the process of revising the SCI and has developed the Statistical
Performance Index (SPI), which is still preliminary. The SPI summarizes national statistical
capacity on a global scale by employing most relevant and representative variables that are publicly
available. The SPI can be used to gauge statistical performance of individual countries over time
or cross-country comparisons of performance at a point in time. The SPI aims to provide an
objective, justifiable/verifiable assessment of the statistical performance of countries over time by
using publicly available information from international agencies and country websites that were
produced by national statistical systems. The SPI is built around four main dimensions:
Methodology, Standards and Classifications (MSC); Censuses and Surveys (CS); Dissemination
Practices and Openness (DPO); and Availability of Key Indicators (AKI).

140. The capacity of Seychelles’ statistical system is also assessed by using the new SPI, which
assesses more indicators and tightens some existing criteria. Using this new, preliminary
methodology, Seychelles received a total overall score of 59.35 out of 100, indicating a relatively
lower level of statistical capacity. This indicates that with the weaknesses identified by the SPI,
there is a need for capacity improvement of the statistical system to properly inform evidence-
based decision making process as well as monitoring and evaluating the development progress in
coming years.

141. The first dimension, MSC, looks at whether countries follow internationally recommended
methodology and standards in collecting and producing data. Seychelles gained a score of 60.0 in
this dimension, with several areas of improvement identified. The National Bureau of Statistics is
still using SNA 1993 which lags behind the international standard (SNA 2008). By updating the
national accounts and CPI base year with annual chain linking, the country will be able to capture
its national economy in a more accurate way. The country could further improve its score by
adopting non-cash recording basis for consolidated central government accounting, and following
the latest government finance statistics manual.

142. The CS section checks whether countries have conducted major censuses and surveys in
internationally recommended form and frequency. Seychelles received a score of 41.67 in this
section. The national statistics office does a good job by conducting timely population and housing
census, agriculture census and a recent Household Budget Survey. More could be done with
establishment censuses and surveys, as well as health and demographic surveys.

143. In terms of DPO, that assesses the dissemination capacity of national statistical systems,
Seychelles scored high at 85.71. The National Bureau of Statistics does a good job by providing
an advance release calendar, a listing of surveys, as well as a comprehensive, well-developed data
portal. By conducting a user satisfaction survey, the NBS could better collect feedback from users
and further improve its score.

144. The fourth dimension, Availability of Key Indicators, checks the availability of selected
indicators in international databases. With the AKI section, we compared the country score using
WDI data in 2015, 2014 and 2013. Seychelles gained the highest score of 43.75 with data from
2014 and 2013, indicating the best data availability for this country in recent years. Scores in this
section for Seychelles are relatively low, compared with the MSC and DPO section, possibly due
to a lack of timely censuses and surveys that was identified by the CS section. The 2015 score
shows that Seychelles has available data on child immunization, adult literacy rate and national
accounts. More data on population living below the national poverty line, primary completion rate
and manufacturing value added are available in previous two years.




                                                133
     2. Annex: Consultations

145. As the World Bank has no country office in Seychelles, SCD consultations took the form
of three team visits. Consultations were organized in three stages. First, a scoping visit (June 2016)
was conducted. Second, intermediate consultations were conducted by the team to follow up on
remaining data requirements and key issues, and to obtain views on emerging conclusions (January
2017). The table below summarizes the formal meetings held during these first two rounds of
consultations. A final consultations visit was made in March 2017, during which the team had
further discussions with Ministry of Finance, Trade and Economic Planning leadership, and the
opportunity to present the draft SCD findings to the Cabinet of Ministers (see Box). Both the
scoping visit and the final consultations visit were conducted by a joint World Bank and IFC team.


                                                                                          First   Second
         Meetings                                    Comments                             visit    visit
                                                                                         Jun-16   Jan-17
                                      Government ministries & departments
Vice President                 Mr. Danny Faure. Assumed the Presidency in October
                                                                                            
                               2016
Minister of Finance            Dr. Peter Larose. Also attending: Senior Advisor, Ms.
                               Sitna Cesar; PS (Economic Planning), Ms. Elizabeth
                                                                                                    
                               Agathine. Meetings in June 2016 included with the
                               Comptroller General, Mr. Damien Thesee
Governor of the Central        Ms. Caroline Abel. Second visit was with First Deputy
Bank of Seychelles             Governor, Mr Christophe Edmond. Meetings included the
                                                                                                    
                               Head of Research (Mr. Brian Commettant), and Head of
                               Supervision (Mr. Naadir Hassan)
Minister of Health and         Mr. Jean Paul Adam. First meeting was in previous
Social Affairs                 capacity (Minister of Finance, Trade and the Blue
                                                                                                    
                               Economy). Also attending: PS (Health), Dr. Bernard
                               Valentin
Minister of Community          Mr. Vincent Meriton. Vice-President as of October 2016,
Development, Social Affairs    with Office including inter alia the depts. of ICT,          
and Sports                     Investment and Industry, Blue Economy
Minister of Environment,       Mr. Didier Dogley. First meeting was with PS
Energy & Climate Change        (Environment) Mr. Alain Decommarmond; the second
                                                                                            
                               meeting with Minister Dogley included also PS (Energy)
                               Mr. Wills Agricole
Minister of Labour &           Ms. Idith Alexander. Second visit with the Minister was
Human Resource                 in her new capacity as Minister of Youth, Sports &                   
Development                    Culture
Minister of Investment,        Mr. Michael Benstrong
Entrepreneurship               Second meeting was with Mr. Kenny Roberts, Director of
                                                                                                    
Development & Business         Investments, with the department now under the VP
Innovation
Minister of Education          Mr. Joel Morgan.
                                                                                                     
                               Also attended by Consultant, Mr. Selby Dora
Ministry of Home Affairs       Mr. Michel Marie (Special Advisor)
                                                                                                     
                               Mr. Paul Didon (Senior Immigration Officer)
Minister of Tourism            Mr. Maurice Lousteau-Lalanne                                          
Dept. of the Blue Economy,     Mrs. Rebecca Lousteau-Lalanne (Principal Secretary)
Office of the Vice-President   Also attending: Dominique Benzaken (Senior Advisor)                   



                                                      134
Department of Public              Mrs. Helene Maiche (Public Sector Reforms)
                                                                                                    
Administration
National Bureau of Statistics     Ms. Laura Ah-Time (CEO)                                          
Advisor, VP’s Office              Mr. Bertrand Belle
                                                                                          
                                  Economic Advisor to the President since October 2016
                                      Agencies and state-owned companies
Public Enterprise Monitoring      Mr Roger Toussaint (CEO)
                                                                                                    
Commission (PEMC)
CEO, Public Utilities             Mr. Philip Morin. Also attending: Mr. Jalan Nathan
                                                                                                    
Corporation (PUC)                 (CFO); Ms. Doreen Bradburn (Corporate Manager)
Nouvobanq                         Mr. Deoraj Puddoo (Operations Manager)                            
Seychelles Pension Fund           Mrs. Lekha Nair (CEO)
                                                                                                    
(SPF)
Agency for Social Protection      Mr. Marcus Simeon (CEO)
                                                                                                    
(ASP)
Seychelles Fishing Authority      Mr. Bernard Arnephy (CEO)
                                                                                                    
(SFA)
Agency for National Human         Mr. Terrence Francoise (CEO) and team
Resource Development                                                                                
(ANHRD)
                                Parliament, academia, civil society and other bodies
National Assembly                 The team met with the 7 members of the Finance and
                                  Public Accounts Committee. The meeting was chaired by             
                                  Mr. Wavel Ramkalawan
University of Seychelles          Professor Dennis Hardy                                  
Seychelles Chamber of             Mr. Wilson Nancy
Commerce and Industry                                                                     
(SCCI)
Citizens Engagement               Mr. Marcel Rosalie (CEO) and team
                                                                                          
Platform Seychelles


Box: Draft SCD results presentation

Cabinet Business – Thursday 30th March 2017
Thu, 30 March 2017

President Danny Faure chaired a special meeting of the Cabinet this morning at which representatives of
the World Bank made a presentation of its Systematic Country Diagnostic (SCD) findings for Seychelles,
and its implications for national development planning.

The SCD examines the characteristics, recent trends, and prospects, for growth, inclusion, and
sustainability. Results come from synthesis of the relevant existing evidence and additional analysis
where possible, aided crucially by consultations.

The SCD will be used by Government as a basis for its National Development Plan, and in this context
Cabinet also had an initial discussion on the vision and values which will guide the planning process
across government as a whole. The Economic Planning Department will be presenting to the Cabinet the
methodology and action plan for the elaboration and consultation process of the National Development
plan in the next two weeks.

(Source: http://www.statehouse.gov.sc/news.php?news_id=3380)


                                                         135
   3. Annex: References

References – World Bank
                                                                                 Type,
                                    Project                                     project
                                                                               code, date
                                                                              DPL,
Accelerated Program for Economic Integration DPL                              P146512,
                                                                              2016
Cluster Country Program Evaluation on Small States, Seychelles Country Case   Working
Study (FY07-15): Enhancing Competitiveness and Private Sector Development     paper, 2016
                                                                              DPL,
Disaster Risk Management Development DPL with CAT DDO                         P148861,
                                                                              Active
                                                                              Report,
Doing Business: Economy Profile 2017 (Seychelles)
                                                                              2017
                                                                              NLTA,
Financial Sector Development Implementation Plan                              P147161,
                                                                              2014
How Classic Policies Restored Sustainability (by Sawkut Rojid, Ahmed Afif,
                                                                              Book, 2013
and Emilio Sacerdoti)
                                                                              NLTA,
Improving Electricity Planning                                                P154048,
                                                                              2016
                                                                              SCD,
The Seychelles Labor Market: Seychelles SCD Background Paper                  P155250,
                                                                              2016
                                                                              ESW,
Poverty & inequality (a Poverty Profile of the Rep. of the Seychelles)        P156329,
                                                                              2016
                                                                              ESW,
Programmatic Public Expenditure Review Policy Notes - Health, Education &
                                                                              P132465,
Investment Management
                                                                              2014
                                                                              RAS,
Reimbursable Advisory Services (RAS) on Financial Sector Development          P156528,
                                                                              Active
                                                                              RAS,
RAS, Public Financial Management & Social Protection                          P147088,
                                                                              2016
Size of the Public Sector - Government Wage Bill and Employment
                                                                              November
(http://www.worldbank.org/en/topic/governance/brief/size-of-the-public-
                                                                              2015
sector-government-wage-bill-and-employment)
                                                                              NLTA,
Social Sectors and SOE RAS (incl. SOE Governance and Operational
                                                                              P157794,
Performance Reviews)
                                                                              Active



                                              136
                                                                              ESW,
 Supply chains linkages to tourism                                            P156516,
                                                                              2016
                                                                              NLTA,
 Support to Social Protection (incl. notes on Long-Term Care, and Framing a
                                                                              P152882,
 More Strategic Social Protection System)
                                                                              2016
                                                                              DPL,
 Sustainability and Competitiveness DPL 3                                     P146567,
                                                                              2015
                                                                              DPL,
 Sustaining Reforms for Inclusive Growth DPL                                  P153269,
                                                                              2016
                                                                              NLTA,
 Technical Assistance for Tuna Industry Management                            P118247,
                                                                              2011

References – Government of Seychelles (GoS) and development partners
      Institution /
                                                     Title (date)
  Government agency
 GoS / Commonwealth Alternative Future Visions for the Seychelles Blue Economy (2015)
                      Article IV / EFF staff reports and selected issues papers (through
 IMF
                      December 2016)
 GoS, Ministry of
 Finance, Trade &     Budget Speeches; Strategy & Outlook (2015 & 2016)
 Economic Planning
 GoS, CBS             Central Bank of Seychelles Annual Report 2015
                      Gender socialization in the home: its impact on boys’ achievement in
 AfDB
                      primary and secondary schools (2009)
 GoS                  Fair Trading Commission notes
 GoS                  Financial Sector Development Implementation Plan (2014)
                      Global Competitiveness Index, Country/Economy Profiles: Seychelles
 WEF
                      (2015/16)
 GoS, NBS             Household Budget Survey Report (2013)
 UNDP                 Human Development Report 2015: Seychelles
 IOM                  Migration in Seychelles: a country profile (2013)
                      Millennium Development Goals Status Report 2013: Assessing
 UNDP
                      Seychelles Progress toward the Millennium Development Goals
 GoS, NBS             Migration and Tourism Statistics reports (2011-2014)
 Christophe Muller,
 Asha Kannan, &       Multidimensional Poverty in Seychelles (2016)
 Roland Alcindor
 GoS, Seychelles
                      National Youth Survey Report, 2014-2015: well-being and quality of
 National Youth
                      life
 Council
 GoS                  National Development Strategy (October 2015)
 GoS, NBS             Poverty and Inequality Estimates (2013)

                                             137
GoS, Ministry of
                   Productivity Survey Report (2014-2015)
Labor
GoS, NHRDC         Report on Analysis of Expatriate Employment in Seychelles (2012)
GoS, ASP           Report of Survey on the Home Care Services in the Seychelles (2014)
Macroconsulting    Seychelles Electricity, Water, & Sewerage Tariff Study (2012)
SFA                Seychelles Fisheries Authority, annual reports & bulletins (2013-2015)
GoS, NBS           Seychelles in Figures reports (2010-15)
GoS, Ministry of
                   Technical Report on Employment Policy
Labor
WTTC               Travel & Tourism Economic Impact 2015: Seychelles
GoS, Ministry of
                   Youth Unemployment Report (2015)
Labor




                                       138
