	   	   	   	      	       	       	        	   	   Report	No.	114826‐UA	



                                       	
                                       	
                                 UKRAINE	
	

                SYSTEMATIC	COUNTRY	DIAGNOSTIC	
                                       	
    TOWARD	SUSTAINABLE	RECOVERY	AND	SHARED	PROSPERITY	
	
	

                               	April	28,	2017	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	
	




                       	
	                  	


                                       1 
 
	

                                                                          Table	of	Contents	
	

Executive	Summary	................................................................................................................................................................	3	
I.	          Introduction	.............................................................................................................................................................	12	
II.	         Growth	and	Sustainability:	Patterns	and	Sources	....................................................................................	14	
III.	                                                          ............................................................................	21	
             Poverty	and	Shared	Prosperity:	Patterns	and	Trends	
IV.	         Framework:	Pathways	and	Constraints	.......................................................................................................	35	
V.	                                                                                  ..............................	44	
             Cross‐Cutting	Pathway:	Better	Governance	and	Anticorruption	Institutions	
VI.	         Pathway	1:	Macroeconomic	Stability	............................................................................................................	52	
VII.	                                              ........................................................................................................	63	
             Pathway	2:	Private	Sector	Productivity	
VIII.	       Pathway	3:	Effective	services	and	targeted	assistance	..........................................................................	80	
Acknowledgements	..............................................................................................................................................................	92	
	

	

	

	                                                       	




                                                                                           2 
 
Executive	Summary	
	
1.      Ukraine	has	experienced	acute	political,	security,	and	economic	challenges	during	the	
last	three	years.		Following	the	“Maidan”	uprising	that	led	to	the	ousting	of	the	previous	President	
in	November	2013,	the	last	three	years	have	witnessed	several	momentous	events:	developments	in	
Crimea	 and	 Sevastopol	 in	 March	 2014	 which	 led	 to	 the	 UN	 General	 Assembly	 resolution	 68/262	
affirming	 the	 territorial	 integrity	 of	 Ukraine;	 the	 outbreak	 of	 conflict	 in	 the	 Donetsk	 and	 Luhansk	
regions	in	eastern	Ukraine;	and	Presidential,	Parliamentary	and	local	elections	in	2014‐2015.		The	
Government	that	took	office	in	December	2014	had	a	mandate	for	reforms	in	the	face	of	formidable	
challenges,	 including:	 containing	 conflict	 and	 restoring	 peace;	 ensuring	 macroeconomic	 stability;	
tackling	 a	 major	 banking	 crisis;	 reducing	 the	 fiscal	 deficit	 in	 the	 midst	 of	 a	 recession	 without	
triggering	 social	 unrest	 or	 backlash	 against	 reforms;	 and	 reducing	 deep‐seated	 corruption	 while	
contending	with	powerful	vested	interests	that	continue	to	oppose	reforms.	After	September	2015,	
the	 pace	 of	 reform	 moderated	 due	 to	 increasing	 political	 uncertainty	 and	 the	 influence	 of	 vested	
interests.	In	April	2016,	a	new	government	took	office	and	issued	a	program	and	action	plan	covering	
a	wide	ranging	reform	agenda	in	May	2016.	An	updated	medium	term	action	plan	for	2017‐2020	was	
adopted	in	April	2017.		
	
	         	             												Figure	1	 	                     	               	            	   	   Figure	2	
                            GDP Growth (%);
                 Fiscal Bal incl Naftgz, CAB (% of GDP)
    10

     5

     0

     ‐5

    ‐10

    ‐15
          2010       2011      2012         2013       2014      2015       2016
              GDP growth (annual %)                Fiscal Def incl Naftgz (% GDP)
              Current Acct Bal (% of GDP)
                                                                                        						                       	
	

2.        Severe	shocks	combined	with	a	history	of	slow	progress	on	structural	reforms	to	result	
in	 a	 serious	 economic	 crisis	 in	 Ukraine	 in	 2014‐2015.		The	economy	was	hit	by	unprecedented	
double	shocks	from	the	conflict	in	eastern	Ukraine	and	a	considerably	weaker	external	environment,	
including	lower	global	commodity	prices.		The	conflict	caused	significant	contraction	of	industrial	
production	and	revenues	in	the	Donetsk	and	Luhansk	regions,	led	to	widespread	disruption	in	supply	
and	distribution	chains,	and	undermined	confidence	in	the	overall	economy.		In	addition,	the	drop	in	
global	commodity	prices	resulted	in	a	serious	deterioration	of	Ukraine’s	terms	of	trade	and	recession	
among	its	trading	partners.		As	a	result	of	these	factors,	real	GDP	contracted	sharply	by	6.6	percent	
in	2014	and	by	a	further	9.8	percent	in	2015.		Furthermore,	structural	bottlenecks	and	accumulating	
imbalances	 preceding	 the	 crisis	 necessitated	 a	 considerable	 fiscal	 and	 external	 adjustment	 in	
response	to	the	shocks,	which	further	compressed	domestic	demand.		The	currency	depreciated	by	

                                                                                        3 
 
47	percent	in	2014	and	a	further	33	percent	in	2015,	while	the	consolidated	fiscal	deficit,	including	
Naftogaz,	reached	10.1	percent	of	GDP	in	2014	and	public	and	guaranteed	debt	spiked	to	79	percent	
of	 GDP	 in	 2015.	 	 The	 deep	 recession	 and	 depreciation	 caused	 deposit	 outflows,	 rising	 levels	 of	
nonperforming	 loans,	 and	 large	 numbers	 of	 bank	 failures,	 further	 reducing	 confidence	 in	 the	
economy.	
	
3.       Poverty	 increased	 significantly	 since	 2015,	 with	 access	 to	 services	 and	 livelihoods	
particularly	 impacted	 in	 conflict	 affected	 areas.	 	 The	 deep	 recession,	 depreciation,	 and	
compression	 of	 public	 current	 expenditures	 contributed	 to	 significant	 contraction	 of	 disposable	
incomes	in	Ukraine,	with	both	labor	and	non‐labor	incomes	contracting	in	2015	in	real	terms.		As	a	
result,	the	estimated	poverty	rate	(under	$5/day	in	2005	PPP)	increased	from	3.3	percent	in	2014	to	
5.8	percent	in	2015,	while	estimated	moderate	poverty	(Bank’s	national	methodology	for	Ukraine)	
increased	 from	 15.2	 percent	 in	 2014	 to	 22.2	 percent	 in	 2015.	 	 Poor	 households,	 which	 spend	 a	
significant	share	of	their	budget	on	heating	and	utilities,	were	also	affected	by	the	dramatic	increase	
in	 energy	 prices	 in	 2015.	 	 The	 rapid	 expansion	 of	 the	 new	 means‐tested	 housing	 utility	 subsidy	
program	(with	up	to	5	million	households	covered	at	end‐2015)	helped	to	mitigate	the	impact	on	
poverty.		Labor	market	conditions	deteriorated,	with	nominal	wage	growth	lagging	inflation,	and	real	
wages	down	on	average	by	20	percent	in	2015.		Unemployment	increased	from	7.8	percent	in	2013	
to	9.5	percent	in	2015.		Joblessness,	access	to	services,	social	tensions,	and	livelihoods	more	broadly	
were	particularly	impacted	in	conflict	affected	areas.		Furthermore,	with	about	1.7	million	people	
estimated	to	have	been	internally	displaced,	these	social	and	humanitarian	impacts	are	felt	by	both	
displaced	and	host	communities.	
         	
4.       The	 “Maidan”	 uprising	 of	 2013‐14	 generated	 demand	 for	 change	 in	 Ukraine,	 and	 the	
authorities	 undertook	 decisive	 reforms	 in	 2014‐2015	 to	 stabilize	 and	 reform	 the	 economy.		
Key	 reforms	 implemented	 included:	 (i)	 moving	 to	 a	 flexible	 exchange	 rate	 to	 stabilize	 external	
imbalances;	(ii)	undertaking	considerable	fiscal	consolidation	by	compressing	expenditures,	averting	
contingent	liabilities	from	the	financial	sector,	and	reforming	energy	tariffs	to	reduce	a	key	quasi‐
fiscal	deficit,	while	strengthening	social	assistance	to	cushion	the	impact	on	the	poor;	(iii)	stabilizing	
the	banking	sector	by	putting	in	place	a	framework	to	resolve	and	recapitalize	banks	and	strengthen	
supervision;	 (iv)	 streamlining	 the	 business	 environment;	 and	 (v)	 taking	 initial	 steps	 to	 enhance	
accountability	in	the	public	sector	by	establishing	anti‐corruption	agencies.	
         	
5.       Ukraine	 today	 is	 at	 a	 crossroads:	 the	 economy	 has	 stabilized	 but	 economic	 prospects	
remain	 weak,	 and	 addressing	 longstanding	 structural	 bottlenecks	 on	 multiple	 fronts	 will	 be	
critical	to	advance	development	prospects	and	deliver	tangible	benefits	for	the	population.		As	
a	 result	 of	 the	 reforms	 since	 2014,	 the	 economy	 has	 stabilized	 and	 large	 imbalances	 have	 been	
reduced	 at	 least	 for	 the	 short	 term.	 	 Real	 GDP	 grew	 by	 2.3	 percent	 in	 2016,	 while	 the	 general	
government	deficit,	including	Naftogaz,	was	down	to	2.1	percent	of	GDP	in	2015	and	2.3	percent	in	
2016.	 	 However,	 poverty	 is	 up	 significantly	 and	 livelihoods	 have	 been	 disrupted	 from	 the	 serious	
shocks	 to	 the	 economy	 and	 the	 resulting	 economic	 crisis.	 	 Furthermore,	 prospects	 for	 economic	
recovery	 remain	 weak	 in	 light	 of	 the	 weak	 global	 economic	 environment,	 continuing	 conflict	 in	
eastern	 Ukraine,	 and	 the	 deep	 structural	 bottlenecks	 and	 governance	 challenges	 that	 have	


                                                      4 
 
constrained	sustainable	growth	and	shared	prosperity	for	the	last	decade	and	half.		Addressing	many	
of	those	longstanding	structural	bottlenecks	and	governance	challenges	will	be	central	to	supporting	
sustained	economic	recovery	and	shared	prosperity	going	forward.	
	
6.       Even	 prior	 to	 the	 current	 crisis,	 macroeconomic	 imbalances	 and	 weak	 productivity	
growth	deriving	from	deep	structural	bottlenecks	and	governance	challenges	led	to	more	than	
a	decade	of	unsustainable	growth	enabled	by	favorable	external	conditions.		Growth	averaged	
7	percent	annually	during	2000‐2007,	driven	mostly	by	favorable	external	conditions	and	rebound	
from	the	sharp	post‐transition	contraction.		Ukraine’s	terms	of	trade	(TOT)	improved	by	50	percent	
between	2001	and	2008,	including	higher	steel	prices	on	the	export	side	and	beneficial	pricing	of	
natural	gas	on	the	import	side.		Capital	inflows	surged	after	2005	while	credit	growth	boomed,	fueled	
by	 external	 borrowing	 of	 commercial	 banks.	 	 These	 favorable	 external	 conditions	 enabled	 an	
expansionary	fiscal	policy	with	accumulating	structural	deficits	including	rising	pension	spending,	
Naftogaz	 and	 other	 subsidies,	 and	 a	 growing	 public	 wage	 bill.	 	 Public	 capital	 expenditures	 were	
squeezed,	while	limited	structural	reforms	were	undertaken,	with	the	result	that	productivity	growth	
slowed	 and	 the	 sophistication	 of	 Ukraine’s	 export	 basket	 experienced	 limited	 improvement.	 	 The	
economy	 stagnated	 during	 2008‐2013,	 with	 growth	 averaging	 ‐0.7	 percent	 annually	 during	 this	
period.	 	 Furthermore,	 imbalances	 accumulated	 from	 2005,	 with	 the	 current	 account	 shifting	 into	
deficit	from	2006	and	averaging	‐5.7	percent	of	GDP	during	2008‐2013	compared	to	a	+3.7	percent	
during	2000‐2007.		The	fiscal	deficit	including	Naftogaz	averaged	5.5	percent	of	GDP	during	2011‐
2013.	
         	
7.       Poverty	 declined	 between	 2000	 and	 2013,	 but	 less	 so	 since	 2008,	 while	 household	
incomes	 have	 relied	 heavily	 on	 pensions	 and	 social	 transfers,	 raising	 concerns	 about	 the	
sustainability	 of	 poverty	 gains.	 	 The	 share	 of	 the	 population	 under	 the	 moderate	 poverty	 line	
declined	from	79	percent	in	2002	to	15	percent	in	2014,	while	the	share	of	the	population	under	$5	
PPP	 declined	 from	 46	 percent	 in	 2002	 to	 3.3	 percent	 in	 2014.	 	 While	 the	 overall	 pace	 of	 poverty	
reduction	since	2002	was	strong,	it	slowed	since	2008	due	to	the	overall	stagnation	in	the	economy.	
Furthermore,	household	incomes	have	relied	heavily	on	pensions	and	social	transfers.	Out	of	income	
growth	 of	 4.5	 percent	 per	 year	 during	 2009‐2014	 for	 the	 bottom	 40	 percent	 of	 the	 population,	
pensions	and	social	assistance	accounted	for	a	large	portion	(2	percent	per	year),	while	labor	income	
accounted	for	2	percent	per	year.		This	raises	concerns	about	sustainability	of	the	gains	in	reducing	
poverty,	particularly	because	of	the	large	cost	of	pensions	(11	percent	of	GDP	in	2016).		Furthermore,	
the	bottom	40	percent	have	lower	labor	market	outcomes	and	levels	of	educational	attainment	and	
access	to	utilities,	which	have	an	impact	on	their	quality	of	life	and	ability	to	generate	incomes.	
	
8.       Ineffective	 services	 and	 weakly	 targeted	 assistance	 have	 contributed	 to	 inadequate	
employment	 outcomes,	 the	 reliance	 on	 transfers,	 and	 the	 unsustainable	 pattern	 of	 poverty	
reduction.		Ukraine	spends	a	large	share	of	GDP	on	social	services	and	assistance,	although	this	does	
not	 translate	 into	 high	 quality	 service	 delivery.	 	 Access	 to	 services	 has	 improved	 over	 time	 in	 a	
number	of	areas,	although	outcomes,	delivery	mechanisms,	and	targeting	remain	ineffective.		Infant	
mortality	 has	 decreased	 from	 17	 per	 thousand	 live	 births	 in	 1990	 to	 8	 in	 2014,	 while	 under‐5	
mortality	and	maternal	mortality	have	also	improved	over	the	same	period.		However,	life	expectancy	


                                                        5 
 
has	 not	 changed	 much	 over	 the	 last	 20	 years	 and	 the	 hospital	 sector	 remains	 oversized	 and	
inefficient.		With	70	percent	of	spending	on	education,	health,	and	social	services	passing	through	
subnational	governments,	improving	delivery	mechanisms	at	the	subnational	level	can	help	enhance	
the	effectiveness	of	services.		Finally,	in	light	of	the	impact	of	the	conflict,	providing	targeted	social	
assistance	and	services	to	conflict	affected	populations	can	help	mitigate	the	impact.	
	
9.       Corruption	 and	 state	 capture	 have	 been	 entrenched	 in	 Ukraine	 and	 are	 a	 dominant	
impediment	 on	 the	 path	 to	 sustained	 recovery	 and	 shared	 prosperity.		Corruption	permeates	
all	walks	of	public	life	in	Ukraine.		On	many	aggregate	measures	of	corruption,	Ukraine	scores	closer	
to	the	poorest	economies	than	to	the	EU	which	it	aspires	to	join.		Ukraine	was	in	the	15th	percentile	
worldwide	in	the	WGI	(World	Governance	Indicators)	Control	of	Corruption	indicator	in	2014,	well	
below	 Poland	 and	 Romania	 (71st	 and	 53rd	 percentile,	 respectively),	 as	 well	 as	 averages	 for	 low	
middle	income	countries	(37th	percentile),	the	ECA	region	(64rd	percentile),	and	sub‐Saharan	Africa	
(30th	percentile).		With	such	extraordinary	levels	of	corruption	and	state	capture,	powerful	vested	
interests	across	a	wide	range	of	sectors	seriously	impede	Ukraine’s	path	toward	sustained	recovery	
and	shared	prosperity.		For	example,	widespread	tax	evasion	and	related	party	lending	undermine	
macroeconomic	 stability,	 a	 highly	 concentrated	 and	 anticompetitive	 production	 structure	 inhibits	
productivity	 and	 job	 creation,	 and	 weaknesses	 in	 the	 management	 of	 public	 resources	 impedes	
delivery	of	effective	services	and	targeted	assistance	to	the	population.	
	
10.      Ukraine	 has	 struggled	 with	 corruption	 and	 state	 capture	 since	 its	 independence	 and	
the	vested	interests	have	established	deep	roots.		Privatized	state	assets	were	concentrated	in	a	
few	 hands	 in	 the	 early	 transition	 years.	 	 State‐regulated	 commodity	 prices,	 underpriced	 leases	 of	
large	tracts	of	agricultural	land,	and	budget	subsidies	have	also	helped	strengthen	the	hand	of	vested	
interests.		As	a	result,	a	 small	number	of	oligarchs	have	dominated	large	 sectors	of	the	Ukrainian	
economy,	 extracting	 rents,	 and	 influencing	 public	 institutions,	 including	 through	 direct	
representation	 in	 political	 parties	 and	 the	 Parliament.	 	 The	 symbioses	 linking	 oligarchs	 with	
politicians	and	state	officials	stand	in	the	way	of	reforms	to	level	the	playing	field	and	eliminate	rents.		
Vested	interests	have	financed	political	parties	and	expensive	election	campaigns,	while	civil	society	
has	 been	 too	 weak	 to	 counter	 such	 deep‐seated	 influence,	 although	 some	 successes	 are	 emerging	
recently,	for	example,	with	NGO	watchdogs	advocating	for	an	effective	launch	of	the	electronic	asset	
declaration	system.	
	
11.      Conflict	 and	 shocks	 is	 another	 important	 constraint	 impeding	 Ukraine’s	 path	 toward	
sustained	recovery	and	shared	prosperity.		As	discussed,	the	conflict	has	had	a	widespread	impact	
on	 economic	 activity	 and	 prospects	 in	 Ukraine.	 Disruptions	 in	 industry,	 transport,	 and	 small	 and	
medium	enterprise	activity	led	to	widespread	job	losses	and	overall	confidence	in	the	economy	was	
seriously	undermined.		The	conflict	also	had	a	considerable	human	cost,	with	vulnerable	groups	in	
conflict	areas,	especially	pensioners,	women,	children	and	people	with	disabilities	most	at	risk,	and	
large	 numbers	 of	 internally	 displaced	 persons	 (IDPs).	 	 Continuing	 insecurity	 means	 that	 Ukraine	
must	go	the	extra	step	to	bolster	confidence	in	its	economy.		Managing	the	human	cost	of	the	conflict	
will	also	require	providing	targeted	services	and	supporting	employment	generation	among	conflict	
affected	populations	and	host	communities.	In	addition	to	the	conflict,	Ukraine	was	hit	by	very	large	


                                                      6 
 
external	shocks,	including	the	sharp	fall	in	global	commodity	prices	and	recession	and	depreciation	
in	export	markets.		Given	the	weak	external	outlook,	Ukraine	will	need	to	go	the	extra	mile	to	manage	
macroeconomic	imbalances	and	support	confidence	in	its	economy.	
	
12.     Demography	and	geography	are	also	at	the	root	of	Ukraine’s	development	challenges.		
Ukraine’s	working	age	population	has	been	declining	while	the	elderly	population	has	been	rising	
due	to	high	mortality,	low	birth	rates,	and	out‐migration.	The	working	age	population	has	fallen	from	
around	34	million	in	2000	to	32	million	in	2013	and	is	projected	to	keep	on	declining	to	reach	25	
million	by	2050,	while	the	elderly	population	is	projected	to	rise.	These	demographic	factors	have	
significant	implications	for	Ukraine’s	development	challenges,	including	a	larger	role	for	productivity	
and	 capital	 accumulation	 in	 driving	 growth,	 and	 initiating	 a	 nationwide	 dialogue	 on	 the	 social	
contract	for	sustainable	old	age	pensions	support.	Ukraine	also	has	a	unique	geography,	with	a	rich	
endowment	of	agricultural	and	other	natural	resources,	and	adjacent	to	the	EU	to	the	west,	Russia	to	
the	East,	and	the	Black	Sea	to	the	south.	The	large	adjacent	markets	can	be	tapped	for	developing	a	
more	diversified	export	base.		On	the	other	hand,	the	rich	endowment	of	natural	resources	leads	to	
significant	challenges	relating	to	corruption	and	rent	seeking.	
        	
                                 Pathways	and	Priority	Interventions	

13.     Based	 on	 the	 foregoing	 analysis	 of	 development	 challenges,	 this	 Systematic	 Country	
Diagnostic	 (SCD)	 identifies	 a	 set	 of	 pathways	 and	 priorities	 toward	 achieving	 sustainable	
recovery	and	shared	prosperity	in	Ukraine.		The	challenges	described	above	point	toward	four	key	
pathways:	 safeguarding	 macroeconomic	 stability,	 boosting	 private	 sector	 productivity,	 and	 providing	
more	 effective	 services,	 while	 building	 institutions	 of	 better	 governance	 and	 anticorruption.	While	the	
measures	taken	to	date	have	been	important	in	stabilizing	the	economy,	the	large	backlog	of	reforms	
and	structural	bottlenecks,	coupled	with	the	weak	economic	outlook,	considerable	vulnerabilities,	

       Figure	3.	Constraints	and	Pathways to	Sustained	Recovery	and	Shared	Prosperity




                                                        7 
 
and	higher	poverty	mean	that	 advancing	 further	reforms	on	multiple	fronts	will	be	critical	to	put	
Ukraine	on	a	path	toward	sustained	recovery	and	shared	prosperity.		First,	in	light	of	the	difficult	
external	 environment,	 persisting	 vulnerabilities,	 and	 history	 of	 large	 imbalances,	 safeguarding	
macroeconomic	stability	will	be	critical	to	move	from	stabilization	to	sustained	recovery.	This	will	
require	reforms	to	consolidate	the	structural	fiscal	deficit	and	strengthen	the	financial	sector,	while	
maintaining	a	flexible	exchange	rate.	Second,	in	light	of	the	history	of	weak	productivity	growth	and	
labor	market	outcomes,	Ukraine	will	need	to	improve	private	sector	productivity.		This	will	require	
investing	in	infrastructure,	creating	a	level	playing	field	in	the	private	sector,	reforming	land	markets,	
and	taking	advantage	of	trade	opportunities.		Third,	in	order	to	reduce	expenditure	pressures,	ensure	
that	the	benefits	of	recovery	are	broadly	shared,	and	generate	tangible	improvements	in	the	quality	
of	 life	 of	 the	 population,	 Ukraine	 will	 need	 to	 provide	 more	 effective	 services	 and	 targeted	
assistance	 to	 the	 population.	 	 This	 will	 require	 reforming	 health	 care	 financing,	 optimizing	 the	
school	 network,	 enhancing	 skills	 of	 the	 workforce,	 and	 improving	 targeting	 of	 social	 assistance.	
Finally,	in	light	of	the	high	degree	of	corruption	and	state	capture,	 building	 institutions	 of	 better	
governance	and	anticorruption	will	be	critical	to	the	success	of	reforms	across	the	board.	
	
14.       Progress	 toward	 the	 World	 Bank’s	 twin	 goals	 in	 Ukraine	 going	 forward	 will	 depend	
critically	on	the	pathways	to	sustained	recovery	and	shared	prosperity	presented	in	this	SCD.		
One	of	the	critical	impediments	to	progress	toward	the	twin	goals	going	forward	is	that	Ukraine	has	
not	 yet	 established	 the	 environment	 for	 sustained	 economic	 growth.	 	 The	 history	 of	 volatile	 and	
unsustainable	growth	fueled	by	large	macroeconomic	imbalances,	coupled	with	a	pattern	of	weak	
productivity	growth,	has	meant	that	progress	toward	the	twin	goals	in	the	past	has	had	to	rely	on	
increasingly	unsustainable	social	protection.	Going	forward,	in	order	to	generate	sustained	progress	
toward	the	twin	goals,	a	new	model	of	poverty	reduction	and	shared	prosperity	based	on	sustained	
economic	recovery	coupled	with	more	effective	services	will	be	critical.	Sustained	economic	recovery	
will	 require	 breaking	 the	 underlying	 drivers	 of	 large	 macroeconomic	 imbalances	 and	 weak	
productivity	growth.		Furthermore,	more	effective	services	will	ensure	that	the	poorer	segments	of	
the	population	can	also	benefit	from	labor	market	opportunities,	while	ensuring	that	the	benefits	of	
growth	are	broadly	shared	in	a	sustainable	manner.	
	
15.       The	 first	 pathway	 is	 safeguarding	 macroeconomic	 stability	 by	 addressing	 the	 largest	
sources	 of	 fiscal	 and	 financial	 sector	 vulnerability.	 	 Ukraine	 has	 made	 important	 progress	 in	
2014‐16	 in	 managing	 fiscal	 and	 financial	 sector	 imbalances	 in	 the	 face	 of	 unprecedented	 shocks.		
Going	 forward,	 the	 focus	 will	 need	 to	 be	 on	 the	 deeper	 structural	 roots	 of	 the	 vulnerabilities.		
Considerable	fiscal	adjustment	has	been	implemented	in	2014‐16	through	tight	controls	on	nominal	
spending	coupled	with	inflation,	as	well	as	energy	tariff	increases.		Going	forward,	the	largest	medium	
term	fiscal	vulnerabilities	come	from	a	narrow	tax	base,	weak	tax	administration,	and	an	ineffective	
pension	 system.	 Reforming	 the	 tax	 system	 will	 require	 broadening	 the	 tax	 base	 by	 removing	
exemptions	 and	 loopholes,	 improving	 international	 taxation	 arrangements,	 and	 strengthening	 tax	
administration.	 The	 pension	 system	 in	 Ukraine	 not	 only	 represents	 a	 major	 fiscal	 vulnerability	
(expenditures	 of	 11	 percent	 of	 GDP	 in	 2016),	 but	 also	 provides	 elderly	 benefits	 that	 are	 far	 too	
inadequate	 (the	 average	 old	 age	 pension	 is	 only	 about	 $2	 a	 day).	 Reform	 options	 include	
restructuring	the	benefit	package	to	strengthen	sustainability,	adequacy,	and	transparency,	as	well	


                                                       8 
 
as	parametric	measures	to	address	categorical	benefits,	early	retirement,	and	provide	incentives	to	
retire	later.	In	the	financial	sector,	deep‐rooted	related	party	lending	and	weaknesses	in	supervision	
have	 combined	 with	 the	 economic	 downturn	 to	 result	 in	 large	 numbers	 of	 bank	 closures	 and	 an	
increase	 in	 non‐performing	 loans.	 	 Going	 forward,	 reforms	 will	 need	 to	 focus	 on	 continuing	 to	
implement	the	framework	put	in	place	to	resolve	and	recapitalize	banks	and	strengthen	supervision,	
but	 also	 put	 in	 place	 measures	 to	 support	 a	 resumption	 of	 lending	 by	 strengthening	 corporate	
governance	of	state	owned	banks	and	facilitating	work	out	of	NPLs.	
	
16.      The	 second	 pathway	 is	 boosting	 private	 sector	 productivity	 by	 strengthening	
infrastructure	investment,	creating	 a	level	 playing	field	in	the	 private	 sector,	 reforming	land	
markets,	and	tapping	trade	opportunities.		Ukraine	has	made	important	progress	in	streamlining	
its	business	environment	in	recent	years,	with	its	Doing	Business	ranking	improving	from	140th	in	
2013	to	80th	in	2017.		However,	deeper	structural	bottlenecks	remain	that	have,	for	an	extended	
period,	undermined	the	 emergence	of	 a	more	productive	private	sector	and	a	 more	sophisticated	
export	 structure.	 	 These	 bottlenecks	 include	 weak	 infrastructure,	 a	 highly	 concentrated	 and	
anticompetitive	market	structure,	and	weak	land	management.		Addressing	these	bottlenecks	is	all	
the	 more	 important	 under	 the	 current	 environment	 in	 which	 the	 conflict	 and	 weak	 external	
conditions	continue	to	undercut	investor	confidence.		Improving	infrastructure	will	require	creating	
fiscal	 space	 for	 public	 investment	 and	 strengthening	 public	 investment	 management,	 while	
improving	governance	and	transparency	in	the	important	energy	and	transport	sectors.		Creating	a	
level	 playing	 field	 for	 the	 private	 sector	 will	 require	 further	 deregulation,	 more	 effective	
implementation	of	competition	legislation,	and	improving	corporate	governance	of	ineffective	state	
owned	enterprises.		Perhaps	most	critical	for	the	private	sector	is	to	reform	land	markets.		Weak	land	
governance	 seriously	 undermines	 investment	 and	 productivity	 in	 the	 high‐potential	 agriculture	
sector,	 as	 well	 as	 other	 sectors.	 	 Reforming	 land	 markets	 will	 require	 improving	 state	 land	
management	through	a	new	legal	framework,	while	gradually	opening	sales	for	private	agricultural	
land	ensuring	transparency	and	equal	access.	
	
17.      The	 third	 pathway	 is	 providing	 more	 effective	 services	 and	 targeted	 assistance	 by	
optimizing	the	financing	and	improving	the	quality	of	health	and	education,	further	improving	
targeting	 of	 social	 assistance,	 and	 providing	 effective	 support	 to	 conflict	 affected	 people.		
Despite	spending	a	large	share	of	GDP	on	social	services	and	assistance,	the	quality	and	effectiveness	
of	health	and	education	services	is	weak,	while	social	assistance	is	weakly	targeted.		Providing	more	
effective	services	and	targeted	assistance	can,	therefore,	not	only	reduce	expenditure	pressures,	but	
also	help	improve	employment	outcomes	and	result	in	tangible	improvements	in	the	quality	of	life	
for	the	population.		The	most	important	priorities	are	in	the	areas	of	health,	social	assistance,	and	
targeted	support	to	conflict	affected	people.		In	health,	a	key	priority	is	to	reform	the	health	financing	
model	from	a	focus	on	hospital	care	and	input‐based	norms	toward	a	payment	system	where	money	
follows	the	patient.		In	social	assistance,	key	priorities	include	improving	the	targeting	of	the	housing	
and	 utilities	 subsidy	 (HUS)	 program	 which	 has	 provided	 temporary	 relief	 from	 energy	 tariff	
increases,	 but	 also	 continuing	 to	 move	 from	 categorical	 to	 targeted	 benefits	 for	 the	 overall	 social	
assistance	package.		In	light	of	the	continuing	conflict	and	large	numbers	of	IDPs,	providing	targeted	
support	 to	 conflict	 affected	 people	 is	 a	 high	 priority.	 	 This	 will	 require	 providing	 effective	 skills,	


                                                         9 
 
training,	and	enterprise	support	in	affected	areas	and	extending	systematic	assistance	to	vulnerable	
households.	
	
18.      The	fourth	and	cross‐cutting	pathway	is	building	institutions	of	better	governance	and	
anticorruption.		These	include	institutions	of	public	financial	management	(PFM),	anticorruption,	
justice,	public	administration,	and	citizens’	engagement.		Strengthening	PFM	institutions	would	help	
improve	 efficiency,	 accountability,	 and	 transparency	 in	 the	 use	 of	 public	 resources,	 including	 for	
service	delivery,	public	investment,	and	state‐owned	enterprises.		This	would	help	reduce	fiscal	risks	
and	 contribute	 to	 more	 effective	 infrastructure	 and	 service	 delivery.	 	 Building	 effective	
anticorruption	and	justice	institutions	would	contribute	to	overall	transparency,	accountability	and	
fairness	 in	 the	 interface	 between	 citizens,	 businesses,	 and	 the	 state,	 while	 providing	 the	 tools	
necessary	to	battle	grand	corruption,	state	capture,	and	the	influence	of	vested	interests	in	order	to	
re‐establish	public	trust	in	the	public	sector.		Improving	public	administration	by	building	a	more	
professional	and	motivated	civil	service	and	more	efficient	institutions	will	help	reduce	incentives	
for	corruption	while	improving	delivery	of	public	services.	Finally,	enhancing	citizens’	engagement	
efforts	in	advancing	key	structural	reforms	and	monitoring	the	effectiveness	of	service	delivery	will	
be	important	in	harnessing	and	channeling	the	energy	and	enthusiasm	for	change	in	Ukraine	since	
the	Maidan	uprising.	
	
19.      In	 fact,	 a	 two‐pronged	 strategy	 is	 important	 in	 addressing	 Ukraine’s	 governance	 and	
corruption	 challenges.		The	first	prong	of	the	strategy	involves	building	the	institutions	of	better	
governance	and	anticorruption	that	would	have	a	cross‐cutting	impact	in	supporting	progress	along	
the	other	pathways	to	sustained	recovery	and	shared	prosperity.		The	second	prong	of	the	strategy	
involves	 advancing	 reforms	 across	 the	 three	 other	 pathways	 of	 macroeconomic	 stability,	 private	
sector	 productivity,	 and	 service	 delivery	 to	 disempower	 vested	 interests.	 	 Reforms	 in	 tax	
administration	and	the	financial	sector	can	help	 not	only	contain	macroeconomic	imbalances,	but	
also	 disempower	 powerful	 underlying	 vested	 interests	 by	 cutting	 tax	 evasion	 and	 reining	 in	
opportunities	 for	 related	 party	 lending.	 Similarly,	 streamlining	 business	 regulations,	 increasing	
competition,	 and	 reforming	 land	 markets	 would	 not	 only	 help	 level	 the	 playing	 field	 and	 support	
productivity	growth,	but	also	undercut	rents	for	powerful	vested	interests.		Furthermore,	effective	
decentralization	can	not	only	help	deliver	more	effective	services	under	the	right	circumstances,	but	
can	 also	 undercut	 a	 centralized	 system	 of	 influence	 and	 rebuild	 public	 support	 for	 government	
institutions.	This	means	that	an	important	prong	of	a	better	governance	and	anticorruption	strategy	
for	Ukraine	involves	pushing	progress	on	reforms	across	the	board	that	undermine	vested	interests.	
	
20.      The	 following	 table	 provides	 a	 summary	 of	 the	 pathways	 and	 priority	 interventions	
identified	by	this	SCD.		Four	pathways	and	sixteen	priorities	are	listed.	While	this	is	narrowed	down	
from	a	wider	universe	of	possible	pathways	and	priorities,	sixteen	priorities	is	still	a	large	number	
and	not	all	of	them	are	equally	critical	in	helping	Ukraine	generate	sustained	recovery	and	shared	
prosperity.	Nor	can	all	of	them	be	expected	to	be	implemented	over	the	same	time	horizon.		Each	of	
the	priorities	are,	therefore,	assigned	a	criticality	rating	of	“critical”,	“high”,	or	“medium”	and	a	time	
horizon	of	“immediate”,	“short”,	or	“medium”	over	which	progress	is	needed	and	can	be	expected.	
	


                                                     10 
 
                                 Summary	of	Pathways	and	Priorities	
                        Cross	Cutting	Pathway:	Better	Governance	and	Anticorruption	Institutions
                                     Priorities                                Criticality        Time	horizon
    Public	financial	management:	Implement	updated	PFM	Strategy,	including	
    medium	term	budgeting,	streamlining	performance	based	budgeting,	and	         High            Short,	Medium
    introducing	fiscal	risk	assessment	framework.
    Anticorruption	and	Justice	Institutions:	Effectively	implement	new	anti‐
    corruption	laws;	strengthen	public	trust	in	justice	system	by	improving	     Critical         Short,	Medium
    enforcement	and	HR	reform.
    Public	administration	reform:	Improve	policy	and	decision‐making;	
    streamline	personnel	while	improving	human	resource	management;	             Critical         Short,	Medium
    undertake	merit‐based	appointments	and	optimize	salaries.
    Citizens	Engagement:	Build	on	successful	post‐Maidan	mobilization	by	
    promoting	more	systematic	planning,	management,	and	communications	          Critical        Immediate,	Short
    based	on	information	and	evidence‐based	analysis.	

                                             Pathway	1:	Macroeconomic	Stability
                                      Priorities                                 Criticality        Time	horizon
    Tax	Reform:	Broaden	tax	base	by	removing	exemptions	and	loopholes;	
                                                                                     High          Immediate,	Short
    improve	international	taxation	treaties;	and	strengthen	tax	administration
    Pension	Reform:	Restructure	benefit	package	to	better	link	contributions	
                                                                                                   Immediate,	Short,	
    to	benefits;	parametric	reforms	to	address	categorical	benefits,	early	        Critical
                                                                                                      Medium
    retirement,	and	provide	incentives	to	retire	later
    Strengthen	Financial	Sector:	Implement	framework	to	recapitalize	and	
    resolve	banks	and	strengthen	supervision;	restore	credit	growth	by	putting	
                                                                                Critical,	High     Immediate,	Short
    in	place	effective	NPL	resolution	framework;	and	improve	governance	of	
    state	owned	banks

                                            Pathway	2:	Private	Sector	Productivity
                                       Priorities                                   Criticality     Time	horizon
    Strengthen	PIM	and	Expand	Infrastructure:                                           High           Short	
     •Create	fiscal	space	for	public	investment	and	strengthen	PIM	systems              High          Medium
     •Energy	sector	–	improve	governance	and	transparency,	reduce	losses,	and	
                                                                                   Critical/High       Medium
     reduce	high	energy	intensity
     •Transport	sector	–	promote	efficient	multimodal	transport	system	to	
                                                                                     Medium            Medium
     unleashing	Ukraine’s	trade	potential
    Create	Level	Playing	Field	in	Private	Sector:                                      High              Short
     •Deregulation	–	further	streamline	business	regulatory	environment                High         Short/Medium
     •Competition	Policy	–	enhance	capacity	of	AMC	to	implement	legislation	
                                                                                       High            Medium
     and	streamline	state	aid	for	enterprises	to	reduce	distortion	of	competition
     •SOE	Reform	–	triage	of	SOEs;	strengthen	accounting	and	financial	
                                                                                       High              Short
     reporting;	and	improve	corporate	governance
    Land	Reform:	Increase	efficiency	of	state	land	management	through	new	
    legal	framework;	open	sales	market	for	private	agricultural	land	ensuring	        Critical      Short/Medium
    transparency	and	equal	access;	and	clear	status	of	unclaimed	property.
    Trade	Facilitation:	Strengthen	and	harmonize	quality	and	standards	
                                                                                     Medium              Short
    arrangements	to	tap	potential	of	international	trade	agreements

                                    Pathway	3:	Effective	Services	and	Targeted	Assistance
                                      Priorities                                    Criticality     Time	horizon
    Health	Reform:	Revise	health	financing	model	from	input‐based	norms	
                                                                                       High              Short
    toward	payment	systems	where	“money	follows”	the	patient
    Education:	Implement	“hub	schools”	program	to	optimize	school	network	
                                                                                     Medium              Short
    while	prioritizing	investments	in	quality‐enhancing	inputs
    Subnational	delivery	mechanisms:	Improve	norm‐based	financing	for	
                                                                                     Medium              Short
    services,	increase	financial	autonomy,	and	clarify	roles	and	responsibilities	
    Social	Assistance:	Continue	shift	from	categorical	to	targeted	benefits	and	
                                                                                     Critical      Immediate,	Short
    improve	targeting	of	the	housing	utility	subsidy	(HUS)	program
    Targeted	support	to	conflict	affected	people:	skills,	training,	and	MSME	
    in	affected	areas	and	host	communities	and	extend	systematic	assistance	to	        High        Immediate,	Short
    vulnerable	households                                                                                               	

	                                 	

                                                             11 
 
I.      Introduction	
	
1.       Ukraine	 has	 tremendous	 potential	 that	 has	 not	 yet	 been	 reached.		Ukraine	is	endowed	
with	 intelligent,	 energetic,	 and	 entrepreneurial	 people;	 extraordinary	 fertile	 land;	 considerable	
natural	resources;	and	a	geographic	location	at	the	crossroads	of	Europe	and	Asia.		There	is	no	reason	
why	 Ukraine,	 under	 the	 right	 conditions,	 should	 not	 be	 among	 the	 league	 of	 prosperous	 and	
successful	 nations.	 	 The	 circumstances	 today,	 however,	 are	 of	 course,	 still	 far	 from	 that	 ultimate	
target.		Ukraine’s	GDP	per	person	in	2015	was	$2,115,	while	the	corresponding	figure	was	$12,500	
for	 Poland,	 around	 $9,000	 for	 Turkey	 and	 Romania,	 and	 $9,800	 for	 Malaysia,	 and	 $13,000	 for	
Argentina.		The	flip	side	of	the	current	circumstances	is	that	if	Ukraine	is	able	to	put	in	place	the	right	
conditions,	it	will	experience	a	period	of	strong	economic	growth	as	it	catches	up	and	converges	to	
the	levels	of	income	of	more	prosperous	nations.	
	




                                                     					                                                	
	
2.       Two	 important	 factors	 explain	 why	 Ukraine	 today	 finds	 itself	 considerably	 below	
potential:	 (i)	 a	 history	 of	 deep	 structural	 bottlenecks	 and	 governance	 challenges;	 and	 (ii)	
serious	 shocks	 from	 political,	 security,	 and	 economic	 challenges	 during	 the	 last	 three	 years.		
The	 history	 of	 structural	 bottlenecks	 and	 governance	 challenges	 has	 led	 to	 large	 macroeconomic	
imbalances,	 weak	 productivity	 growth,	 and	 ineffective	 social	 services	 in	 Ukraine	 for	 an	 extended	
period.		This	has	in	turn	led	to	a	pattern	of	unsustainable	economic	growth	and	poverty	reduction.		
Growth	averaged	only	2	percent	per	year	in	Ukraine	during	2000‐2015,	compared	to	3.6	percent	in	
Poland,	 4.2	 percent	 in	 Turkey,	 and	 5.1	 percent	 in	 Malaysia.	 	 Second,	 Ukraine	 has	 been	 hit	 by	
unprecedented	 shocks	 on	 two	 fronts	 in	 2014‐2015:	 the	 conflict	 in	 eastern	 Ukraine	 and	 the	
deterioration	in	the	global	economic	environment,	including	sharply	lower	commodity	prices.		The	
impact	of	the	dual	shocks	has	been	very	significant.		Real	GDP	contracted	by	6.6	percent	in	2014	and	
by	 a	 further	 9.8	 percent	 in	 2015.	 	 The	 currency	 depreciated	 sharply	 in	 2014‐2015	 and	 the	
consolidated	fiscal	deficit,	including	Naftogaz,	reached	10.1	percent	of	GDP	in	2014.		A	large	number	
of	banks	have	failed	and	the	level	of	nonperforming	loans	increased.	
	
3.       The	economic	crisis	has	been	an	opportunity	for	change	in	Ukraine.		For	much	of	the	last	
15	years,	Ukraine	faced	very	favorable	external	conditions.		Capital	flowed	freely	into	Ukraine	and	
other	emerging	markets,	while	commodity	prices	boomed.		As	a	result,	Ukraine	was	able	to	grow	

                                                      12 
 
without	structural	reforms	or	significant	improvements	in	efficiency.		All	this	led	to	an	unsustainable	
pattern	 of	 growth.	 	 The	 economic	 crisis	 since	 2013	 has	 forced	 change	 and	 Ukraine	 has	 taken	
advantage	of	the	opportunity.		Considerable	reforms	have	been	implemented	in	the	last	three	years	
to	stabilize	the	economy	in	the	face	of	shocks,	reduce	large	imbalances,	and	cushion	the	impact	of	the	
shocks	 on	 the	 population.	 Key	 reforms	 adopted	 include	 moving	 to	 a	 flexible	 exchange	 rate;	
undertaking	 significant	 fiscal	 consolidation;	 reforming	 energy	 tariffs	 and	 strengthening	 the	 social	
safety	net	to	cushion	the	impact	on	the	poor;	 stabilizing	the	banking	sector	by	putting	in	place	the	
framework	to	resolve	and	recapitalize	banks,	and	strengthen	supervision;	streamlining	the	business	
environment;	 making	 public	 procurement	 more	 transparent	 and	 improving	 public	 investment	
management;	and	putting	in	place	key	instruments	of	anticorruption.	
          	
4.        Much	more	needs	to	be	done	to	move	from	economic	stabilization	to	durable	recovery	
and	shared	prosperity	for	the	population.		Strong	and	sustained	recovery	have	not	yet	taken	hold	
and	poverty	has	increased	significantly	in	light	of	the	economic	crisis.		Ukraine	needs	to	now	address	
the	 deeper	 structural	 bottlenecks	 and	 governance	 challenges	 on	 multiple	 fronts	 that	 have	
constrained	 sustainable	 development	 for	 the	 last	 15	 years.	 	 This	 will	 help	 translate	 economic	
stabilization	into	lasting	economic	growth	and	tangible	improvements	for	the	population.		It	will	also	
contribute	to	the	political	and	social	sustainability	of	the	reform	program.	Across	the	board,	making	
progress	on	the	reforms	will	require	intensifying	anti‐corruption	and	governance	efforts	to	reduce	
the	influence	of	vested	interests.		Without	new	reform	momentum,	economic	prospects	will	remain	
very	weak,	large	macroeconomic	imbalances	could	re‐emerge,	and	the	population	will	continue	to	
hurt	from	the	impact	of	the	economic	downturn.	With	new	reform	momentum	to	bolster	investor	
confidence	and	productivity	and	deliver	more	effective	services	to	the	population,	economic	growth	
could	pick	up	to	4	percent	or	more	in	the	medium	term	and	the	population	would	experience	tangible	
improvements	over	time.	With	even	greater	reform	momentum,	Ukraine	would	be	able	to	generate	
the	conditions	for	rapid	economic	growth	and	convergence	to	the	income	levels	of	the	community	of	
prosperous,	socially	equitable,	and	successful	nations	where	it	belongs.	
	
5.        This	Systematic	Country	Diagnostic	(SCD)	for	Ukraine	is	intended	as	an	evidence	based	
diagnostic	of	the	constraints	and	priorities	to	reduce	poverty	and	promote	shared	prosperity	
in	 a	 sustainable	 way.		The	SCD	is	intended	as	an	evidence‐based	and	integrative	analytical	report,	
combining	analysis	of	growth,	inclusion,	and	sustainability.		The	SCD	is	not	intended	to	be	limited	to	
expected	areas	of	World	Bank	Group	(WBG)	engagement,	but	is	instead	intended	to	assess	what	the	
country	itself	should	do	to	advance	its	growth,	poverty	reduction,	and	shared	prosperity	objectives	
in	a	sustainable	way.	
	
6.        This	 SCD	 is	 structured	 as	 follows.	 	 The	 next	 section	 covers	 the	 analysis	 of	 growth	 and	
sustainability.		The	third	section	covers	the	analysis	of	poverty	and	shared	prosperity.		The	fourth	
section	uses	the	analysis	from	the	prior	two	sections	to	lay	out	the	framework	for	the	SCD,	including	
the	constraints	and	pathways	to	sustainable	recovery	and	shared	prosperity	for	Ukraine.		The	fifth,	
sixth,	seventh,	and	eighth	sections	elaborate	on	the	pathways	to	achieving	sustainable	recovery	and	
shared	prosperity	in	Ukraine.	

	                                 	

                                                      13 
 
II.             Growth	and	Sustainability:	Patterns	and	Sources	
	
                                                                                                                                    Key	Takeaways
    	
            After	a	rebound	and	boom	during	2000‐07,	growth	stagnated	on	average	during	2008‐13	and	
             collapsed	in	2014‐15.	
            The	unsustainable	growth	path	and	overall	stagnation	in	growth	since	2008	resulted	from	
             large	macroeconomic	imbalances	and	instability	associated	with	structural	bottlenecks	and	
             a	weak	policy	stance.	
            Weak	productivity	growth	has	also	contributed	to	the	unsustainable	growth	path	and	overall	
             stagnation	in	Ukraine’s	growth	performance	since	2008.	
            Limited	progress	in	diversifying	 and	 enhancing	the	sophistication	of	Ukraine’s	export	and	
             production	base	has	contributed	to	weak	productivity	growth.	
	
	
1.       Growth	in	Ukraine	over	the	last	fifteen	years	has	been	characterized	by	three	phases:	
rebound	and	 boom	 during	 2000‐2007;	stagnation	during	2008‐2013;	and	crisis	and	collapse	
during	 2014‐2015.	Following	the	breakup	of	the	former	Soviet	Union,	Ukraine	experienced	one	of	
the	sharpest	and	most	protracted	output	contractions	among	transition	economies.		By	1999,	real	
GDP	collapsed	to	a	mere	38	percent	of	its	1989	level.		From	2000,	positive	external	conditions,	along	
with	some	initial	stabilization	and	reform	efforts,	contributed	to	rebound	and	growth	from	highly	
depressed	levels.		Growth	averaged	7	percent	per	year	during	2000‐2007.		Ukraine’s	terms	of	trade	
(TOT)	improved	by	50	percent	between	2001	and	2008,	including	higher	steel	prices	on	the	export	
side	 and	 beneficial	 pricing	 of	 natural	 gas	 on	 the	 import	 side.	 	 As	 external	 conditions	 deteriorated	
following	the	global	financial	crisis	of	2008‐2009,	the	economy	contracted	sharply	in	2009	and	then	
mostly	stagnated	through	2013.		Between	2008	and	2013,	growth	averaged	‐0.7	percent	per	year.		
Finally,	as	Ukraine	was	hit	by	the	double	shocks	of	the	conflict	and	lower	global	commodity	prices	in	
2014‐2015,	 the	 economy	 contracted	 sharply	 by	 8.7	 percent	 per	 year	 during	 2014‐2015.	 	 The	
economy	stabilized	and	grew	by	2.3	percent	in	2016.	
	
	               	                         												Figure	4	 	                                                     	                           	                     	                     	                         Figure	5	
                    GDP Growth (%); Exports, Imports (% of GDP)                                                                                                                     CA Bal, Savings, Investment, FDI (% of GDP)
        15                                                                                                                          65                                35

                                                                                                                                                                      30
        10                                                                                                                          60
                                                                                                                                                                      25
                                                                                                                                         Exports, Imports 




        5                                                                                                                           55                                20

                                                                                                                                                                      15
        0                                                                                                                           50                                10

                                                                                                                                                                       5
        ‐5                                                                                                                          45
                                                                                                                                                                       0

      ‐10                                                                                                                           40                                 ‐5

                                                                                                                                                                      ‐10
                                                                                                                                                                            2000

                                                                                                                                                                                   2001

                                                                                                                                                                                            2002

                                                                                                                                                                                                   2003

                                                                                                                                                                                                          2004

                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2005

                                                                                                                                                                                                                         2006

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                2007

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2008

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2009

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2010

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            2011

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   2012

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2013

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2014

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        2015

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               2016




      ‐15                                                                                                                           35
             2000
                    2001
                           2002
                                  2003
                                         2004
                                                2005
                                                       2006
                                                              2007
                                                                     2008
                                                                            2009
                                                                                   2010
                                                                                          2011
                                                                                                 2012
                                                                                                        2013
                                                                                                               2014
                                                                                                                      2015
                                                                                                                             2016




                                                                                                                                                                                          CAB (% of GDP)                                      Gross Investment (% of GDP)
                                          GDP Growth                         Exports                    Imports
                                                                                                                                                             						                                                                                                                                   	
                                                                                                                                                                                          FDI (% of GDP)                                      Gross natl savings (% of GDP)

	

                                                                                                                                                             14 
 
                                                Table	1.		Structure	of	Aggregate	Demand	(%	of	GDP)	
                            2000       2001       2002     2003     2004     2005      2006     2007     2008     2009     2010     2011     2012     2013     2014
                                                                             SHARE OF GDP (%)
HH Consumption               54.4       57.0       57.1     56.4     53.3     57.9  59.6   60.6          64.0     64.5     62.9     66.8      68.3     72.7     71.4
Govt Consumption             20.9       19.6       18.4     19.0     18.1     18.6  18.4   18.3          17.0     20.1     20.3     17.4      18.6     18.4     18.6
Gross Investment             19.6       21.8       20.1     22.0     21.1     22.6  24.8   26.7          27.9     17.1     19.6     22.4      21.7     18.1     14.1
Net Exports                   5.0        1.6        4.4      2.6      7.5      0.8  -2.8   -5.5          -8.0     -1.7     -2.8     -6.6      -8.7     -9.3     -4.1    	
	
2.      Unsustainable	 macroeconomic	 policies	 and	 limited	 structural	 reforms	 contributed	 to	
an	unsustainable	growth	path	since	2004.		Capital	inflows	surged	after	2005	while	credit	growth	
boomed,	fueled	by	external	borrowing	of	commercial	banks.		Given	the	positive	external	conditions	
fueling	the	boom,	limited	structural	reforms	took	place.		Ukraine’s	exports	actually	declined	from	61	
percent	of	GDP	in	2004	to	45	percent	in	2007,	pointing	to	an	erosion	of	competitiveness	of	tradables.		
The	 authorities	 continued	 to	 pursue	 unsustainable	 macroeconomic	 policies	 during	 this	 period,	 so	
that	the	current	account	deficit	grew	to	9.2	percent	of	GDP	in	2013.		Gross	national	savings	declined	
steadily	after	2004,	while	gross	investment	actually	increased,	suggesting	that	growth	since	2004	
was	associated	with	a	credit	fueled	consumption	boom	and	investment	in	nontradables	sectors.	
	
3.      An	unsustainable	fiscal	stance	fueled	large	imbalances	and	macroeconomic	instability	
even	 before	 the	 current	 economic	 crisis.	 	 Between	 2005	 and	 2009,	 while	 general	 government	
revenues	averaged	around	41	percent	of	GDP,	general	government	expenditures	increased	from	43	
percent	of	GDP	in	2005	to	47	percent	in	2009	and	further	to	49	percent	in	2010.		As	a	result,	the	
consolidated	general	government	deficit,	including	Naftogaz,	increased	from	1.8	percent	of	GDP	in	
2005	to	9	percent	of	GDP	in	2009.		The	growth	of	expenditures	was	fueled	by	current	spending,	which	
increased	 from	 39	 percent	 of	 GDP	 in	 2005	 to	 46	 percent	 in	 2010.	 	 The	 large	 fiscal	 imbalances	
combined	with	a	rigid	exchange	rate	regime	compounded	the	credit	fueled	consumption	boom,	so	
that	when	external	conditions	deteriorated,	the	economy	contracted	sharply	by	14.8	percent	in	2009.	
	
                                    Table	2.		Key	Economic	Indicators	
                                                  2007     2008     2009     2010      2011     2012     2013     2014     2015     2016     2017P    2018P    2019P

Nominal	GDP,	UAH	billion                            721      948      913    1,083     1,300    1,405    1,465    1,587    1,980    2,383    2,735    3,085    3,450
GDP	per	capita,	US$                               3,090    3,916    2,560    2,992     3,784    4,080    4,216    3,119    2,122    2,174    2,277    2,464    2,736
Unemployment	Rate                                    6.4      6.4      8.8      8.1       7.9      7.5      7.3      9.3      9.1      8.8      9.2      8.8      8.5

Real	GDP,	%	change                                  7.9      2.1    ‐14.8      4.1       5.5      0.2      0.0     ‐6.6     ‐9.8      2.3      2.0      3.5      4.0
Gross	Domestic	Investment,	%	GDP                   26.7     27.9     17.1     19.6      22.4     21.7     17.9     14.1     15.3     18.5     18.6     19.2     18.6
CPI,	%	change	eop                                  16.6     22.3     12.3      9.1       4.6     ‐0.2      0.5     24.9     43.3     12.4     10.2      7.0      6.0
Current	Account	Balance,	%	GDP                     ‐3.7     ‐7.1     ‐1.5     ‐2.2      ‐6.3     ‐8.2     ‐9.2     ‐3.5     ‐0.2     ‐3.8     ‐4.1     ‐3.0     ‐3.3
Exports	of	G&S,	%	GDP                              43.0     45.8     44.4     48.1      51.3     49.3     45.2     49.1     52.9     49.2     49.5     50.0     48.5
Imports	of	G&S,	%	GDP                              48.7     53.8     46.1     51.0      57.5     57.4     53.8     52.5     54.7     55.4     54.7     54.1     52.7
External	debt,	%	GDP                               58.6     83.6     90.8     85.0      77.6     76.6     78.6     97.6    131.5    129.6    131.6    125.4    107.5
International	Reserves,	US$	billion                32.5     31.5     26.5     34.6      31.8     24.5     20.4      7.5     13.3     15.5     21.8     29.5     29.8
			In	months	of	next	year’s	imports                 4.0      7.0      4.6      4.4       3.7      2.9      3.3      1.9      3.2      3.4      4.6      5.8      5.4
Budget	revenues,	%	GDP                             40.0     42.3     40.4     43.9      42.9     44.5     43.6     40.3     42.1     38.4     38.8     38.9     39.0
    Tax	revenues,	%	GDP                            36.7     37.8     37.2     39.3      38.4     38.9     37.9     35.8     35.5     33.1     34.3     34.8     34.8
Budget	expenditures,	%	GDP                         42.1     45.4     46.8     49.2      45.7     48.9     48.4     44.8     43.2     40.6     41.9     41.5     41.4
    Current	expenditures,	%	GDP                    36.9     40.1     44.7     46.4      42.3     45.7     46.2     44.3     41.0     37.4     38.6     37.8     37.5
    Capital	expenditures,	%	GDP                     5.2      5.3      2.1      2.8       3.0      2.9      2.0      1.3      2.2      3.1      2.8      2.9      3.1
Fiscal	balance,	%	GDP                              ‐2.1     ‐3.1     ‐6.4     ‐5.3      ‐2.8     ‐4.4     ‐4.8     ‐4.5     ‐1.2     ‐2.2     ‐3.1     ‐2.6     ‐2.4
Consolidated	deficit,	incl	Nagtogaz,	%	            ‐2.1     ‐3.1     ‐8.9     ‐6.3      ‐4.4     ‐5.5     ‐6.7    ‐10.1     ‐2.1     ‐2.3     ‐3.1     ‐2.6     ‐2.4
Public	and	Guaranteed	Debt,	%	GDP                  12.4     20.0     35.4     40.5      36.3     36.6     40.6     70.3     79.4     81.2     88.8     83.5     75.9
Source:	Ukrainian	Authorities,	WB	projections                                                                                                                           	
	


                                                                                      15 
 
4.        After	 a	 spurt	 of	 productivity	 growth	 in	 part	 associated	 with	 improved	 capacity	
utilization	 during	 2000‐07,	 productivity	 has	 stagnated	 in	 Ukraine.		During	2000‐2007,	out	of	
total	growth	of	7.2	percent	per	year,	total	factor	productivity	(TFP)	growth	accounted	for	6.3	percent,	
while	capital	accumulation	accounted	for	1.1	percent	and	the	labor	force	actually	contracted	slightly,	
pulling	growth	back	by	0.26	percent.		While	TFP	growth	of	6.3	percent	per	year	looks	impressive	at	
face	value,	rough	estimates	suggest	that	a	good	part	of	this	productivity	spurt	was	due	to	the	rebound	
in	capacity	utilization	following	the	sharp	post‐transition	contraction	when	real	GDP	in	1999	reached	
38	 percent	 of	 its	 1989	 value.	 	 Of	 course,	 the	 rebound	 in	 capacity	 utilization	 after	 2000	 was	 itself	
supported	 by	 initial	 reforms	 directed	 at	 macroeconomic	 stabilization	 and	 very	 favorable	 external	
conditions	with	Ukraine’s	terms	of	trade	improving	significantly.		However,	Ukraine	did	not	make	
significant	progress	in	tapping	export	markets	for	new	products	and	in	new	destinations	or	moving	
up	 the	 export	 quality	 ladder,	 all	 of	 which	 would	 have	 laid	 the	 foundation	 for	 more	 durable	
productivity	 growth.	 	 As	 a	 result,	 when	 external	 conditions	 deteriorated	 from	 2008	 onward,	
productivity	growth	stagnated.		In	fact,	during	2008‐2013,	TFP	growth	actually	averaged	negative	
1.52	percent	per	year,	contributing	to	overall	contraction	of	GDP	by	0.7	per	year.		Furthermore,	as	
Ukraine	was	hit	by	the	dual	shocks	of	the	conflict	and	the	sharp	decline	in	global	commodity	prices	
during	2014‐15,	TFP	plummeted	further	by	8.3	percent	per	year.		While	some	of	this	is	undoubtedly	
a	 result	 of	 lower	 capacity	 utilization,	 the	 overall	 story	 is	 one	 of	 limited	 reforms	 and	 progress	 in	
generating	productivity	growth	which	has	contributed	to	a	pattern	of	unsustainable	growth	over	the	
last	fifteen	years.		In	fact,	in	2015,	total	factor	productivity	was	only	27	percent	above	its	1999	level,	
which	largely	explains	why	real	GDP	in	2015	was	only	42	percent	above	its	1999	level.	
	
	       	        												Figure	6	 	    	        	            	                  	                        Figure	7	
                                                                                          Real GDP and Drivers (Index, 1999=100)
                                                                  200


                                                                  180


                                                                  160


                                                                  140


                                                                  120


                                                                  100


                                                                      80
                                                                           1999
                                                                                  2000
                                                                                         2001
                                                                                                2002
                                                                                                       2003
                                                                                                              2004
                                                                                                                     2005
                                                                                                                            2006
                                                                                                                                   2007
                                                                                                                                          2008
                                                                                                                                                 2009
                                                                                                                                                        2010
                                                                                                                                                               2011
                                                                                                                                                                      2012
                                                                                                                                                                             2013
                                                                                                                                                                                    2014
                                                                                                                                                                                           2015




                                                                                                GDP                  Capital                 Labor                    TFP
                                                          					                                       	
	
5.       Agriculture	has	served	as	a	steady	driver	of	growth,	while	industry	and	services	drove	
the	 strong	 rebound	 and	 growth	 of	 2000‐2007,	 they	 also	 stagnated	 during	 2008‐13	 and	
contracted	 sharply	 during	 2014‐15.		Ukraine	has	an	abundant	endowment	of	fertile	agricultural	
land	and	is	a	major	producer	and	exporter	of	wheat,	corn,	barley,	and	sunflower	oil.		This	has	resulted	
in	a	steady	contribution	of	agriculture	to	growth	over	an	extended	period	of	time.		On	the	other	hand,	
agriculture	remains	a	relatively	small	part	of	the	economy,	accounting	for	14	percent	of	GDP	in	1999	
and	dropping	to	7.5	percent	in	2007	before	increasing	again	to	12.5	percent	in	2015.		Industry	and	

                                                         16 
 
services,	 which	 account	 for	 the	 bulk	 of	 the	 economy,	 played	 a	 major	 part	 in	 driving	 rebound	 and	
growth	during	2000‐2007,	but	also	played	a	major	part	in	driving	stagnation	during	2008‐13	and	
collapse	in	2014‐15.		During	2000‐2007,	out	of	total	growth	of	7.4	percent,	industry	accounted	for	
3.4	 percent	 and	 services	 accounted	 for	 3.5	 percent,	 while	 the	 contribution	 of	 agriculture	 was	 0.6	
percent.		As	Ukraine	emerged	from	the	depths	of	the	post‐crisis	transition	starting	in	2000,	its	large	
industrial	 base	 rebounded	 supported	 by	 improving	 global	 commodity	 prices,	 while	 the	 services	
sector	expanded	as	the	new	market	economy	took	hold.		The	expansion	of	services	following	2004	
was	 also	 driven	 by	 the	 unsustainable	 credit	 fueled	 consumption	 and	 investment	 boom	 as	 banks	
borrowed	externally	to	expand	their	portfolio	in	Ukraine.		Since	2007,	however,	the	story	of	industry	
and	services	has	largely	been	one	of	stagnation	and	collapse.		During	2008‐13,	industry	contracted	
by	1.3	percent	per	year,	while	services	contracted	by	2.1	percent	per	year.		During	2014‐15,	industry	
contracted	by	14.1	percent	per	year,	while	services	contracted	by	7.1	percent	per	year.		In	contrast,	
agriculture	grew	steadily	by	6.6	percent	per	year	during	2008‐13	and	contracted	only	slightly	during	
the	economic	collapse	of	2014‐15.	
	
	          	       												Figure	8	 	       	       	           	      	           Figure	9	




                                                         					                                                                	
	
                                   Table	3.		Sectoral	Structure	and	Sources	of	Growth	
                  SECTORAL	SHARE	OF	GDP	(%)          SECTOR	GROWTH	RATE	(%)          SECTOR	CONTRIBUTION	TO	GROWTH	(%)
                  1999     2007      2013    2015 2000‐2007 2008‐2013 2014‐2015        2000‐2007    2008‐2013   2014‐2015
    Agriculture    14.3      7.5      10.2    12.5     3.56         6.62     ‐0.97          0.55         0.31       ‐0.10
    Industry       38.5     36.7      26.2    24.4     8.05         ‐1.30   ‐14.05          3.35        ‐0.30       ‐3.70
    Services       47.2     55.8      63.6    63.1     6.92         ‐2.11    ‐7.13          3.53        ‐0.73       ‐4.56
    Total	GDP     100.0    100.0     100.0   100.0     7.43         ‐0.72    ‐8.36          7.43        ‐0.72       ‐8.36 	
	
6.      Ukraine	 has	 not	 succeeded	 in	 generating	 sustained	 growth	 in	 exports	 over	 the	 last	
decade.	 	 In	 fact,	 exports	 have	 fluctuated	 considerably	 in	 line	 with	 the	 volatility	 in	 the	 global	
commodity	prices.	Primary	goods	comprised	over	80	percent	of	total	exports	on	average	over	the	
last	 10	 years.	 With	 export	 dynamics	 depending	 heavily	 on	 commodity	 prices,	 exports	 grew	
significantly	 during	 2005‐2008,	 but	 subsequently	 collapsed	 by	 over	 40	 percent	 during	 the	 global	
crises	in	2009.		Exports	recovered	again	during	2010‐2012,	but	have	declined	again	since	2013	due	
to	lower	global	commodity	prices	and	disrupted	trade	relations	with	the	Russian	Federation.		In	fact,	

                                                              17 
 
   looking	at	export	destinations,	the	Russian	Federation	was	Ukraine’s	major	trading	partner	through	
   2013,	with	Russia	and	other	CIS	markets	accounting	for	35	percent	of	Ukraine’s	exports	in	2013.		On	
   the	other	hand,	the	share	of	exports	going	to	the	EU‐28	countries	was	relatively	stable	at	26	percent	
   in	2013,	compared	to	23	percent	in	1996.		Following	the	conflict	in	eastern	Ukraine	and	disrupted	
   economic	 relations	 with	 Russia,	 exports	 to	 Russia	 have	 declined	 to	 12	 percent	 of	 total	 exports	 in	
   2015,	while	the	share	going	to	the	EU‐28	countries	grew	to	30	percent	in	2015.	
   	
Figure	10:	Ukraine	Exports	(types	of	goods,	$mn)                       Figure	11:	Geographical	structure	of	
                                                                                         exports	
                     Other
                     Consumer goods
                                                                                                       EU       Russia     Others
                                                                                  100%
                     Primary goods
70,000               Equipment                                            500     90%
                     S&P World Commodity Index, annual average  (RHA)
                                                                                  80%
60,000
                                                                          400     70%
50,000
                                                                                  60%
                                                                          300
40,000                                                                            50%

                                                                                  40%
30,000
                                                                          200
                                                                                  30%
20,000
                                                                                  20%
                                                                          100
10,000                                                                            10%

       0                                                                  0        0%
           2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015                    2010       2011     2012       2013      2014   2015

Source: NBU, WB estimates                                                                Source: NBU, WB estimates 
   	
   	
   	           Figure	12:	Export	Structure	(%	of	Total)	                      	          Figure	13:	Export	Sophistication	Index	




                                                                        			                                                          	
   	
   7.     Ukraine	 has	 made	 limited	 progress	 in	 diversifying	 its	 export	 base	 and	 enhancing	 the	
   sophistication	 of	 its	 exports.		Ukraine’s	export	structure	has	remained	largely	unchanged	with	a	
   predominant	share	of	resources.		The	consolidated	share	of	metals,	minerals	and	crops	amounted	45	
   percent	in	2014,	which	is	only	9	percentage	points	lower	than	in	1996.		The	share	of	engineering	

                                                                    18 
    
products	 has	 remained	 unchanged.	 	 In	 2000,	 the	 level	 of	 sophistication	 of	 Ukraine’s	 exports	 was	
almost	the	same	as	that	of	Poland,	Lithuania	and	Bulgaria.		However,	over	the	last	5	years,	Ukraine’s	
export	sophistication	has	declined	below	the	level	of	2000,	while	that	of	peer	countries	has	improved	
significantly.	
	
		Gross	Regional	Product	per	capita	(UAH,	2014)	            	       Regional	Exports	(%	of	GRP,	2014)	




                                                         				                                                  	
	
8.        The	 distribution	 of	 output	 and	 exports	 across	 oblasts	 also	 suggests	 that	 Ukraine	 has	
not	 yet	 made	 sufficient	 progress	 in	 moving	 beyond	 commodity	 exports	 and	 leveraging	 its	
other	comparative	advantages.		The	oblasts	with	the	highest	levels	of	output	per	capita	and	exports	
are	those	where	Ukraine’s	commodity	based	exports	are	concentrated.	The	oblasts	with	the	highest	
levels	of	output	per	capita	in	2014	include	Kyiv,	Dnipro,	Zaporizhia,	Kharkiv,	Poltava,	and	Odessa,	
while	 the	 oblasts	 with	 the	 highest	 export	 shares	 in	 2014	 include	 Dnipro,	 Zaporizhia,	 Donetsk,	
Luhansk,	 and	 Mykolayiv.	 On	 the	 other	 hand,	 those	 oblasts	 that	 are	 home	 to	 Ukraine’s	 other	
comparative	advantages	(agriculture	and	greater	proximity	to	the	large	EU	market)	generally	have	
lower	levels	of	output	per	capita	and	export	shares.		This	points	toward	a	significant	opportunity	to	
create	 the	 enabling	 conditions	 for	 the	 private	 sector	 in	 Ukraine	 to	 tap	 its	 other	 comparative	
advantages	by	leveraging	the	agriculture	sector	and	by	integrating	into	European	production	chains,	
particularly	at	a	time	when	traditional	comparative	advantages	in	commodities	has	been	affected	by	
shocks..	
	
9.        Going	 forward,	 the	 prospects	 for	 generating	 sustained	 moderate	 growth	 in	 Ukraine	
will	 require	 combining	 an	 increase	 in	 both	 productivity	 growth	 and	 investment	 from	 recent	
trends.		The	burden	on	investment	and	productivity	growth	are	particularly	high	in	Ukraine	given	
that	 its	 labor	 force	 is	 projected	 to	 continue	 to	 decline	 gently	 going	 forward	 due	 to	 demographic	
factors.		The	labor	force	is	projected	to	decline	by	about	0.1	percent	per	year	during	the	next	ten	
years.		A	number	of	scenarios	of	investment	and	TFP	growth	rates	required	to	generate	given	GDP	
growth	rates	during	2017‐2021	are	shown	in	table	3	below.		In	order	to	generate	a	growth	rate	of	5	
percent	 per	 year	 during	 2017‐2021,	 with	 investment	 at	 20	 percent	 of	 GDP,	 the	 TFP	 growth	 rate	
necessary	is	a	staggering	4.5	percent	per	year.		Such	a	TFP	growth	rate	is	very	high	by	international	
standards	for	a	sustained	period	of	time,	and	also	considerably	higher	than	Ukraine’s	average	TFP	
growth	rate	of	1.2	percent	during	the	last	15	years.		If	investment	rises	to	30	percent	of	GDP,	the	
necessary	TFP	growth	rate	is	still	a	formidable	3.4	percent.		In	order	to	generate	a	more	modest	GDP	

                                                      19 
 
growth	of	3	percent	during	2017‐2021,	with	investment	at	25	percent	of	GDP,	TFP	growth	will	have	
to	average	about	2	percent	per	year.		These	scenarios	demonstrate	that	Ukraine	needs	to	increase	
investment	and	productivity	growth	from	recent	trends	in	order	to	generate	reasonable	economic	
growth	rates	going	forward.	
	
                      Table	4:	Ukraine:	Growth	Scenarios	for	2017‐2021	
                         Growth        Investment (%GDP)         TFP Growth
                          5.0%                  20%                 4.5%
                          5.0%                  25%                 4.0%
                          5.0%                  30%                 3.4%
                          5.0%                  35%                 3.1%
                          3.0%                  20%                 2.5%
                          3.0%                  25%                 2.1%
                          3.0%                  30%                 1.9%
                          3.0%                  35%                 1.6%
                             Actual Growth (for Comparison): 2001-2015
                          2.0%                  21%                 1.2%                       	
                    Source:	World	Bank	staff	estimates.
	
10.     Generating	 the	 necessary	 increase	 in	 investment	 and	 productivity	 will	 require	 both	 a	
more	 sustainable	 macroeconomic	 stance	 and	 deep	 structural	 reforms.		Gross	national	savings	
has	averaged	12.5	percent	of	GDP	during	the	last	five	years	(2011‐2015).		This	was	due	to	both	low	
private	savings	(13.5	percent	of	GDP)	and	negative	public	savings	(‐1.0	percent	of	GDP)	during	this	
period.		So,	in	order	to	increase	investment	to	25	percent	of	GDP	(from	the	average	of	18	percent	
during	the	last	five	years),	Ukraine	will	need	to	increase	both	private	and	public	savings.		Increasing	
public	savings	will	require	significant	consolidation	of	current	expenditures	going	forward.		While	
private	 savings	 is	 difficult	 to	 influence	 through	 policy,	 sound	 macro‐financial	 policies,	 pension	
reform,	 and	 improvements	 in	 financial	 intermediation	 can	 help.	 	 Beyond	 the	 increase	 in	 national	
savings,	 Ukraine	 will	 also	 require	 higher	 levels	 of	 foreign	 direct	 investment.	 	 Both	 this	 and	 the	
necessary	increase	in	productivity	will	require	deep	structural	reforms	to	improve	infrastructure,	
level	the	playing	field	for	the	private	sector,	and	take	advantage	of	international	trade	opportunities.	
	

	                                 	




                                                      20 
 
III.      Poverty	and	Shared	Prosperity:	Patterns	and	Trends	
	
                                               Key	Takeaways
    	
       Poverty	 has	 declined	 significantly	 in	 Ukraine	 since	 2000,	 although	 the	 pace	 of	 poverty	
        reduction	slowed	during	2008‐13,	before	poverty	increased	significantly	in	2014‐15.	
       Household	 incomes	 have	 relied	 on	 large	 pension	 and	 social	 assistance	 spending,	 raising	
        concerns	about	the	sustainability	of	poverty	reduction.	
       With	 higher	 education	 levels,	 households	 enjoy	 the	 double	 benefit	 of	 higher	 employment	
        rates	 and	 higher	 returns,	 though	 for	 the	 B40s	 these	 education	 premia	 appear	 to	 be	 more	
        restrained	than	for	the	rest	of	the	population.	This	suggests	that	better	education	–	combined	
        with	measures	to	raise	overall	productivity	in	the	economy	and	especially	in	the	sectors	the	
        B40	tend	to	be	employed	in	–	could	be	an	important	driver	of	a	more	sustainable	model	of	
        poverty	reduction.	
	
	
11.      Between	the	turn	of	the	century	and	2013,	Ukraine	experienced	a	significant	reduction	
in	poverty,	though	the	pace	has	slowed	since	the	global	financial	crisis	of	2008‐09.		Since	2002,	
the	 earliest	 date	 for	 which	 comparable	 estimates	 are	 available,	 the	 country	 witnessed	 significant	
poverty	reduction,	in	both	urban	and	rural	areas.	According	to	the	recently	developed	World	Bank	
national	 methodology	 for	 Ukraine,	 “moderate	 poverty”	 declined	 from	 79	 percent	 in	 2002	 to	 38	
percent	in	2007.		In	rural	areas,	the	decline	was	from	85	percent	in	2002	to	50	percent	in	2007,	while	
in	urban	areas,	moderate	poverty	declined	from	76	percent	in	2002	to	33	percent	in	2007.		The	global	
financial	 crisis	 brought	 a	 trend	 reversal	 in	 2009,	 especially	 in	 urban	 areas.	 	 Subsequent	 years,	
however,	 saw	 a	 resumption	 of	 poverty	 reduction	 with	 moderate	 poverty	 declining	 further	 to	 14	
percent	in	2013.	The	breakout	of	conflict	and	economic	crisis	led	to	a	reversal	of	trend,	with	poverty	
up	significantly	since	2014‐15.	
	
	         	       							Figure	14	   	    	        	         	     	        Figure	15	




                                                			                                                     	
	
12.    Poverty	 trends	 based	 on	 the	 ECA	 wide	 regional	 poverty	 line	 ($5	 a	 day,	 2005	 PPP)	 are	
consistent	 with	 trends	 for	 the	 “moderate	 poverty”	 measure.	 	 The	 two	 poverty	 measures	 use	

                                                        21 
 
different	consumption	aggregates	but	nevertheless	yield	similar	trends.		The	share	of	the	population	
below	 the	 $5	 PPP	 poverty	 line	 decreased	 from	 46	 percent	 in	 2002	 to	 8	 percent	 in	 2008	 and	 3.2	
percent	in	2013.		Beyond	moderate	poverty	and	the	$5	PPP	per	day	line,	other	measures	of	extreme	
poverty	based	on	the	national	food	poverty	line	or	the	$2.5	PPP	per	day	line	suggest	that	extreme	
poverty	is	largely	not	present	in	Ukraine.		The	extreme	poverty	rate	based	on	the	food	line	declined	
from	26	percent	in	2002	to	0.4	percent	in	2014,	while	the	poverty	rate	based	on	$2.5	PPP	per	day	
declined	from	6.5	percent	in	2002	to	0.1	percent	in	2013.		
	
                                     Measuring	poverty	in	Ukraine	
	
This	SCD	uses	multiple	lines	to	look	at	poverty	trends	given	the	complementary	insights	they	provide.	Given	
the	lack	of	a	reliable	national	indicator,	the	robustness	of	trends	to	different	methodologies	is	comforting	on	
the	estimates’	ability	to	capture	welfare	dynamics	in	the	country.	The	official	poverty	methodology	to	measure	
extreme	poverty	is	based	on	a	measure	of	income	per	capita	and	adopts	the	official	Subsistence	Minimum	(SM)	
as	a	poverty	line.	This	is	problematic	as	the	SM	is	a	policy	variable	rather	than	a	technical	one	–	while	based	on	
a	basket	intended	to	cover	subsistence	needs,	it	is	reviewed	and	approved	by	the	Cabinet	of	Ministers	based	on	
policy	considerations	as	it	acts	as	an	anchor	for	a	number	of	benefits,	as	well	as	pensions	and	the	minimum	
wage.	Trends	analysis	based	on	the	SM	can	therefore	prove	misleading	as	it	is	based	on	a	varying	yardstick.	To	
obviate	the	methodological	shortfalls	of	the	official	methodology	the	World	Bank	introduced	in	2016	a	new	
poverty	line,	based	on	a	new	consumption	aggregate	and	the	cost	of	basic	needs	methodology.	This	is	the	line	
adopted	 here	 to	 present	 “moderate	 poverty”	 estimates,	 though	 the	 methodology	 provides	 also	 an	 extreme	
poverty	line	covering	only	the	food	component	of	the	moderate	poverty	line.	As	this	line	is	not	part	of	the	official	
set	of	poverty	lines	and	is	not	yet	familiar	to	Ukrainian	audiences,	the	SCD	also	reports	estimates	based	on	the	
well‐established	ECAPOV	methodology	(the	5	USD	a	day	and	2.5	USD	a	day,	2005	PPP	lines).	This	line	is	mostly	
intended	for	international	comparisons,	though	the	methodology	suffers	from	a	special	shortcoming	in	the	case	
of	 Ukraine,	 in	 that	 there	 is	 a	 perception	 among	 audiences	 familiar	 with	 Ukraine	 that	 the	 2005	 PPP	 might	
overestimate	household	welfare	when	compared	to	other	countries	in	the	region.		
	
For	comparison	purposes	when	looking	at	different	estimates	it	is	worth	considering	that	the	WB	moderate	
poverty	line	is	set	in	2014	prices	at	1045	hryvnia	per	month.	This	is	equivalent	to	8.5	USD	a	day	in	2005	PPP,	
and	is	somewhat	lower	than	the	official	poverty	line	(SM)	for	2014,	which	was	set	at	1176	hryvnia	per	month.	
Note	however	that	it	yields	a	poverty	incidence	estimate	which	is	much	higher	than	the	ECAPOV	methodology	
(15.2	rather	than	3.3	percent)	due	to	differences	in	the	consumption	aggregate	adopted;	and	twice	as	high	as	
the	official	poverty	estimate	which	is	based	on	an	income	rather	than	a	consumption	aggregate.		
	
13.     The	 long	 term	 decline	 in	 poverty	 was	 accompanied	 by	 a	 sizeable	 increase	 of	 those	
living	in	economic	security,	though	since	2008	 the	ranks	of	those	 living	in	 near	poverty	have	
swollen	significantly.		Looking	more	broadly	at	the	distribution,	Ukraine	has	adopted	as	a	target	for	
its	 2020	 Strategy	 increasing	 the	 number	 of	 people	 living	 in	 economic	 security,	 i.e.	 with	 low	
vulnerability	of	falling	into	poverty	(defined	as	having	more	than	15	USD	a	day	in	PPP).		This	group	
has	grown	significantly	between	2003	and	2008.	The	global	financial	crisis	reversed	this	trend	–	and	
then	 again	 the	 current	 crisis	 is	 reversing	 the	 gains	 made	 between	 2011	 and	 2013.	 	 An	 important	
element	that	emerges	from	Figure	15	is	the	growing	number	of	people	who	over	the	decade	have	
been	able	to	escape	poverty,	but	not	to	the	extent	of	being	considered	economically	secure.	
	


                                                          22 
 
14.    Poverty	 is	 estimated	 to	 have	 increased	 significantly	 in	 2015.	 	 The	 deep	 recession,	
depreciation,	 and	 compression	 of	 public	 current	 expenditures	 have	 resulted	 in	 significant	
contraction	of	disposable	incomes	in	Ukraine.		As	a	result,	moderate	poverty	is	estimated	to	have	
increased	from	14.1	percent	in	2013	to	22.2	percent	in	2015,	while	the	poverty	rate	(under	$5/day	
in	2005	PPP)	is	estimated	to	have	increased	from	3.2	percent	in	2013	to	5.8	percent	in	2015.		Labor	
market	conditions	have	deteriorated,	with	nominal	wage	growth	lagging	inflation,	and	real	wages	
down	on	average	by	13	percent	(year‐over‐year)	in	December	2015.		Unemployment	increased	from	
8	percent	in	2013	to	9.5	percent	in	the	second	half	of	2015.	
	
                  Table	5.		Poverty	Rates	(based	on	different	poverty	lines,	%	of	population)	
                              Moderate	Poverty                 Extreme	Poverty       $5	PPP         $2.5	PPP
                      Total         Rural           Urban       (food	pov	line) (ECA	regional)
                            (percent	of	population)                         (percent	of	population)
         2002         78.8           85.3            75.5            25.9              46.4            6.5
         2003         73.3           82.3            68.7            18.7              36.8            3.5
         2004         63.5           72.5            59.0            14.2              28.5            2.9
         2005         50.0           59.5            45.3             8.6              18.5            1.2
         2006         43.7           53.6            38.9             6.0              14.7            0.7
         2007         38.3           50.0            32.5             3.3              11.5            0.5
         2008         26.4           36.8            21.3             2.4               8.1            0.1
         2009         29.2           37.9            25.1             2.1               9.1            0.3
         2010         24.1           29.5            21.5             1.4               6.0            0.1
         2011         20.8           25.1            18.7             1.1               5.3            0.1
         2012         18.2           24.8            15.1             0.6               3.9            0.1
         2013         14.1           19.4            11.6             0.4               3.2            0.1
         2014         15.2           20.1            12.7             0.4               3.3            0.0
     2015	(est)       22.2                                                              5.8            0.1      	
	
15.      Despite	 significant	 poverty	 reduction	 over	 time,	 geographical	 gaps	 in	 poverty	
incidence	 remain	 significant.		The	rural‐urban	gap	in	moderate	poverty	has	hovered	around	7‐8	
percentage	points	in	recent	years.		In	2014,	poverty	incidence	in	rural	areas	was	20.1,	while	in	urban	
areas	it	was	12.7.		Overall,	a	significant	share	of	the	poor	live	in	rural	areas	and	key	demographic	
groups,	 such	 as	 pensioners,	 are	 even	 more	 concentrated	 in	 rural	 areas.	 	 Poverty	 incidence	 also	
appears	to	vary	significantly	across	regions	(possibly	by	as	much	as	a	factor	of	8	between	Kyiv	and	
other	parts	of	the	country,	though	for	most	regions	the	difference	in	incidence	is	more	contained).	
Despite	the	relevance	of	these	regional	disparities	to	current	policy	debates,	such	comparisons	need	
to	 be	 considered	 purely	 indicative,	 due	 to	 questions	 about	 whether	 data	 at	 the	 regional	 level	 are	
sufficiently	representative	and	because	data	availability	limits	the	extent	to	which	a	regional	price	
index	can	capture	fully	differences	in	purchasing	power	across	regions.	
	
16.      The	 conflict	 has	 had	 significant	 impacts	 on	 poverty	 and	 the	 well‐being	 of	 large	
populations	 in	 eastern	 Ukraine,	 although	 the	 regional	 data	 has	 its	 limitations.	Over	4	million	
Ukrainians	in	the	east	of	the	country	have	been	affected.	Donetsk	has	one	of	the	highest	populations	
of	the	B40	in	absolute	terms.	It	also	had	the	highest	number	(1.4	million)	of	pensioners	before	the	
outbreak	of	conflict	in	early	2014,	while	the	number	was	730,000	in	Luhansk	region.	The	conflict	and	

                                                      23 
 
       its	impacts	on	livelihoods	and	social	and	economic	opportunities	has	pushed	such	households	further	
       into	poverty	and	created	additional	pressures	on	Ukraine’s	already	overstretched	social	protection	
       systems.	 Insecurity	 has	 also	 interrupted	 service	 delivery	 and	 infrastructure.	 Vulnerability	 is	
       particularly	acute	for	forcibly	displaced	households	living	in	areas	with	significant	conflict‐related	
       damage	and	the	800,000	persons	living	in	areas	close	to	the	“line	of	contact”	between	government	
       and	non‐government	controlled	areas.		For	these	communities,	damage	to	homes	and	businesses	and	
       interruptions	 in	 public	 services	 (from	 electricity	 and	 water	 to	 health	 and	 education),	 livelihoods,	
       travel	routes	and	supply	chains,	compounded	by	the	psychosocial	stresses	of	living	in	a	conflict	zone,	
       and	the	dangers	and	constraints	resulting	from	land	mines	and	explosive	remnants	of	war,	all	result	
       in	a	state	of	high	vulnerability.	Opportunities	for	employment	in	mining	and	heavy	industry	in	the	
       east	has	also	been	impacted	considerably.	As	a	result,	IDPs	from	the	heavy	industrialized	areas	of	the	
       eastern	 Ukraine	 often	 face	 a	 mismatch	 between	 their	 skillsets	 and	 the	 economic	 opportunities	 in	
       communities	where	they	settle.	
       	
       17.      Labor	 market	 trends	 and	 particularly	 real	 wage	 growth	 played	 an	 important	 role	 in	
       driving	the	poverty	decline	observed	up	to	2013.	Indeed,	the	boom	period	of	2000‐2007	saw	an	
       increase	in	the	number	of	employed	and	of	the	employment	rate,	with	a	relative	stable	labor	force	
       participation	rate.	 This	period	was	 also	characterized	by	very	 high	real	wage	 growth	 (on	 average	
       above	 15	 percent	 annually)	 which	 more	 than	 tripled	 real	 wages	 during	 the	 period	 of	 2000‐2007	
       (Figure	16).		After	2008	the	economic	crisis	coincided	with	a	decline	in	the	working	age	population	
       due	 to	 long	 term	 demographic	 trends.	 After	 a	 significant	 fall	 in	 2009	 as	 a	 reaction	 for	 the	 deep	
       recession	the	employment	rate	grew	moderately	until	2013,	despite	a	decline	in	the	absolute	number	
       of	employed	over	the	period.	Despite	the	crisis,	because	of	the	tightening	of	the	labor	market,	average	
       real	wage	growth	in	Ukraine	for	the	period	2008‐2013	was	relatively	high	at	the	level	of	6.4	percent.		
       	
      Figure	16:	Labor	market	trends	2000‐2015                     Figure	17:Real	wages	and	real	wage	growth	
                                                                                        2000‐2015	
70                                                                                     14     500                                                                                30
                      Boom	                               Stagnati            Crisis                            Boom	                              Stagnati             Crisi
68                    period                                                                  450                                                                                25
                                                          on                           12                       period                             on                   s
66                                                        period                              400                                                  period                        20

                                                                                       10                                                                                        15
64                                                                                            350
                                                                                                                                                                                 10
62                                                                                            300
                                                                                       8
                                                                                                                                                                                 5
60                                                                                            250
                                                                                                                                                                                 0
                                                                                       6
58                                                                                            200
                                                                                                                                                                                 ‐5
56                                                                                     4      150
                                                                                                                                                                                 ‐10
54                                                                                            100                                                                                ‐15
                                                                                       2
52                                                                                                50                                                                             ‐20

50                                                                                     0           0                                                                             ‐25
     2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015                   2000200120022003200420052006200720082009201020112012201320142015
               LFP               employment                uneployement	(right	axis)                       real	wage	index,	2000=100%       real	wage	growth,	percent	(right	axis)

         	
         	
         18.      The	 crisis	 in	 2014‐2015	 saw	 labor	 market	 adjust	 through	 the	 rise	 of	 unemployment	
         and	 a	 real	 wage	 correction.	 	 During	 the	 crisis	 of	 2014‐2015	 both	 employment	 and	 labor	 force	
         participation	rates	and	absolute	numbers	sharply	declined	while	the	unemployment	jumped	to	over	


                                                                                            24 
          
9	percent	levels.	On	the	background	of	high	inflation	wages	declined	in	real	terms	by	one	quarter	
over	two	year	period	and	returned	to	the	levels	of	2008.	
	
          Figure	18:	Income	Growth	of	B40	vs	Total	Pop                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Figure	19:	Growth	Incidence	Curve,	2008‐13
    10%




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    7
                                                                                  Bottom 40%                                                                                        Total Population
     8%




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    6
     6%

     4%




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    5
     2%




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    4
     0%




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    3
    ‐2%
          Serbia (2007‐2010)
                               Armenia (2008‐2013)
                                                     Macedonia, FYR (2003‐2008)


                                                                                                         Hungary (2006‐2011)


                                                                                                                                                    Lithuania (2006‐2011)
                                                                                                                                                                            Estonia (2006‐2011)
                                                                                                                                                                                                  Bulgaria (2007‐2011)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Slovenia (2006‐2011)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Czech Republic (2006‐2011)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Montenegro (2006‐2011)


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Croatia (2004‐2009)


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Ukraine (2008‐2013)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Turkey (2007‐2012)


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Poland (2006‐2011)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Kyrgyz Republic (2006‐2011)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Russian Federation (2007‐2012)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Slovak Republic (2006‐2011)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Belarus (2006‐2011)
                                                                                   Albania (2008‐2012)


                                                                                                                               Latvia (2006‐2011)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Georgia (2008‐2013)


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Romania (2006‐2011)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Moldova (2008‐2013)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Tajikistan (2004‐2009)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Kazakhstan (2006‐2010)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        0    20            40                 60            80       100
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Percentiles

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Median spline                Growth rate in mean




    Source:	Bank	staff	estimates	using	household	budget	surveys
	
19.     Income	growth	of	the	B40	population	in	Ukraine	exceeded	that	of	the	total	population	
during	 2008‐13,	 although	 questions	 about	 data	 quality	 remain.	 	 A	 comparison	 of	 shared	
prosperity	indicators	across	the	ECA	region	indicates	that	Ukraine	performed	favorably	relative	to	
other	 countries	 in	 the	 region,	 including	 many	 EU	 member	 states.	 	 The	 data	 indicates	 that	 during	
2008‐13,	income	growth	of	the	bottom	40	percent	of	the	population	in	Ukraine	exceeded	that	of	the	
total	population.		This	assessment,	however,	needs	to	be	tempered	by	a	consideration	of	some	of	the	
weaknesses	that	characterize	the	data,	particularly	the	likely	underestimation	of	the	top	incomes	in	
the	distribution.	While	common	to	the	region,	this	problem	is	likely	to	result	in	a	rosier	picture	of	the	
relative	growth	performance	of	the	bottom	40	percent.	The	belief	that	the	survey	might	be	missing	a	
large	part	of	the	higher	end	of	the	income	distribution	is	well‐established	among	local	researchers	
and	 supported	 by	 the	 fact	 that	 estimates	 of	 private	 consumption	 in	 the	 survey	 are	 less	 than	 60	
percent	of	estimates	from	national	accounts.		Furthermore,	the	available	data	on	professional	and	
high	 skilled	 wages	 from	 human	 resource	 firms	 show	 that	 they	 are	 significantly	 higher	 than	 those	
captured	by	the	survey.		Finally,	while	the	perception	is	that	the	upper	end	of	the	income	distribution	
in	 Ukraine	 is	 extremely	 well‐off,	 the	 evidence	 from	 the	 household	 survey	 points	 to	 very	 limited	
inequality	(a	Gini	of	about	24	percent	in	2013).	
	
                         Comparison	of	HBS	and	National	Accounts	Consumption	Growth	
    	
    The	 significant	 decline	 in	 poverty	 incidence,	 particularly	 during	 the	 2008‐13	 period	 of	 stagnant	 growth,	
    raises	questions	about	the	underlying	drivers.		The	analysis	in	this	chapter	suggests	that	two	factors	could	
    be	responsible	for	this.		The	first	is	the	considerable	dependence	of	income	growth	on	pensions	and	social	
    assistance,	 which	 will	 be	 discussed	 in	 the	 next	 section.	 	 The	 second	 is	 that	 consumption	 growth	 in	 the	
    household	survey	has	exceeded	that	in	national	accounts,	as	shown	by	the	figures	in	this	box.	
    	




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             25 
 
                                                                  					                                               	
    	
    A	comparison	of	consumption	growth	in	the	household	survey	and	in	national	accounts	turns	up	a	number	
    of	interesting	findings.		The	first	is	that	consumption	growth	in	the	household	survey	overall	and	particularly	
    for	the	B40	population	exceeded	consumption	growth	in	national	accounts.		This	is	likely	because	national	
    accounts	 do	 not	 fully	 take	 account	 for	 the	 large	 unobserved	 economy.	 	 The	 second	 is	 that	 consumption	
    growth	 exceeds	 growth	 of	 GDP	 per	 capita,	 in	 part	 because	 transfers	 and	 social	 assistance,	 along	 with	 a	
    compression	of	savings,	 enabled	 households	to	 increase	 consumption	 faster	 than	 their	 incomes.	 	 Both	 of	
    these	findings	can	partly	explain	why	poverty	was	declining	during	a	period	of	stagnant	growth	in	2008‐13.		
    Further	analysis	on	this	issue	would	be	useful	going	forward.	
    	
	
	
                                       Reliance	on	Pensions	and	Transfers	
	
20.     Overall,	 a	 significant	 portion	 of	 household	 income	 in	 Ukraine	 and	 particularly	 for	 the	
poor	comes	from	pensions	and	transfers,	raising	concerns	about	the	sustainability	of	poverty	
reduction.		The	figure	below	provides	a	snapshot	of	the	income	streams	of	households	in	the	bottom	
40	percent	of	the	population	(B40)	and	in	the	top	20	percent	(T60)	in	2013.		The	figure	also	shows	
how	this	differs	across	rural	and	urban	areas	for	the	B40.		Overall,	the	B40	derive	less	of	their	income	
from	labor	and	employment	and	more	from	pensions,	social	assistance	and	other	transfers.		This	type	
of	income	profile	is	very	common	in	Eastern	Europe	and	Central	Asia,	where	the	B40	rely	on	public	
transfers	more	than	in	other	regions	of	the	world.		Disaggregating	the	income	profile	of	the	B40	by	
urban	 and	 rural	 shows	 that	 the	 biggest	 differences	 across	 areas	 are	 in	 the	 extent	 to	 which	 they	
depend	on	labor	income	(driven	by	wage	income)	and	agricultural	incomes.		This	difference	matters	
as,	while	both	labor	income	and	agricultural	income	are	produced	by	labor	(the	B40	in	rural	Ukraine	
are	unlikely	to	be	enjoying	rents	from	land),	agricultural	income	is	more	likely	to	vary	with	exogenous	
shocks,	such	as	changes	in	commodity	prices	or	weather	shocks.	
	
21.     Social	assistance	accounted	for	6	percent	of	the	income	of	the	B40,	with	little	difference	
between	 urban	 and	 rural	 areas.		It	is	noticeable,	however,	that	also	the	T60	in	2013	received	3	
percent	of	their	income	from	social	assistance.		Detailed	analysis	of	the	system	for	2012	shows	indeed	
that	as	many	as	49	percent	of	those	living	in	the	top	decile	were	being	reached	by	some	form	of	social	
assistance.		In	addition	to	a	variety	of	“privileges”	which	were	untargeted,	the	major	social	assistance	
programs	was	the	child	birth	grant	(that	would	give	increasing	amounts	of	money	for	children	of	
higher	 order).	 Other	 programs	 included	 subsidies	 for	 energy	 consumption,	 and	 a	 small	 targeted	


                                                             26 
 
guaranteed	minimum	income	program.		As	lower	income	groups	have	more	children,	the	child	birth	
grant	had	an	element	of	“self‐targeting”	and	could	amount	to	as	much	as	38	percent	of	the	resources	
of	those	in	the	bottom	decile	that	would	receive	it.	For	the	top	decile	the	same	indicator	of	generosity	
would	amount	to	4	percent,	which	is	not	trivial	considering	that	those	were	meant	to	be	the	richest	
groups	 in	 the	 population.	 	 Reforms	 undertaken	 since	 2014	 have	 addressed	 some	 elements	 of	
regressivity	in	the	system,	with	reforms	of	the	Housing	and	Utility	Subsidies,	and	introducing	a	fixed	
amount	 per	 child	 in	 the	 birth	 grant,	 resulting	 in	 an	 increase	 on	 the	 first	 child	 and	 decreases	 on	
subsequent	children.		However,	considerable	challenges	remain	in	achieving	a	more	targeted	package	
of	social	assistance	going	forward.	
	
        Figure	20:	Income	sources	of	the	B40	and	the	T60	for	urban	and	rural	population	
                                                    2013                                                                        2013 b40
                100%                                                                           100%
                 90%                                                                             90%
                 80%                                                                             80%
                 70%                                                                             70%
                 60%                                                                             60%
                 50%                                                                             50%
                 40%                                                                             40%
                 30%                                                                             30%
                 20%                                                                             20%
                 10%                                                                             10%
                   0%                                                                             0%
                                         b40                           t60                                              rural                      urban

                 other income                  Other transfers       Social Assistance           other income                Other transfers       Social Assistance
                 Pensions                      Agricultural income   Labor income                Pensions                    Agricultural income   Labor income
              Source: UkrStat, World Bank staff estimation                               				Source: UkrStat, World Bank staff estimation                              	
        Note:	Other	transfers=	other	public	transfers	+	private	transfers;	Other	income=	Proceeds	from	sales	of	personal	and	
        household	effects+	Proceeds	from	sales	of	the	real	estate+	other	proceeds	+	income	from	properties.	
	
22.     Concerns	 about	 sustainability	 of	 poverty	 reduction	 are	 also	 reflected	 in	 a	 breakdown	
of	 sources	 of	 household	 income	 growth,	 with	 pensions	 and	 transfers	 again	 a	 prominent	
source.		During	2009‐2014,	out	of	an	annual	B40	household	income	growth	of	4.5	percent,	pensions	
and	social	assistance	accounted	for	2	percent,	while	labor	income	accounted	for	2	percent.		In	fact,	
these	patterns	are	also	reflected,	although	to	a	somewhat	lesser	extent,	in	the	earlier	boom	period.		
During	2002‐2007,	out	of	annual	B40	household	income	growth	of	17.6	percent,	pensions	and	social	
assistance	accounted	for	8	percent,	while	labor	income	accounted	for	9.3	percent.		Between	2008	and	
2013,	 both	 social	 assistance	 and	 pensions	 grew	 in	 weight	 in	 the	 budget	 of	 those	 who	 received	 it,	
particularly	for	those	in	the	B40	(social	assistance	from	8	to	13	percent).	This	reflected	the	impact	of	
two	different	factors.	First,	social	assistance	is	anchored	to	the	Subsistence	Minimum	Income	(SMI)	
which	grew	significantly	more	than	the	CPI	over	this	period	(it	was	subsequently	frozen	in	2013	and	
adjusted,	 albeit	 rather	 marginally	 when	 compared	 to	 inflation,	 in	 2016).	 In	 addition,	 some	 of	 the	
programs	 changed,	 with	 the	 birth	 grant	 in	 particular	 increasing	 over	 the	 period.	 	 In	 the	 case	 of	
pensions,	changes	to	the	SMI	appear	to	be	the	main	driving	force	behind	the	observed	increase.	The	
parametric	 reforms	 introduced	 in	 2011	 are	 unlikely	 to	 already	 have	 had	 an	 impact	 on	 incomes,	



                                                                                  27 
 
though	in	the	long	run	elements	of	the	reform	–	such	as	increasing	the	pensionable	age	–	will	result	
in	increases	in	the	pension	income	recipients	will	get.	
	
        Figure	21:	Growth	of	HH	Income	Sources,	B40	versus	T60,	2009‐2014	and	2002‐2007	
                              2009-2014                                                                   2002-2007
                                                        2.0                             labor income                                 9.3
            labor income                          1.3                                                                                   10.8
                                      0.1                                         agricultural income           1.4
      agricultural income              0.2                                                                     0.6

                pensions                      1.0                                           pensions                           6.4
                                             0.8                                                                            4.9
         social assistance                    1.0                                    social assistance           1.5
                                      0.0                                                                      0.6
     other private income                   0.7                                  other private income                 3.3
                                            0.7                                                                      2.7
            other income       -0.1                                                     other income           0.1
                              -0.2                                                                             0.0
                    Total                                           4.5                         Total                                              17.6
                                                              2.7                                                                                16.5

                             -1.0 0.0 1.0 2.0 3.0 4.0 5.0                                                0.0         5.0        10.0      15.0    20.0
                             b40             t60                                                         b40                   t60
		                                                                        				                                                                            	
            Note:	WB	own	estimates	for	2008‐2013	based	on	UkrStat	data.	

	
28.	     While	the	heavy	reliance	of	household	incomes	on	social	benefits	is	a	serious	concern	
for	 sustainability	 of	 poverty	 reduction,	 more	 targeted	 programs	 have	 played	 an	 important	
role	 since	 2014	 in	 cushioning	 the	 impact	 of	 the	 large	 shocks.		In	the	wake	of	the	large	energy	
price	 and	 income	 shocks,	 targeted	 social	 assistance	 programs	 have	 played	 an	 important	 role	 in	
cushioning	the	impact	on	the	vulnerable	population.		The	means‐tested	housing	and	utilities	subsidy	
(HUS)	 program	 has	 been	 expanded	 significantly,	 with	 coverage	 increasing	 from	 1	 to	 5	 million	
households	by	end‐2015.		Furthermore,	the	authorities	have	taken	initial	steps	toward	containing	
non‐targeted	social	assistance	programs.		While	the	HUS	has	proved	an	effective	crisis	response	tool,	
going	forward,	as	households	adjust	to	a	new	price	environment	and	complementary	measures	(e.g.	
improving	energy	efficiency)	are	rolled	out,	the	HUS	program	will	need	further	reform	to	enhance	
targeting	and	fiscal	affordability.	
	
23.      Improved	 education	 provides	 an	 important	 route	 out	 of	 reliance	 on	 social	 benefits,	
with	higher	education	levels	leading	to	a	higher	share	of	labor	income	and	lower	reliance	on	
social	 benefits.	 	 For	 households	 in	 the	 T60	 group	 whose	 head	 has	 tertiary	 education	 this	 share	
reached	67	percent,	while	for	B40	it	is	10	percentage	points	lower.	Similar	gaps	in	the	labor	share	
characterize	 households	 whose	 heads	 have	 other	 educational	 levels.	 These	 differences	 in	 labor	
shares	 as	 a	 function	 of	 education	 depend	 on	 the	 effects	 of	 education	 on	 both	 wages	 and	 levels	 of	
employment.	On	the	wage	side,	the	premium	for	tertiary	education	comparing	to	complete	secondary	
(or	even	incomplete	tertiary)	is	18	percent	for	the	B40	and	30	percent	for	the	T60.	For	the	B40	this	
premium	is	much	higher	in	rural	areas,	while	for	T60	it	is	of	the	same	size	in	urban	and	rural	locations.	
It	is	also	higher	for	the	T60	for	both	genders.		Also	on	the	employment	sides	higher	education	has	
high	 pay	 offs.	 On	 average	 tertiary	 educated	 people	 in	 T60	 have	 employment	 rate	 higher	 than	 80	
percent	(higher	employment	rates	are	recorded	for	men	in	urban	areas),	that	is	10‐15	percentage	

                                                                             28 
 
points	more	than	for	secondary	education.	In	the	B40	group	the	gap	between	levels	of	education	is	
as	big	as	in	the	T60,	but	the	levels	themselves	are	lower	–	67	percent	on	average.	
	
                        Table	6.	Share	of	labor	income	by	education	levels	
                                          total                     rural                     urban
                                   b40         t60         b40         t60         b40         t60
                                2008 2013 2008 2013 2008 2013 2008 2013 2008 2013 2008 2013
tertiary                       55.2% 56.1% 68.4% 66.9% 40.6% 49.0% 51.4% 53.5% 59.0% 57.5% 70.5% 69.2%
full secondary                 48.3% 46.6% 62.3% 56.5% 39.3% 41.1% 45.9% 43.7% 54.7% 50.1% 68.0% 62.4%
incomplete secondary and below 38.6% 42.6% 49.1% 49.8% 31.0% 32.5% 28.5% 31.5% 47.8% 52.2% 61.9% 61.7%

                                         total                   male                   female
                                   b40         t60         b40         t60         b40         t60
                                2008 2013 2008 2013 2008 2013 2008 2013 2008 2013 2008 2013
tertiary                       55.2% 56.1% 68.4% 66.9% 58.8% 59.3% 69.1% 67.8% 52.7% 54.1% 67.9% 66.2%
full secondary                 48.3% 46.6% 62.3% 56.5% 51.4% 50.6% 65.4% 59.2% 45.9% 43.3% 59.4% 54.0%
incomplete secondary and below 38.6% 42.6% 49.1% 49.8% 44.8% 48.2% 53.2% 54.1% 34.0% 38.2% 45.7% 46.6% 	
        Note:	WB	own	estimates	for	2008‐2013	based	on	UkrStat	data.	
	
24.     While	education	offers	a	premium	through	both	higher	wages	and	higher	employment	
levels,	the	B40	appear	less	able	to	capitalize	on	these	benefits.	Education	leads	to	higher	shares	
of	 labour	 income	 due	 to	 both	 its	 employment	 and	 wage	 effects:	 for	 households	 in	 the	 T60	 group	
whose	head	has	tertiary	education	the	labour	income	share	reached	67	percent,	while	for	B40	it	was	
10	percentage	points	lower.	Similar	gaps	in	the	labor	share	characterize	households	whose	heads	
have	other	educational	levels.	On	the	wage	side,	the	premium	for	tertiary	education	comparing	to	
complete	secondary	(or	even	incomplete	tertiary)	is	18	percent	for	the	B40	and	30	percent	for	the	
T60.	For	the	B40	this	premium	is	much	higher	in	rural	areas,	while	for	T60	it	is	of	the	same	size	in	
urban	and	rural	locations.	It	is	also	higher	for	the	T60	for	both	genders.		Also	on	the	employment	
sides	higher	education	has	high	pay	offs,	but	less	so	on	the	B40.	On	average	tertiary	educated	people	
in	T60	have	employment	rate	higher	than	80	percent	(higher	employment	rates	are	recorded	for	men	
in	urban	areas),	that	is	10‐15	percentage	points	more	than	for	secondary	education.	In	the	B40	group	
the	gap	between	levels	of	education	is	as	big	as	in	the	T60,	but	the	levels	themselves	are	lower	–	67	
percent	on	average.	
	
                                    Profile	of	the	Bottom	40	and	Poor	
	
25.     Overall,	the	bottom	40	percent	of	the	population	feels	more	deprived	and	expects	more	
state	 support.	 	 Overall,	 when	 asked	 where	 they	 would	 classify	 themselves,	 80	 percent	 of	 the	
respondents	from	this	group	consider	themselves	poor	rather	than	middle	class.		In	contrast,	only	56	
percent	of	the	rest	of	the	population	consider	themselves	poor.		Interestingly,	this	is	a	group	where	
people	 feel	 more	 entitled	 to	 state	 support	 and	 less	 able	 to	 look	 after	 themselves:	 over	 1/3	 of	
respondents	feel	that	the	state	has	the	main	or	full	responsibility	to	ensure	the	welfare	of	its	citizen,	
against	about	one	quarter	in	the	rest	of	the	population.	
	


                                                     29 
 
    Figure	22:	Education	and	Labor	Market	Outcomes	for	B40	and	T60,	share	of	population	
                                                100%
                                                 90%         21%
                                                                                             28%
                                                 80%                        44%                           47%
                                                 70%
                                                 60%
                                                 50%         57%
                                                                                             55%
                                                 40%
                                                                            44%                           43%
                                                 30%
                                                 20%
                                                 10%         22%                             17%
                                                                            13%                           10%
                                                   0%
                                                               b40          t60              b40          t60
                                                                     2008                          2013

                                                     Primary         Secondary         Tertiary (incl. incomplete)

          100%                                                                     100%
           90%                 24%                          21%
           80%                                                                         80%                                          35%
                                                                                                          46%
                                                            9%
           70%
                               23%                                                     60%                                           4%
           60%
           50%                                                                                            11%
           40%                                                                         40%
                                                            69%
           30%                                                                                                                      61%
                               53%
           20%                                                                         20%                43%
           10%
            0%                                                                         0%
                           b40                             t60                                         b40                 t60
             male: employed male: unemployed              male: inactive                female: employed female: unemployed female: inactive
          Source: WB staff calculations based on HLCS by UkrStat                   Source: WB staff calculations based on HLCS by UkrStat      	
	
26.      The	bottom	40	percent	live	in	households	with	higher	dependency	ratios.		Households	
in	the	bottom	40	percent	are	more	likely	to	live	in	families	with	children	–	indeed	55	percent	of	T60	
live	in	households	of	adults	only	as	compared	to	33	percent	for	the	B40.		In	contrast,	the	incidence	of	
households	of	pensioners	only	is	similar	across	the	two	groups.		This	has	two	important	implications:	
one	is	that,	as	a	result	of	this	demographic	structure,	children	represent	almost	one	quarter	of	the	
B40	(as	opposed	to	15	percent	for	the	T60);	the	other	is	that	the	young‐dependency	ratio	for	the	B40	
is	54	percent	against	30	percent	for	the	T60.		In	other	words,	any	B40	adult	has	many	more	children	
to	support	than	is	the	case	for	the	T60.		While	this	is	an	empirical	regularity	across	the	world	and	not	
exclusive	to	Ukraine,	it	nevertheless	suggests	that	appropriate	services	may	be	needed	to	facilitate	
labor	market	participation	for	women	in	the	bottom	40	percent.	
	
27.      The	 B40	 have	 less	 education	 and	 weaker	 labor	 market	 outcomes	 than	 their	 richer	
counterparts.	 Only	 28	 percent	 of	 the	 adults	 in	 this	 group	 have	 some	 form	 of	 tertiary	 education,	
against	47	percent	of	the	T60.		The	bulk	of	the	B40	has	completed	secondary	education.	It	seems	
likely	that	low	education	compounds	the	impacts	of	rural	location	in	reducing	the	opportunities	for	
B40	households	to	access	jobs,	and	especially	good	jobs.	The	B40’s	employment	rate	(for	15‐64	age	
group	for	both	genders)	is	only	48	percent,	against	65	for	the	T60.	They	are	also	more	likely	to	be	
inactive	(36	percent	vs	28),	and	especially	unemployed	(16	percent	of	this	groups	is	unemployed	
versus	7	percent	for	the	T60).		As	far	as	job	quality	is	concerned,	the	HBS	provides	scant	information	
about	it.		Self‐employed	workers	with	no	employees	might	be	a	proxy	for	a	low	quality	segment	of	

                                                                                 30 
 
 the	market.		The	share	of	people	with	this	type	of	jobs	is	higher	for	the	B40	in	rural	areas,	while	in	
 urban	 areas	 there	 are	 more	 self‐employed	 with	 employees.	 	 These	 indicators,	 however,	 are	 quite	
 volatile	(in	2008	the	situation	was	different).	
 	
 28.       The	 education	 profile	 of	 the	 B40	 and	 their	 concentration	 in	 sectors	 such	 as	 trade,	
 manufacturing,	 and	 agriculture	 helps	 explain	 their	 low	 wage	 premia,	 suggesting	 that	 raising	
 productivity	 economy‐wide	 and	 particularly	 in	 these	 sectors	 would	 support	 shared	
 prosperity	 and	 poverty	 reduction.		The	B40	are	most	likely	to	be	working	in	trade	(21	percent),	
 manufacturing	 (12	 percent),	 and	 agriculture	 (10	 percent).	 Furthermore,	 the	 construction	 and	
 transport	sectors	each	employed	about	8	percent	of	the	B40.	These	sectors	generally	employ	workers	
 with	lower	levels	of	education.		In	addition,	with	the	exception	of	transportation,	these	sectors	appear	
 to	provide	jobs	which	tend	to	pay	less	than	average	wages.	Public	sector	services	(education,	health	
 and	 public	 administration	 and	 defense),	 which	 generally	 employ	 workers	 with	 higher	 levels	 of	
 education,	 provided	 employment	 to	 almost	 one	 quarter	 of	 the	 B40	 (11	 percent	 in	 education,	 8	
 percent	in	health,	and	5	percent	in	public	administration	and	defense).	Of	these	public	sector	jobs,	
 only	 those	 in	 public	 administration	 and	 defense	 appear	 to	 pay	 higher	 than	 average	 wages.	 	 	 In	
 addition	to	the	variation	across	sectors	in	B40	employment,	it	is	also	likely	that	the	B40	are	employed	
 in	 less	 education‐intensive	 and	 lower	 paying	 jobs	 within	 sectors.	 	 Over	 time,	 the	 share	 of	 B40	
 employment	 has	 risen	 in	 agriculture	 and	 trade,	 but	 declined	 in	 manufacturing	 and	 public	
 administration	and	defense.		These	patterns	could	be	related	to	employment	and	growth	patterns	
 across	sectors	in	light	of	the	serious	shocks	to	the	economy	since	2014.		Manufacturing,	which	has	
 been	seriously	affected	by	the	conflict	and	saw	a	decline	in	output	as	well	as	overall	employment,	also	
 saw	a	decrease	in	the	share	of	B40	workers.		On	the	other	hand,	the	share	of	B40	in	the	transport,	
 trade,	and	agriculture	increased	significantly,	suggesting	a	shift	of	B40	workers	into	these	sectors	
 between	2009	and	2014.	
 	

Figure	23:	Employment	by	Sectors	of	B40,	percent                Figure	24:	Employment	Growth	of	B40
                                                                              percent	
                                                         1.1
 25
 20                                                         1
 15                                                      0.9
 10
                                                         0.8
     5
     0                                                   0.7




                                                                     B40	employment	growth	by	sectors,	2010‐2014
                  2009   2010    2014
                                                                     Total	B40	employment	growth,	2010‐2014
Source:	Bank	staff	estimates	using	household	budget	surveys
 	
 	

                                                      31 
  
29.      People	 in	 higher	 quintiles	 are	 better	 educated,	 and	 as	 it	 is	 typically	 the	 case,	 they	 are	
more	likely	to	report	serious	cardiovascular	health	issues,	although	data	on	a	broader	range	
of	 health	 indicators	 in	 not	 captured	 in	 the	 household	 survey.	 The	 share	of	the	population	with	
tertiary	education	is	higher	for	richer	quintiles	(table	7).	This	pattern	applies	for	both	genders	though	
women	are	more	likely	to	have	tertiary	education	than	men.	As	far	as	health	indicators	are	concerned,	
people	at	higher	income	levels	tend	to	report	more	problems	with	their	health,	for	example	chronic	
cardiovascular	 diseases	 (table	 8).	 This	 is	 generally	 attributed	 to	 some	 “reverse	 causation”	 where	
better	access	to	diagnostics	and	medical	services	in	general	makes	them	more	aware	of	their	health	
status.	 Similar	 patterns	 apply	 to	 gender,	 with	 women	 who	 are	 typically	 found	 to	 be	 more	 health	
conscious	 more	 likely	 to	 report	 cardiovascular	 disease	 (note	 that	 mortality	 data	 suggest	 that	 this	
should	not	be	the	case).	The	household	survey	does	not	cover	questions	of	access,	so	it	is	not	possible	
to	test	the	importance	of	access	to	services	in	driving	these	findings.		
                                                        	
        Table	7.	Level	of	Education	by	Quintiles	in	2014,	Percent	of	Population	above	21	
                                              Total population                Male                              Female
                                     1st     2nd 3rd 4th 5th 1st 2nd          3rd 4th 5th       1st     2nd      3rd 4th 5th
Tertiary (copmplte or incomplete)     31.9    42.9 44.5 52.2 62.2 28.2 37.2    37.1 46.6 56.7    34.7    47.7     51.0 57.2 67.2
Complete general secondary            57.1    45.6 44.5 38.2 30.8 63.6 53.7    54.8 46.0 37.8    52.1    38.8     35.6 31.3 24.5
Incomplete general secondary or below 11.0    11.5 10.9 9.6 7.0 8.2 9.1         8.2 7.4 5.5      13.1    13.6     13.3 11.5 8.3       	
         Note:	Bank	staff	estimates	using	household	budget	surveys.	
	
     Table	8.	Share	of	Population	Reported	Chronic	Diseases	by	Quintiles	in	2014,	Percent	
                                           Total population            Male                Female
                                     1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th
Hypertension (high blood pressure)     6.6 10.4 12.6 13.3 14.4 3.9 5.7 6.7 8.5 9.8 8.9 14.8 17.8 17.8 18.8
Cardiovascular diseases                4.4 6.9 7.8 8.6 9.6 2.9 4.7 5.8 7.0 8.3 5.6 8.9 9.5 10.2 10.7                                  	
         Note:	Bank	staff	estimates	using	household	budget	surveys.	
        	
30.     The	characteristics	of	the	poor	are	similar	to	those	of	the	B40.		Like	the	B40,	poor	people	
are	more	likely	to	live	in	rural	areas	and	small	towns.	They	also	tend	to	live	in	bigger	households	with	
more	children	and	higher	young	dependency	rates	(table	9).	The	old	age	dependency	ratio	is	also	
somewhat	higher	for	the	poor	than	for	the	non‐poor.	As	with	the	B40,	the	poor	have	less	education	–	
the	share	of	people	with	tertiary	education	is	more	than	half	among	the	poor	that	among	the	non‐
poor.	The	poor	also	have	worse	labor	market	outcomes	than	the	rest	of	the	population,	with	lower	
employment	and	labor	force	participation	rates.	 They	 are	 also	more	likely	to	be	employed	in	less	
productive	sectors	with	lower	levels	of	incomes.	
	
31.     Regional	 variation	 in	 human	 capital	 compounds	 differences	 by	 income	 groups.	 	 In	
addition	 to	 the	 differences	 in	 education	 levels	 and	 household	 characteristics	 highlighted	 above,	
regional	differences	also	play	a	significant	role.	Those	are	hard	to	capture	with	the	existing	household	
survey	 as	 even	 before	 the	 conflict,	 coverage	 by	 administrative	 region	 was	 uneven.	 	 Estimates	 of	
regional	variation	based	on	four	macro‐regions	are,	therefore,	more	reliable	from	a	statistical	point	
of	 view,	 but	 also	 a	 lower	 bound	 for	 the	 real	 variation	 given	 the	 higher	 level	 of	 aggregation	 than	
administrative	boundaries	we	adopt.		Both	poor	and	non‐poor	people	in	Western	and	Central	regions	
on	average	have	lower	levels	of	education	and	are	less	likely	to	be	in	employment	than	in	the	rest	of	

                                                            32 
 
the	country,	while	Southern	and	Eastern	have	higher	levels	of	both	indicators.		The	more	industrial	
Southern	and	Eastern	regions	are	more	urbanized.	Their	populations	are	characterized	by	smaller	
families	 with	 less	 children	 and	 lower	 young	 age	 dependency	 rates.	 These	 variations	 in	 social	
indicators	across	regions	apply	to	both	the	bottom	40	percent	of	the	population	(depicted	in	the	maps	
below)	as	well	as	for	the	rest	of	the	population.	
	
          Table	9.	Social	indicators	for	Bottom	40%	of	Population	by	Regions,	percent	

        Young	age	dependency	ratio	         	        	          Share	of	people	with	complete	tertiary	education	




                                                                                                                 
                                      Share	of	employed	in	working	age	population	




                                                                                      	
        Note:	Bank	staff	estimates	using	household	budget	surveys.	
	
32.      Significant	differences	emerge	also	in	access	to	utilities	and	other	communal	services,	
especially	in	the	rural	areas.	While	most	of	households	in	urban	areas	do	have	access	to	water	and	
sewerage	(the	share	is	above	90	percent	for	all	quintiles),	this	is	not	the	case	for	rural	ones	(table	10).	
Access	to	this	type	of	services	is	higher	for	households	with	higher	incomes.	In	rural	areas	only	45	
percent	of	the	poorest	quintile	have	access	to	water	and	sanitation,	against	66‐67	percent	for	the	top	
quintile.	 In	 urban	 areas	 the	 rich	 are	 more	 likely	 than	 the	 poor	 to	 have	 access	 to	 district	 heating	
(though	the	share	of	poorer	households	connected	to	district	heating	is	over	40	percent)	–	in	rural	
areas	 access	 to	 individual	 heating	 is	 better	 for	 richer	 rural	 households	 than	 for	 poor.	 	 The	 same	
pattern	 of	 richer	 households	 more	 likely	 to	 have	 access	 than	 poorer	 ones	 applies	 also	 to	 other	
utilities,	(central	gas,	bath	or	shower,	home	telephone).	




                                                         33 
 
                                                   	
    Table	10.	Access	to	Utilities	by	Quintiles	for	Urban	and	Rural	Population	in	2014,	Percent	
                                          Total population                             Urban population                              Rural population
                                 1st     2nd 3rd 4th               5th         1st     2nd 3rd 4th                  5th     1st     2nd 3rd 4th                 5th
District heating                  24.3    29.1 34.1 40.1            48.5        41.2    49.4 54.6 61.5               66.3     0.1     0.4 0.2 0.6                 1.3
Individual heating system         50.9    50.8 47.9 44.7            40.3        44.5    41.0 38.5 32.4               28.5    60.0    64.7 63.6 67.4              71.4
Water mains                       72.1    78.2 79.8 83.8            89.7        91.2    91.5 94.7 95.4               98.0    44.9    59.4 55.1 62.3              67.6
Waste water disposal system       71.5    77.4 79.5 83.6            89.2        90.4    90.8 94.4 95.3               97.8    44.6    58.4 54.8 61.9              66.5
Hot water supply                  25.1    37.6 40.5 41.9            53.4        37.7    47.1 54.9 58.7               65.9     7.3    24.2 16.7 10.7              20.3
Gas-fired water heater            16.9    16.0 17.9 19.2            14.7        21.4    18.6 18.3 17.6               14.1    10.6    12.2 17.3 22.2              16.2
Centralised gas supply            76.2    82.4 80.4 82.7            81.7        85.0    90.1 87.9 87.6               85.9    63.7    71.4 68.0 73.6              70.4
Bottled gas                       14.4     9.7 12.9 10.3             9.2         6.4     3.6 6.0 3.4                  3.0    25.7    18.4 24.1 23.1              25.7
Bathtub or shower                 66.4    72.9 75.7 80.0            86.4        85.3    87.0 91.3 93.6               95.4    39.4    53.0 49.9 54.6              62.6
Home telephone                    35.2    40.1 39.6 48.7            56.9        46.7    54.1 48.5 59.9               64.2    18.8    20.1 24.9 28.2              37.7    	
        Note:	Bank	staff	estimates	using	household	budget	surveys.	
        	
33.     While	the	rich	enjoy	better	access	to	utilities	everywhere,	the	gaps	between	richer	and	
poorer	 households	 vary	 significantly	 by	 region,	 and	 rural/urban	 areas	 within	 region.	 Access	
to	 main	 utilities	 (water	 and	 heating)	 is	 different	 across	 the	 four	 macro‐regions.	 While	 richer	
household	tend	to	have	better	access	to	central	heating	and	water	supply	everywhere	(table	11),	the	
gap	between	rich	and	poor	varies	across	region,	being	particularly	marked	for	access	to	water	in	rural	
parts	of	the	East	region,	and	of	the	West.	In	rural	areas	of	the	Central	region	even	the	rich	have	less	
access	 than	 poorer	 households	 in	 other	 regions.	 Eastern	 regions	 had	 the	 biggest	 gap	 in	 access	
between	urban	and	rural	areas	in	2014,	though	the	conflict	is	likely	to	have	changed	significantly	this	
picture.	
	
  Table	11.	Access	to	Utilities	by	Quintiles	for	Urban	and	Rural	Population	in	2014,	Percent	
                                                Total population                       Urban population                     Rural population
                                      1st        2nd 3rd 4th 5th               1st     2nd 3rd 4th 5th               1st    2nd 3rd 4th 5th
          Region 1 (West):
          District heating                  15.2   17.5   12.9   18.6   13.7    33.1    38.1   30.4   40.9   23.4
          Individual heating system         46.1   53.0   54.1   51.1   64.4    44.9    39.7   51.0   48.9   58.7    47.2    64.2   56.4   52.9   70.3
          Water mains                       67.0   75.8   74.7   77.0   89.6    91.4    86.4   94.5   97.7   98.5    46.2    66.8   60.1   61.1   80.1
          Region 2 (Center):
          District heating                  28.9   33.3   43.9   48.4   61.5    44.5    56.0   63.3   69.1   81.9
          Individual heating system         55.2   49.2   47.9   39.4   31.3    46.8    39.6   35.0   25.8   17.1    70.9    63.3   77.0   71.2   74.2
          Water mains                       69.1   72.0   80.3   80.3   86.8    86.4    90.6   94.2   93.8   98.5    36.9    44.7   49.1   48.5   51.7
          Region 3 (South):
          District heating                  29.4   42.2   45.2   49.9   52.0    44.3    59.2   63.8   68.6   65.9
          Individual heating system         55.1   47.3   40.3   42.7   39.3    44.3    38.1   32.4   28.1   32.2    76.4    68.6   59.2   81.7   65.8
          Water mains                       84.8   87.0   81.9   91.2   93.4    95.6    97.1   95.4   96.8   98.8    63.2    63.5   49.7   76.5   73.2
          Region 4 (East):
          District heating                  33.6   34.8   43.1   42.2   59.6    46.0    42.6   52.1   54.1   68.6
          Individual heating system         46.8   54.2   46.0   49.5   28.8    37.8    51.3   39.5   37.4   20.8    69.9    67.5   77.3   92.4   81.6
          Water mains                       71.3   88.4   89.0   92.6   90.5    94.1    94.9   95.3   94.3   94.5    13.0    59.4   58.6   86.5   63.6      	
         Note:	Bank	staff	estimates	using	household	budget	surveys.	

	
	                                           	


                                                                          34 
 
IV.     Framework:	Pathways	and	Constraints	
	
34.      The	 analysis	 in	 the	 two	 prior	 chapters	 shows	 that	 Ukraine	 faces	 key	 challenges	 in	
achieving	 sustainable	 recovery	 and	 shared	 prosperity:	 macroeconomic	 imbalances,	 weak	
productivity	 growth,	 and	 inadequate	 service	 delivery.	 Large	 macroeconomic	 imbalances	 and	
instability,	including	large	fiscal	and	current	account	deficits	and	an	insolvent	banking	sector,	not	
only	stifle	confidence	under	the	current	crisis,	but	also	contributed	to	an	unsustainable	growth	path	
in	 the	 pre‐crisis	 period.	 	 Weak	 productivity	 and	 inadequate	 progress	 in	 diversifying	 exports	
contributed	 to	economic	stagnation	 after	the	initial	spurt	 of	rebound	and	 growth	during	2000‐07	
fueled	by	external	conditions.		Weak	labor	market	outcomes	also	generated	an	excessive	reliance	on	
unsustainable	pensions	and	social	assistance	in	improving	incomes	of	the	bottom	40	percent	of	the	

                                Figure	25:	Ukraine	SCD	Framework




                                                  35 
 
population.	 	 Inadequate	 and	 inefficient	 service	 delivery	 has	 constrained	 labor	 market	 outcomes,	
particularly	 for	 the	 bottom	 40	 percent	 of	 the	 population,	 while	 contributing	 to	 macroeconomic	
imbalances,	and	squeezing	resources	for	public	investment.		In	addition	to	the	challenges	described	
above,	 Ukraine	 also	 faces	 the	 fundamental	 challenge	 of	 extraordinary	 levels	 of	 corruption	 and	
powerful	vested	interests	that	seriously	impede	development	progress	across	the	board.		This	will	
be	described	in	more	detail	below.		The	challenges	described	point	toward	four	key	pathways	toward	
sustained	 recovery	 and	 shared	 prosperity	 in	 Ukraine:	 safeguarding	 macroeconomic	 stability,	 boosting	
private	 sector	 productivity,	 and	 providing	 more	 effective	 services,	 while	 building	 institutions	 of	 better	
governance	and	anticorruption.	
	
35.       The	 rest	 of	 this	 chapter	 is	 organized	 as	 follows.	 The	 next	 section	 describes	 the	
prioritization	methodology	that	is	used	in	this	SCD.		The	specific	priority	interventions	to	address	
within	the	pathways,	while	summarized	in	the	framework	graphic	above,	will	be	discussed	further	in	
the	 subsequent	 chapters	 on	 each	 of	 the	 four	 pathways.	 	 This	 chapter	 also	 describes	 three	 “initial	
conditions”	or	root	constraints	facing	Ukraine:	conflict	and	shocks;	demography	and	geography;	and	
corruption	 and	 state	 capture.	 	 These	 constraints	 are	 important	 factors	 in	 gaining	 a	 better	
understanding	of	the	types	of	interventions	necessary	to	make	progress	along	each	of	the	pathways	
identified	in	this	SCD.	
	
                                             Prioritization	Method	
	
36.       The	prioritization	method	utilized	in	this	SCD	involves	a	three	step	process.	These	three	
steps	 include:	 (i)	 identifying	 the	 broad	 pathways	 to	 address	 Ukraine’s	 overarching	 development	
challenges;	(ii)	identifying	priority	interventions	to	address	the	more	specific	challenges	within	each	
of	 the	 pathways;	 and	 (iii)	 assessing	 the	 criticality	 for	 twin	 goals	 and	 time	 horizon	 for	 each	 of	 the	
priority	interventions.	
          	
37.       The	 first	 step	 involves	 identifying	 the	 pathways	 that	 address	 Ukraine’s	 overarching	
development	challenges.	As	part	of	this	first	step,	the	diagnostics	of	growth,	sustainability,	poverty,	
and	 shared	 prosperity	 have	 contributed	 to	 identifying	 the	 pathways	 of	 macroeconomic	 stability,	
private	 sector	 productivity,	 and	 more	 effective	 service	 delivery.	 Furthermore,	 the	 subsequent	
analysis	of	some	of	the	initial	conditions	and	constraints	affecting	progress	along	the	three	pathways	
shows	that	better	governance	and	anticorruption	institutions	is	a	cross‐cutting	pathway	important	
in	achieving	Ukraine’s	development	objectives	across	the	board.	In	particular,	the	analysis	will	show	
that	addressing	the	governance	challenge	will	require	a	two‐pronged	strategy	that	includes	building	
better	 governance	 and	 anticorruption	 institutions	 and	 advancing	 reforms	 along	 the	 three	 other	
pathways	that	disempower	vested	interests.		In	this	sense,	the	cross‐cutting	pathway	is	not	so	much	
a	filter	for	priorities	and	interventions	within	the	other	three	pathways,	but	rather	a	foundation	to	
facilitate	progress	across	the	three	pathways.	
	
38.       The	second	step	in	prioritization	involves	identifying	priority	interventions	to	address	
the	 specific	 challenges	 within	 each	 of	 the	 pathways.		This	second	step	relies	on	the	analyses	of	
the	SCD	as	well	as	extensive	deliberations	and	consultations	across	multiple	sectoral	teams	engaged	


                                                         36 
 
in	Ukraine.		First,	the	analyses	of	growth,	sustainability,	and	poverty	goes	beyond	the	identification	
of	 pathways	 and	 also	 informs	 the	 selection	 of	 priorities	 and	 interventions	 within	 the	 pathways.		
Second,	 the	 analyses	 in	 the	 subsequent	 chapters	 on	 the	 cross‐cutting	 and	 three	 other	 pathways	
further	 informs	 the	 selection	 of	 priorities	 and	 interventions.	 	 Third,	 extensive	 deliberations	 and	
consultations	have	taken	place	across	the	sectoral	teams	in	the	context	of:	preparing	the	policy	notes	
delivered	to	the	new	government	of	in	June	2016;	the	extensive	inputs	prepared	and	consultations	
undertaken	for	the	SCD	across	different	sectoral	teams;	the	work	by	the	different	sectoral	teams	in	
their	 respective	 engagements	 on	 development	 prospects	 and	 priorities	 in	 Ukraine;	 subsequent	
prioritization	discussions	held	across	the	full	country	team	in	October	2016;	external	consultations	
held	 with	 the	 government,	 private	 sector,	 civil	 society,	 and	 development	 partners	 in	 October‐
December	2016.	
         	
39.      The	 third	 step	 involves	 assessing	 the	 criticality	 and	 time	 horizon	 for	 the	 priority	
interventions.	 	 The	 first	 two	 steps	 result	 in	 four	 pathways	 and	 fifteen	 priorities.	 	 While	 this	 is	
narrowed	down	from	a	wider	universe	of	possible	pathways	and	priorities,	fifteen	priorities	is	still	a	
large	number.		Not	all	of	them	will	be	equally	critical	in	helping	Ukraine	generate	sustained	recovery	
and	shared	 prosperity.	Furthermore,	 not	 all	of	them	can	 be	expected	to	be	implemented	over	the	
same	time	horizon.		Therefore,	the	analyses	in	the	subsequent	chapters	on	the	cross	cutting	and	three	
other	pathways		assigns	a	criticality	rating	of	“critical”,	“high”,	or	“medium”	for	each	of	the	priority	
interventions.		For	example,	pension	reform	is	assessed	as	critical	since	is	represents	a	fundamental	
source	of	fiscal	and	macroeconomic	vulnerability.	In	addition,	the	assessment	of	the	state	of	affairs,	
challenges,	 and	 prospects	 for	 progress	 within	 each	 priority	 area	 is	 used	 to	 determine	 the	 time	
horizon	(“immediate”,	“short”,	or	“medium”)	over	which	progress	is	needed	and	can	be	expected.		For	
example,	 while	 public	 administration	 reform	 is	 critical	 for	 better	 governance,	 progress	 cannot	 be	
expected	immediately,	but	rather	over	the	medium	term.	
	
40.      It	 is	 important	 to	 note	 that	 significant	 complementarities	 exist	 across	 the	 different	
pathways	 and	 priorities.		In	other	words,	the	priorities	within	the	pathways	do	not	contribute	to	
addressing	 mutually	 exclusive	 challenges.	 	 For	 example,	 improving	 the	 effectiveness	 of	 service	
delivery	 can	 help	 consolidate	 Ukraine’s	 large	 current	 expenditures	 and	 thus	 contribute	 to	
macroeconomic	 stability.	 	 Similarly,	 improving	 financial	 sector	 stability	 not	 only	 contributes	 to	
macroeconomic	 stability,	 but	 also	 facilitates	 growth	 of	 credit	 to	 the	 private	 sector,	 which	 enables	
productivity	and	job	creation.		Finally,	building	institutions	of	better	governance	and	anticorruption	
contribute	to	progress	across	the	three	other	pathways.	
	
                                                  Constraints	
	
41.      The	rest	of	this	chapter	discusses	three	important	constraints	that	affect	development	
progress	 in	 Ukraine:	 conflict	 and	 shocks,	 demography	 and	 geography,	 and	 corruption	 and	
state	capture.			First,	the	double	shocks	from	the	conflict	and	lower	global	commodity	prices	in	2014‐
15	triggered	macroeconomic	instability,	depressed	economic	activity,	employment	and	livelihoods,	
and	disrupted	delivery	of	services.		This	added	to	a	history	of	volatile	external	conditions	with	the	
commodity	boom	and	free	capital	flows	of	2000‐07	followed	by	the	global	financial	crisis	of	2008‐09.		


                                                       37 
 
Second,	 the	 demographic	 pattern	 of	 a	 declining	 working	 age	 population	 puts	 a	 larger	 burden	 on	
productivity	 and	 capital	 accumulation	 in	 driving	 growth	 and	 leads	 to	 larger	 social	 insurance	
obligations	that	need	to	be	supported	by	fewer	workers.		In	addition,	Ukraine’s	geography	with	a	rich	
endowment	of	natural	resources	can	inhibit	export	diversification	and	provide	a	ready	habitat	for	
corruption	and	rent	seeking,	although	its	location	adjacent	to	large	markets	represents	a	significant	
opportunity	to	developing	its	export	base.		Third,	state‐capture	and	corruption	are	at	the	heart	of	
many	of	the	structural	bottlenecks	facing	Ukraine,	including	fiscal	liabilities	for	the	energy	sector,	
insolvent	banks,	inadequate	protection	of	property	rights,	anticompetitive	business	practices,	and	
inefficient	 delivery	 of	 services.	 	 Combatting	 state	 capture	 and	 corruption	 will,	 therefore,	 require	
reforms	across	a	number	of	areas	to	disempower	vested	interests,	as	well	as	efforts	to	strengthen	
institutions	specifically	dedicated	to	PFM,	anticorruption	and	justice,	and	public	administration.			
	
                                          Conflict	and	External	Shocks	
	
42.      The	 conflict	 has	 had	 a	 widespread	 impact	 on	 economic	 activity	 and	 prospects	 in	
Ukraine,	 so	 that	 extra	 effort	 will	 be	 needed	 to	 bolster	 confidence	 in	 the	 economy.	 	 The	
implications	for	economic	activity	in	Ukraine’s	eastern	industrial	heartland	were	drastic.		Before	the	
conflict,	the	Donetsk	and	Luhansk	regions	accounted	for	almost	one‐quarter	of	Ukraine’s	industrial	
activity	and	an	equal	share	of	its	exports.		In	addition,	disruptions	in	industry,	transport	and	small	
and	medium	enterprise	activity	led	to	widespread	job	losses	and	overall	confidence	in	the	economy	
has	been	seriously	undermined.		Continuing	insecurity	means	that	Ukraine	must	go	the	extra	step	to	
bolster	confidence	in	its	economy.	
	
43.      The	conflict	has	also	had	a	considerable	human	cost,	and	will	require	targeted	services	
and	opportunities	for	affected	populations.		With	the	Donetsk	region	home	to	a	large	population	
of	the	bottom	40	percent,	and	with	large	numbers	of	pensioners	in	Donetsk	(1.4	million	before	the	
conflict)	 and	 Luhansk	 (730,000	 before	 the	 conflict),	 the	 human	 cost	 on	 populations	 in	 conflict	
affected	areas	has	been	severe.		Vulnerable	groups	in	conflict	areas,	especially	pensioners,	women,	
children	and	people	with	disabilities	are	most	at	risk,	especially	as	a	result	of	a	lack	of	access	to	quality	
housing,	water	and	electricity	and	health	care.		While	the	wellbeing	of	vulnerable	groups	in	conflict	
areas	is	a	concern,	the	footprint	of	the	conflict	extends	much	more	widely.		According	to	UN	estimates,	
the	 conflict	 has	 resulted	 in	 9,800	 deaths	 through	 January	 2017.	 	 Furthermore,	 large	 scale	
displacement	 means	 that	 social	 and	 humanitarian	 costs	 are	 felt	 by	 both	 displaced	 and	 host	
communities—service	 delivery	 deficits,	 overburdened	 social	 welfare	 services,	 joblessness,	
increasing	social	tensions,	and	deteriorating	debt	and	credit	relations.		It	is	estimated	that	as	a	result	
of	the	conflict,	about	2.5	million	people	have	been	displaced	both	internally	(1.7	million)	and	outside	
Ukraine	(1	million).		This	represents	approximately	5	percent	of	Ukraine’s	population.		Managing	the	
human	 cost	 of	 the	 conflict	 will	 require	 providing	 targeted	 services	 and	 supporting	 employment	
generation	among	conflict	affected	populations	and	host	communities.	
	
                                    Development	Impact	of	the	Conflict	
    	
    Conflict	 in	 eastern	 Ukraine	 has	 had	 a	 severe	 impact	 on	 the	 lives	 and	 livelihood	 opportunities	 of	
    millions	 of	 Ukrainians.		Since	the	outbreak	of	fighting	in	2014,	about	9.800	people	have	been	killed,	

                                                         38 
 
    over	2.7	million	displaced	(about	5	percent	of	Ukraine’s	population)	and	over	4	million	people	in	the	
    eastern	Donbas	region	have	been	directly	affected.		As	the	conflict	spills	into	its	third	year,	there	are	
    mounting	 development	 challenges	 alongside	 humanitarian	 concerns,	 including	 pressures	 on	 the	
    economy,	lack	of	investment,	joblessness,	service	delivery	deficits,	and	social	tensions.		
    	
                       Economic	Impacts	                                            Social	Impact	
       Disruption	of	economic	activity	in	Ukraine’s	eastern	  Acute	impacts	for	over	4	million	people	living	
        industrial	 base	 (one	 quarter	 pre‐crisis	 industrial	   in	conflict‐affected	areas/800,000	living	close	
        production)	and	significant	decline	in	exports	            to	the	‘line	of	contact’		
       Crisis	of	investor	confidence:	Uncertainty	related	to	  Insecurity	 has	 interrupted	 service	 delivery,	
        the	conflict	undermines	investor	confidence	               infrastructure,	urban	development	
       Widespread	 job	 loss.	 Net	 employment	 in	 Donetsk	  Over	 1.7	 million	 IDPs:	 socio‐economic	
        and	 Luhansk	 down	 by	 40	 and	 70	 percent,	             pressures	on	displaced	and	host	communities	
        respectively	(about	800,000	jobs)	by	end	2014.	           Over	 200,000	 veterans	 integrating	 back	 into	
       Fiscal	pressures	–	Revenues	from	Donbas	down	40	           communities	
        percent	in	2014	and	military	expenditures	up	to	5	 	
        percent	of	GDP	in	2015.	
    The	conflict,	along	with	the	sharp	decline	in	commodity	prices,	has	had	a	considerable	impact	on	
    Ukraine’s	 economy	 and	 its	 development	 prospects.	 The	 Donbas	 region	 was	 an	 important	 part	 of	
    Ukraine’s	industrial	base.	The	conflict	has	caused	significant	 contraction	of	production	and	revenues,	
    disrupted	 supply	 chains	 and	 trade,	 and	 undermined	 investor	 confidence.	 The	 conflict	 has	 also	 put	
    significant	 burden	 on	 the	 national	 budget.	 	 However,	 industry	 in	 eastern	 Ukraine	 was	 outdated	 and	
    obsolete	prior	to	the	outbreak	of	fighting	and	recovery	efforts	could	offer	the	opportunity	to	build	back	
    better—to	modernize	industry,	push	new	technologies,	and	pursue	efficient	energy	sources.	
    	
    The	direct	impacts	of	the	conflict	are	faced	by	eastern	populations	but	also	by	internally	displaced	
    persons,	 former	 combatants,	 and	 host	 communities	 across	 Ukraine.	 More	than	half	of	IDPs	have	
    stayed	in	Donetsk	and	Luhansk	regions	near	the	conflict	zone,	but	IDPs	have	also	settled	throughout	the	
    country	in	search	of	opportunity.		The	overall	economic	situation	and	the	increasingly	protracted	nature	
    of	 the	 challenge	 means	 IDPs	 are	 becoming	 increasingly	 vulnerable.	 	 As	 the	 conflict	 continues,	
    development	 impacts	 are	 felt	 by	 both	 displaced	 and	 host	 communities—service	 delivery	 deficits,	
    overburdened	social	welfare	services	and	housing	markets,	joblessness,	and	social	tensions.		




                                                                                             	
    	
	


                                                         39 
 
44.      In	 addition	 to	 the	 conflict,	 Ukraine	 has	 been	 hit	 by	 large	 external	 shocks,	 another	
reason	 why	 extra	 effort	 will	 be	 needed	 to	 bolster	 confidence.	 	 Global	 commodity	 prices	 have	
declined	sharply	since	2014.		This	has	not	only	impacted	Ukraine’s	exports	of	commodities	globally,	
but	it	has	also	meant	that	many	of	Ukraine’s	resource	rich	export	markets	have	been	hit	by	recession	
and	 have	 experienced	 sharp	 depreciation	 in	 their	 currencies.	 	 Given	 the	 weak	 external	 outlook,	
Ukraine	 will	 need	 to	 go	 the	 extra	 mile	 to	 restore	 macroeconomic	 balances	 and	 confidence	 in	 its	
economy.	 	 The	 weak	 outlook	 for	 commodity	 markets	 also	 presents	 an	 opportunity	 for	 Ukraine	 to	
develop	 a	 more	 diversified	 export	 base.	 	 In	 fact,	 Ukraine’s	 reliance	 on	 commodity	 markets	 has	
contributed	to	its	volatile	and	unsustainable	growth	path	in	the	pre‐crisis	period.	
	
                                         Demography	and	Geography	
	
45.      Ukraine’s	working	age	population	has	been	declining	while	the	elderly	population	has	
been	 rising	 due	 to	 high	 mortality,	 low	 birth	 rates,	 and	 considerable	 out‐migration.	 	 The	
working	age	population	fell	from	around	34	million	in	2000	to	32	million	in	2013	and	is	projected	to	
keep	 on	 declining	 to	 reach	 25	 million	 by	 2050.	 	 Ukraine	 ranks	 second	 in	 the	 world	 together	 with	
Bulgaria	and	Georgia	and	after	Moldova	in	terms	of	the	pace	of	aging.		The	share	of	elderly	population	
is	projected	 to	rise	significantly.		 This	demography	shift	 has	significant	implications	for	sustained	
recovery	and	shared	prosperity.	
	
                            Figure	26:	Ukraine	Population	Age	Distribution	




                                                                                  	
	
46.      Low	fertility	and	high	mortality	rates	result	in	low	life	expectancy	at	birth	(71	years	in	
2013)	 that	 lag	 EU	 and	 the	 OECD	 averages	 by	 more	 than	 10	 years.	 The	 main	 losses	 in	 life	
expectancy	 are	 due	 to	 excess	 mortality	 from	 non‐communicable	 diseases	 (NCD)	 among	 the	 male,	
especially	the	rural	population.	Low	life	expectancy	today	is	the	result	of	a	steep	loss	at	the	beginning	
of	the	1990s	common	to	other	former	Soviet	countries	caused	mostly	by	stress‐related	heart	attacks,	
alcoholism	and	accidents,	and	slow	improvements	subsequently	but	only	after	2011	when	Ukraine	
reached	pre‐transition	life	expectancy	levels.	The	recent	conflict	in	the	East	and	the	economic	crisis	
that	followed	could	jeopardize	the	positive	trend	in	life	expectancy	of	the	last	few	years.		The	decline	

                                                      40 
 
in	working	age	population	and	the	increase	in	the	elderly	population	means	that	health	care	services	
will	need	to	be	improved	significantly	not	only	for	the	elderly,	but	also	for	the	working	age	population	
through	a	scaling	up	of	preventive	and	primary	care.	
	
47.      In	 addition	 to	 the	 human	 costs	 of	 low	 life	 expectancy,	 the	 decline	 in	 fertility	 and	
marked	excess	mortality	among	working	age	men	have	significant	economic	consequences.		If	
Ukraine	had	experienced	the	same	mortality	reductions	as	France	since	1950,	its	labor	force	would	
be	19	percent	larger	than	it	is	today.		This	implies	a	loss	of	productive	potential,	on	top	of	the	human	
costs	 of	 the	 lives	 lost.	 	 This	 loss	 of	 working‐age	 population	 to	 high	 adult	 mortality	 rates	 has	 the	
potential	of	raising	the	economic	dependency	ratios	to	levels	that	are	unsustainable.		In	addition	to	
the	 loss	 of	 productive	 population,	 the	 decline	 in	 the	 working	 age	 population	 raises	 significant	
questions	about	the	sustainability	of	social	insurance	systems.	
	
48.      The	 declining	 working‐age	 population	 means	 that	 substantial	 growth	 in	 productivity	
is	needed	to	generate	higher	per	capita	incomes.		This	challenging	requirement	puts	a	premium	
on	the	range	of	factors	necessary	to	improve	productivity,	including	better	infrastructure,	entry	or	
more	productive	firms	and	exit	of	less	productive	firms	and	productivity	improvements	within	firms,	
tapping	international	trade	opportunities,	and	 effective	functioning	of	the	labor	 market.		 The	 free	
movement	 of	 labor	 across	 firms,	 sectors,	 and	 geographical	 areas	 is	 an	 important	 component	 of	
productivity	growth.		Evidence	suggests	that	the	degree	of	internal	migration	in	Ukraine	is	less	than	
in	 other	 ECA	 countries,	 and	 within‐country	 migration	 appears	 to	 be	 taking	 place	 towards	 lower	
productivity	and	lower	wage	areas.	
         	
49.      Ukraine	 has	 a	 unique	 geography,	 with	 a	 rich	 endowment	 of	 natural	 resources	 which	
are	 assets	 but	 have	 also	 encouraged	 rent	 seeking	 and	 stymied	 reforms	 and	 diversification.		
Ukraine	is	endowed	with	considerable	natural	resources,	including:	rich	deposits	of	various	metal	
ores	(more	than	5	percent	of	the	world	reserves	of	iron	ore),	one‐quarter	of	the	world’s	black	soil	
(over	60.4	mn	ha),	the	world’s	largest	number	of	mineral	rock	deposits;	native	sulfur,	potash	salt,	in	
addition	considerable	fuel	and	energy	reserves	that	have	been	discovered.	The	natural	resources	lead	
to	 significant	 economic	 potential	 for	 development	 of	 such	 industries	 as	 agriculture	 and	 food	
processing,	 metallurgy,	 chemicals,	 as	 well	 as	 the	 production	 of	 ceramic	 articles	 and	 construction	
materials.		At	the	same	time,	the	rich	endowment	of	natural	resources	coupled	with	the	commodity	
boom	of	2000‐2007	discouraged	diversification	and	encouraged	rent	seeking	and	corruption.		The	
influence	of	vested	interests	has	also	been	a	serious	obstacle	for	structural	reforms.	
         	
50.      Ukraine’s	geography	also	puts	it	at	the	center	of	major	markets	and	leads	to	significant	
potential	 to	 develop	 exports.		Ukraine’s	geographic	location	is	at	the	center	of	Eastern	Europe,	at	
the	crossroads	of	major	transportation	routes	from	Europe	to	Asia	and	from	the	Scandinavian	states	
to	the	Mediterranean	region.		This	presents	a	very	favorable	environment	to	develop	international	
trade.		Ukraine	is	adjacent	to	the	EU	to	the	west,	Russia	to	the	East,	and	the	Black	Sea	to	the	south.	
Ukraine	may	also	benefit	from	the	recent	signing	of	DCFTA	agreement	with	the	EU,	which	can	ease	
access	to	the	large	and	competitive	EU	market.	
	


                                                        41 
 
                                                               Corruption	and	State	Capture1	
	
51.      Corruption	 and	 state	 capture	 are	 entrenched	 in	 Ukraine	 and	 a	 dominant	 constraint	
impeding	reforms	and	progress	toward	sustained	recovery	and	shared	prosperity.		Corruption	
permeates	all	walks	of	public	life	in	Ukraine.		On	many	aggregate	measures	of	corruption,	Ukraine	
scores	closer	to	the	lowest	income	countries	than	to	the	EU	which	it	aspires	to	join.		Ukraine	was	in	
the	 15th	 percentile	 worldwide	 in	 the	 WGI	 (World	 Governance	 Indicators)	 Control	 of	 Corruption	
indicator	in	2014,	well	below	Poland	and	Romania	(71st	and	53rd	percentile,	respectively),	as	well	
as	averages	for	low	middle	income	countries	(37th	percentile),	the	ECA	region	(64rd	percentile),	and	
sub‐Saharan	Africa	(30th	percentile).		With	such	extraordinary	levels	of	corruption	and	state	capture,	
powerful	vested	interests	across	the	board	seriously	impede	Ukraine’s	pathways	toward	sustained	
recovery	 and	 shared	 prosperity.	 	 Widespread	 tax	 evasion	 and	 related	 party	 lending	 undermine	
macroeconomic	 stability,	 a	 highly	 concentrated	 and	 anticompetitive	 production	 structure	 inhibits	
productivity	 and	 job	 creation,	 and	 weaknesses	 in	 the	 management	 of	 public	 resources	 impedes	
efficient	and	effective	delivery	of	public	services	to	the	population.	
	
52.      Ukraine	has	struggled	with	corruption	and	state	capture	since	its	independence	more	
than	 two	 decades	 ago.	 	 Privatized	 state	 assets	 were	 concentrated	 in	 a	 few	 hands	 in	 the	 early	
transition	years.		In	addition,	commodities	were	often	bought	at	state‐regulated	prices	and	sold	at	
full	market	prices,	while	underpriced	leases	of	large	tracts	of	agricultural	land,	budget	subsidies,	and	
low‐interest	bank	loans	were	made	available	to	favored	persons.	All	this	has	been	made	possible	by	
partial	 and	 incomplete	 market	 reforms.	 	 As	 a	 result,	 a	 number	 of	 oligarchs	 have	 dominated	 large	
sectors	 of	 the	 Ukrainian	 economy	 (energy,	 metallurgy,	 mining,	 chemicals	 and	 more	 recently	
agriculture),	 extracting	 rents,	 and	 influencing	 public	 institutions,	 including	 through	 direct	
representation	 in	 political	 parties	 and	 the	 Parliament.	 	 The	 symbiosis	 linking	 oligarchs	 with	
politicians	 and	 state	 officials	 stands	 in	 the	 way	 of	 reforms	 that	 could	 level	 the	 playing	 field	 and	
eliminate	rents.		Vested	interests	have	financed	political	parties	and	expensive	election	campaigns,	
and	 influenced	 decisions	 of	 officials	 in	 state‐owned	 enterprises,	 courts	 and	 presidential	
administrations2	in	order	to	create	and	maintain	a	non‐level	playing	field	to	their	benefit.	Civil	society	
has	been	too	weak	to	counter	these	influences,	rendering	politicians	and	state	officials	accountable	
more	to	the	few	than	to	the	many	who	voted	for	them.	
	
53.      Systematic	evidence	points	to	a	high	degree	of	corruption	facing	Ukraine.		According	to	
Transparency	International’s	2015	Corruption	Perception	Index	(CPI),	Ukraine	ranks	130th	out	of	
167	countries;	only	Tajikistan,	Uzbekistan	and	Turkmenistan	in	the	ECA	region	performed	worse.		
The	 Global	 Corruption	 Barometer	 2013	 shows	 that	 95	 per	 cent	 of	 Ukraine’s	 citizens	 believe	 that	
corruption	 levels	 had	 either	 worsened	 or	 stayed	 the	 same	 over	 the	 previous	 two	 years,	 with	 the	
judiciary	and	the	police	being	perceived	as	the	sectors	most	affected	by	corruption.		Anticorruption	

                                                            
1
  State	capture	is	defined	as	the	actions	of	individuals,	groups,	or	firms	both	in	the	public	and	private	sectors	to	
influence	the	formation	of	laws,	regulations,	decrees,	and	other	government	policies	to	their	own	advantage	as	
a	 result	 of	 the	 illicit	 and	 non‐transparent	 provision	 of	 private	 benefits	 to	 public	 officials	 (Hellman	 and	
Kaufmann,	2001).	
2	See	Aslund	(2009)	and	Aslund	(2015)	


                                                                            42 
 
institutions	in	Ukraine	have	been	ineffective,	with	financial	declarations	of	high	level	officials	and	
civil	servants	hard	to	verify	and	lacking	accountability	for	containing	false	information.		Until	very	
recently,	 conflict	 of	 interest	 was	 not	 adequately	 legislated.	 	 Work	 is	 now	 underway	 to	 establish	 a	
preventive	 anticorruption	 agency,	 broaden	 and	 publicize	 income	 and	 asset	 declarations,	 and	
implement	conflict	of	interest	provisions.		At	the	same	time,	rightsizing	the	public	sector	could	create	
the	fiscal	space	to	align	remuneration	with	the	market	and	help	increase	the	attractiveness	of	the	
civil	service	and	bring	in	qualified	staff.	
	
    Figure	27.	Corruption	Perceptions	Index,	2015               Figure	28.	Government	Effectiveness




                                                         	
    Sources:	TI	Corruption	Perceptions	Index	and	World	Governance	Indicators
	
54.     Poor	governance,	including	a	broken	social	contract	between	citizens	and	the	state,	is	
a	major	structural	impediment	to	 effective	provision	of	 public	 services.		Ukraine	scores	below	
most	 comparator	 countries	 in	 terms	 of	 government	 effectiveness,	 as	 reflected	 in	 the	 World	
Governance	 Indicators.	 	 The	 government	 has	 an	 outsized	 role	 in	 the	 economy	 (with	 general	
government	 spending	 43	 percent	 of	 GDP	 in	 2015),	 but	 government	 effectiveness	 is	 poor.	 	 An	
ineffective	 public	 sector	 undermines	 health	 and	 education	 service‐delivery,	 public	 investment	 in	
infrastructure,	 and	 protection	 of	 property	 rights	 for	 the	 private	 sector.	 	 Furthermore,	 the	 weak	
independence	 and	 low	 quality	 of	 the	 judiciary	 has	 a	 direct	 bearing	 on	 prospects	 for	 improving	
governance	 across	 the	 board.	 	 Unless	 government	 effectiveness	 is	 strengthened	 and	 impunity	
removed	from	the	state,	Ukraine	will	face	difficulty	in	making	progress	along	its	pathways	toward	
sustainable	recovery	and	shared	prosperity.	
	
	
	
	                                	




                                                       43 
 
V.      Cross‐Cutting	Pathway:	Better	Governance	and	Anticorruption	Institutions	
	
55.      A	 two‐pronged	 strategy	 is	 important	 in	 addressing	 Ukraine’s	 governance	 and	
corruption	 challenges.	 	 The	 first	 prong	 of	 the	 strategy	 involves	 building	 the	 institutions	 of	 better	
governance	 and	 anticorruption	 that	 would	 have	 a	 cross‐cutting	 impact	in	supporting	progress	along	
the	 pathways	 to	 sustained	 recovery	 and	 shared	 prosperity.	 	 These	 include	 institutions	 of	 public	
financial	management	(PFM),	anticorruption,	justice,	and	public	administration.		Strengthening	PFM	
institutions	 would	 help	 improve	 efficiency,	 accountability,	 and	 transparency	 in	 the	 use	 of	 public	
resources,	 including	 for	 service	 delivery,	 public	 investment,	 and	 state‐owned	 enterprises.	 	 This	
would	help	reduce	fiscal	risks	and	contribute	to	more	effective	infrastructure	and	service	delivery.		
Building	 anticorruption	 and	 justice	 institutions	 would	 contribute	 to	 overall	 transparency	 and	
accountability	 in	 the	 interface	 between	 the	 citizen,	 businesses,	 and	 the	 state,	 while	 battling	 state	
capture,	administrative	corruption,	and	the	influence	of	vested	interests	across	the	board.		Improving	
public	administration	by	building	a	more	professional	and	motivated	civil	service	and	strengthening	
strategic	 planning	 and	 coordination	 will	 help	 reduce	 incentives	 for	 corruption	 while	 improving	
delivery	of	public	services.	
	
56.      The	 second	 prong	 of	 the	 strategy	 involves	 advancing	 reforms	 across	 the	 three	
pathways	 of	 macroeconomic	 stability,	 productivity,	 and	 service	 delivery	 to	 disempower	
vested	 interests.		Reforms	in	tax	administration	and	the	financial	sector	can	help	not	only	contain	
macroeconomic	imbalances,	but	also	disempower	powerful	underlying	vested	interests	by	cutting	
tax	evasion	and	reining	in	opportunities	for	related	party	lending.		Similarly,	streamlining	business	
regulations,	 increasing	 competition,	 and	 reforming	 land	 markets	 would	 not	 only	 help	 level	 the	
playing	field	and	support	productivity	growth,	but	also	undercut	rents	for	powerful	vested	interests.		
Furthermore,	effective	decentralization	can	not	only	help	deliver	more	effective	services	under	the	
right	circumstances,	but	can	also	undercut	a	centralized	system	of	influence		All	this	means	that	an	
important	prong	of	a	better	governance	and	anticorruption	strategy	is	to	push	progress	on	reforms	
across	the	board	that	undermine	vested	interests.	
	
57.      The	 analysis	 in	 this	 chapter	 suggests	 that	 building	 better	 governance	 and	
anticorruption	 institutions	 are	 critical	 for	 Ukraine,	 although	 improved	 outcomes	 may	 be	
realized	 in	 the	 medium	 term.		Building	better	anticorruption,	justice,	and	public	administration	
institutions	 are	 critically	 important	 for	 Ukraine	 and	 would	 have	 far	 reaching	 ramifications	 for	
progress	 along	 each	 of	 the	 other	 development	 pathways.	 	 At	 the	 same	 time,	 building	 such	
fundamental	institutions	takes	time	and	actual	improvements	may	be	realized	in	the	medium	term.		
Nonetheless,	it	is	important	to	continue	to	push	for	specific	implementation	steps	in	areas	where	the	
process	has	been	initiated,	such	as	effective	implementation	of	anticorruption	laws.		And	in	other	
areas	 that	 are	 at	 a	 more	 incipient	 stage,	 such	 as	 justice	 and	 public	 administration	 reform,	 it	 is	
important	to	launch	the	process.		While	these	critically	important	reform	processes	are	underway,	
immediate	 and	 systematic	 efforts	 to	 enhance	 citizens’	 engagement	 will	 be	 critical	 in	 facilitating	
progress.		The	following	table	summarizes	the	priority	interventions	for	building	better	governance	
and	anticorruption	institutions	identified	through	the	analysis	in	this	chapter.	
	

                                                       44 
 
                                 Priorities                                Criticality     Time	horizon
Public	financial	management:	Implement	updated	PFM	Strategy,	including	
medium	term	budgeting,	streamlining	performance	based	budgeting,	and	         High         Short,	Medium
introducing	fiscal	risk	assessment	framework.
Anticorruption	and	Justice	Institutions:	Effectively	implement	new	anti‐
corruption	laws;	strengthen	public	trust	in	justice	system	by	improving	    Critical       Short,	Medium
enforcement	and	HR	reform.
Public	administration	reform:	Improve	policy	and	decision‐making;	
streamline	personnel	while	improving	human	resource	management;	            Critical       Short,	Medium
undertake	merit‐based	appointments	and	optimize	salaries.
Citizens	Engagement:	Build	on	successful	post‐Maidan	mobilization	by	
promoting	more	systematic	planning,	management,	and	communications	         Critical      Immediate,	Short
based	on	information	and	evidence‐based	analysis.	                                                           	
	
                                     Public	Financial	Management	
	
58.     Strengthening	 PFM	 institutions	 is	 a	 key	 component	 of	 improving	 governance	 in	
Ukraine	 by	 improving	 efficiency,	 accountability,	 and	 transparency	 in	 the	 use	 of	 public	
resources.	In	the	face	of	substantial	fiscal	pressures	in	recent	years,	fiscal	management	in	Ukraine	
has	been	dominated	by	short‐term	consolidation	needs,	while	long	term	institutional	improvements	
have	been	sidelined.		In	recent	years,	progress	has	been	made	in	budget	transparency,	revamping	
intergovernmental	 transfers,	 and	 changes	 to	 procurement	 to	 allow	 for	 implementation	 of	 e‐
procurement	and	reduced	number	of	exemptions	from	competitive	tenders.		However,	progress	has	
been	slow	in	such	important	areas	as	the	policy	alignment	of	budgeting,	multiyear	fiscal	planning	and	
budgeting,	 expenditure	 consolidation	 and	 fiscal	 risk	 management,	 and	 internal	 control.	 	 The	 PFM	
system	in	Ukraine	thus	hampers	efficient	service	delivery.	The	budget	process	does	not	have	a	strong	
policy	or	strategic	focus	and	a	medium‐term	fiscal	strategy	to	guide	the	budget	process	is	lacking.	
Performance	information	is	included	in	program	budgets	but	tends	to	focus	on	outputs	rather	than	
outcomes	and	results.	Weak	links	between	sector	plans	and	budget	allocations	and	weaknesses	in	
public	investment	management	both	at	selection	and	implementation	stages	are	not	conducive	to	
efficient	targeting	of	resources	to	strategic	policy	priorities.	
	
59.     Ukraine’s	 PFM	 system	 is	 control	 oriented	 and	 rigid.	 The	 control	 environment	 is	
burdensome	and	obliges	those	responsible	for	the	delivery	of	public	services	to	focus	their	efforts	on	
compliance	 rather	 than	 improving	 performance	 and	 the	 effectiveness	 of	 service	 delivery.	 Cash	
rationing	practices	have	helped	curtail	the	deficit	during	the	fiscal	crisis,	but	will	add	further	rigidity	
budget	system	once	the	fiscal	situation	normalizes.	Ongoing	 efforts	 to	improve	internal	audit	 and	
external	 audit	 and	 focus	 on	 performance	 auditing	 are	 only	 likely	 to	 have	 an	 impact	 on	 the	
performance	orientation	of	the	PFM	system	over	the	longer‐term.	
        	
60.     A	 key	 step	 in	 strengthening	 PFM	 institutions	 going	 forward	 is	 to	 continue	
implementation	 of	 PFM	 reforms	 that	 enable	 efficient	 service	 delivery	 and	 ensure	 fiscal	
discipline.	The	reform	process	is	shaped	by	the	recent	adopted	PFM	Reform	Strategy	as	a	long‐term	
vision	for	reform,	along	with	an	extended	action	plan	for	the	period	2017‐2020.		Key	reform	elements	
include:	 moving	 forward	 with	 implementation	 of	 medium	 term	 budgeting	 including	 establishing	


                                                      45 
 
multi‐year	ceilings	for	line	ministries	and	agencies;	streamlining	performance	based	budgeting	by	
reducing	the	number	of	programs	and	linking	results	with	the	decisions	making	process	at	both	the	
parliament	 and	 executive	 levels;	 fully	 institutionalizing	 and	 introducing	 a	 fiscal	 risk	 assessment	
framework.	 The	 governance	 arrangements	 to	 implement	 the	 PFM	 Strategy	 would	 be	 essential	 to	
success	of	the	reform	process.	High	level	leadership’s	upfront	commitment	to	clear	and	measurable	
results,	and	monitoring	implementation	of	the	PFM	reform	actions	is	required.		Ukraine	has	made	
considerable	process	in	bringing	budget	legislation	to	good	international	practice	in	many	areas.	The	
challenge	 going	 forward	 is	 to	 ensure	 transformation	 of	 practices.	 Practice	 changes	 would	 require	
building	 institutional	 and	 human	 capacity	 across	 all	 government	 agencies.	 Development	 and	
implementation	of	a	PFM	ICT	Strategy	will	enable	a	comprehensive	and	cost	efficient	ICT	support	to	
all	the	reforms.	
	
                                Anticorruption	and	Justice	Institutions	
	
61.      Effective	 implementation	 of	 new	 anti‐corruption	 laws	 aimed	 at	 battling	 grand	
corruption	and	state	capture	is	crucial	in	improving	governance	in	Ukraine.	In	2014,	a	number	
of	anti‐corruption	laws	were	adopted,	institutionalizing	some	of	the	anti‐corruption	initiatives	aimed	
at	battling	corruption	and	state	capture.	Most	notably,	a	package	of	anti‐corruption	laws	was	passed	
in	October	2014,	which	establish	the	Anti‐Corruption	Bureau	with	investigative	functions	and	the	
Specialized	Anti‐Corruption	Prosecutor’s	Office	(SACPO)	to	prosecute	high‐level	corruption	crimes.	
Another	 law	 creates	 a	 corruption	 prevention	 body,	 National	 Agency	 for	 Corruption	 Prevention	
(NACP),	 whose	 responsibilities	 include	 verification	 of	 asset	 declarations	 of	 public	 officials	 and	
implementing	conflict	of	interest	provisions.	Both	the	Bureau	and	NACP	are	still	in	early	days	of	their	
operations.	 	 Another	 newly	 adopted	 law	 regulates	 the	 provision	 of	 information	 on	
ultimate/beneficial	 ownership,	 closing	 some	 of	 the	 loopholes	 for	 not	 declaring	 assets	 that	 are	
formally	registered	to	other	individuals	or	entities.	An	important	law	was	adopted	in	October	2015,	
introducing	comprehensive	rules	on	financing	of	political	parties	and	assigning	supervisory	powers	
over	political	financing	to	the	NACP.		In	2015,	Ukraine	also	adopted	laws	that	establish	an	Agency	for	
Tracing,	Recovering	and	Managing	Criminal	Proceeds	and	the	State	Bureau	of	Investigations	that	will	
deal	with	corruption	at	the	middle	and	lower	levels	of	government.	The	success	of	the	Bureau,	SACPO	
and	NACP,	as	well	as	other	new	agencies,	hinges	on	their	financing,	staffing	and	full	cooperation	from	
other	government	bodies.	
	
62.      While	 the	 passage	 of	 these	 laws	 is	 an	 important	 step,	 to	 strengthen	 Ukraine’s	
commitment	 to	 fight	 corruption,	 the	 government	 will	 need	 to	 publicly	 endorse	 a	 set	 of	
ambitious	yet	achievable	anti‐corruption	goals.		Such	goals	should	focus	on	ensuring	the	success	
of	the	new	anti‐corruption	institutions	by	providing	political	and	financial	support	and	working	to	
ensure	the	cooperation	and	collaboration	of	other	government	bodies.	The	Bureau	and	the	NACP	will	
focus	 both	 on	 investigating	 and	 prosecuting	 existing	 corruption	 as	 well	 as	 on	 preventing	 it	 by	
addressing	 conflicts	 of	 interest,	 illegal	 financing	 of	 political	 parties	 and	 ensuring	 the	 filing	 and	
publication	 of	 accurate	 asset	 declarations.	 If	 done	 well,	 these	 efforts	 could	 markedly	 increase	 the	
accountability	of	public	officials	and	transparency	about	their	assets	–	a	worthy	anti‐corruption	goal	



                                                       46 
 
in	itself.		The	Government	should	focus	on	selected	achievable	activities	in	order	to	build	success	one	
step	at	a	time.	
	
63.       The	justice	system	is	poorly	trusted	and	ineffective.	Public	trust	in	the	courts	has	been	as	
low	 as	 9	 percent	 (December	 2014	 survey,	 Democratic	 Initiative	 Fund).	 	 In	 addition,	 international	
comparisons	show	Ukraine	performing	well	behind	a	number	of	regional	comparators	in	terms	of	
the	 effectiveness	 of	 its	 rule	 of	 law.	 	 The	 sources	 of	 Ukraine’s	 weak	 justice	 sector	 governance	 are	
complex,	and	have	resulted	in	limited	reforms	to	restrain	arbitrary	state	actions	and	for	legal	redress.	
Ukraine’s	 justice	 sector	 shares	 governance	 challenges	 with	 many	 transition	 countries,	 suggesting	
that	historical	legacies	could	play	an	important	role,	such	as	the	emergence	of	oligarchs	who	have	
sponsored	 political	 parties	 and	 often	 exercise	 strong	 influence	 over	 government	 institutions	 and	
officials	across	all	three	branches	of	state.		In	addition,	some	unfinished	justice	reforms	have	severely	
impacted	the	state’s	ability	to	collect	revenues.		The	significance	of	the	challenge	is	illustrated	by	the	
high	cost	of	enforcing	contracts	in	Ukraine	(46	percent	of	the	total	cost	of	the	claim	(compared	to	the	
ECA	average	of	26.2	percent	according	to	DB2016)	and	the	impact	of	non‐enforcement	of	civil	claims	
(Ukraine’s	recovery	rate	is	estimated	to	be	3	cents	on	the	dollar	compared	to,	for	example,	27	cents	
for	the	US).3	Civil	society,	while	strong,	has	not	yet	become	a	force	to	consistently	influence	policy‐
makers	to	act	in	the	public	interest.	Social	collective	action	is	often	hampered	by	the	juxtaposition	of	
unrealistically	 high	 expectations	 of	 what	 the	 state	 should	 deliver	 on	 justice	 reform,	 against	 low	
confidence	in	its	ability	to	do	so.	
	
          Ukraine:	Constitutional	Amendments	to	Strengthen	Justice	and	Anti‐Corruption	Reforms	
	
The	Verkhovna	Rada	(parliament)	in	mid‐2016	adopted	several	constitutional	amendments	and	a	new	
law	 (“On	 the	 Court	 System	 and	 the	 Status	 of	 Judges”),	 which	 together	 aim	 to	 strengthen	 judicial	
independence	and	streamline	the	functioning	of	the	justice	system.		Some	legal	experts	have	opined	that	
if	 implemented	 properly,	 they	 could	 reduce	 corruption	 and	 enhance	 judges’	 accountability	 and	 system	
efficiency.	The	seven	key	changes	comprise:	
a) Abolition	 of	 existing	 High	 Courts	 (reducing	 the	 number	 of	 court	 tiers	 from	 four	 to	 three),	 changes	 to	
      Supreme	 Court	 functions	 and	 composition,	 and	 establishment	 of	 two	 new	 High	 Courts.	 The	 three	
      existing	High	Courts4	(above	the	courts	of	appeal	and	below	the	Supreme	Court)	will	be	abolished	and	the	
      Supreme	Court	will	consist	of	four	courts	of	cassation	(criminal,	civil,	commercial	and	administrative)	and	
      a	grand	chamber.	This	will	eliminate	Ukraine’s	system	of	three	parallel	independent	specialized	high	courts	
      and	aims	to	reduce	–	over	time	‐	forum‐shopping,	inconsistencies,	unpredictability	and	corruption.	A	High	
      Specialized	Court	on	Intellectual	Property	and	a	High	Specialized	Court	on	Anti‐Corruption	will	be	set	up;	
      their	place	in	the	judicial	system	remains	unclear.		
b) Actions	 to	 improve	 judicial	 independence,	 competence	 and	 ethics:	 Judges	 will	 be	 appointed	 by	 the	
      President	of	Ukraine	upon	nomination	by	the	Supreme	Council	of	Justice,	a	new	state	body	to	be	established	
      to	 replace	 the	 current	 High	 Council	 of	 Justice.	 The	 competence	 to	 appoint	 and	 to	 remove	 judges	 was	
      transferred	to	the	Supreme	Council	of	Justice	from	the	Parliament	of	Ukraine.	The	probation	period	of	five	
      years	 will	 be	 revoked	 for	 newly	 appointed	 judges,	 and	 significantly	 increased	 base	 salaries	 will	 be	
                                                            
3	As	a	result	of	high	recovery	costs	and	low	recovery	rates	on	debt	collection,	private	companies	in	Ukraine	are	

increasingly	 turning	 to	 private	 debt	 collection	 companies	 (including	 some	 foreign	 firms)	 to	 address	 debt	
collection.	This	has	become	a	growing	but	completely	unregulated	industry	in	Ukraine.		
4	High	Court	of	Civil	and	Criminal	Cases,	High	Commercial	Court	and	High	Administrative	Court	


                                                               47 
 
   provided.	 Sitting	 judges	 will	 be	 tested	 on	 professional	 expertise	 and	 ethics.	 Failure	 to	 demonstrate	
   compliance,	or	refusal	to	participate	in	the	review,	will	constitute	grounds	for	dismissal.	
c) Stronger	 anti‐corruption	 provisions	 for	 judges:	 Each	judge	will	have	to	submit	two	additional	annual	
   declarations,	one	to	disclose	on	family	relations	and	the	other	a	declaration	of	integrity,	to	be	made	publicly	
   available.	Judges	have	to	confirm	the	legality	of	the	source	of	their	assets,	with	failure	to	justify	sources	of	
   funds	and	other	assets	being	treated	as	grounds	for	dismissal.	Judges’	blanket	immunity	from	prosecution	
   will	be	lifted;	immunity	from	criminal	liability	will	only	be	limited	to	functional	immunity5.	
d) Changes	to	the	prosecutorial	function.	The	amendments	abolish	the	wide	general	supervisory	authority	
   of	the	general	prosecutor’s	office	and	limit	its	functions	to	(a)	pre‐trial	investigations,	(b)	supporting	public	
   prosecution	in	courts	and	(c)	representing	the	state’s	interest	in	courts.		
e) Representational	 monopoly	 of	 advocates.	 The	 Constitutional	 amendments	 also	 propose	 to	 regulate	
   representation	 of	 litigants	 before	 courts:	 from	 January	 1,	 2017	 only	 licensed	 advocates	 can	 represent	
   clients	in	cassation	matters;	from	January	1,	2018	in	appeal	matters	and	from	January	1,	2019	in	courts	of	
   first	 instance.	 (Currently,	 any	 duly	 authorized	 individual	 can	 represent	 any	 person	 in	 court	 except	 in	
   criminal	proceedings).	
f) Greater	 access	 to	 the	 Constitutional	 Court	 has	been	provided	to	all	individuals	and	companies	where	
   there	are	claims	that	a	final	court	decision	contradicts	the	Constitution.	A	complaint	may	be	filed	only	after	
   all	other	remedies	have	been	exhausted	in	regular	Ukrainian	courts.	This	amendment	could	significantly	
   improve	access	to	justice,	obviating	(in	many	cases)	the	need	for	remedies	from	international	tribunals	
   (e.g.	the	European	Court	of	Human	Rights).	
	
64.      Justice	reform	is	an	important	component	of	strengthening	governance	in	Ukraine	and	
facilitating	 its	 aspirations	 of	 joining	 the	 European	 Union.		In	order	to	accomplish	this,	it	will	be	
important	to	systematically	implement	the	integrated	justice	reform	strategy,	where	credible	results	
will	depend	on	how	Ukraine’s	authorities	address	a	number	of	key	challenges	in	the	justice	system.		
First,	 pervasive	 corruption	 and	 state	 capture	 in	 the	 courts	 and	 prosecution	 has	 resulted	 in	
persistently	low	public	trust	and	credibility.		Second,	slow	and	non‐transparent	enforcement	of	civil	
cases	 has	 locked	 up	 scarce	 capital,	 impeded	 the	 business	 climate	 and	 adversely	 impacted	 the	
economy	including	the	banking	sector6.	Enforcement	reportedly	commences	on	less	than	10	percent	
of	civil	decisions,	with	thousands	of	civil	decisions	–	whose	number,	monetary	value	and	pendency	
are	not	yet	accurately	assessed	‐	remain	unenforced,	denying	justice	to	firms	and	individuals.	Third,	
ensuring	 access	 to	 justice	 for	 vulnerable	 groups	 and	 businesses	 will	 be	 important	 in	 supporting	
broad‐based	employment	generation	and	inclusive	growth.	Fourth,	reversing	the	effects	of	decades	
of	under‐performance	and	over‐staffing,	compounded	by	structural	and	institutional	dysfunctions	
and	conflict‐wrought	infrastructure	loss	and	damage.	Finally,	improving	the	enforcement	of	judicial	
decisions	could	enable	Ukraine	to	collect	considerable	sums	from	private	entities	who,	for	years,	have	
owed	money	to	the	state.7	
                                                            
5	 Judges	 will	 be	 protected	 from	 liability	 only	 in	 respect	 of	 judicial	 actions	 and	 can	 be	 prosecuted	 for	 other	

offences.	
6	 The	 banking	 system	 faces	 significant	 constraints	 associated	 with	 shortcomings	 in	 court	 decisions	 and	

enforcement	related	to	nonperforming	loans,	transfer/sale	of	assets,	foreclosing	of	collateral,	and	other	issues.	
7According	to	the	Ministry	of	Justice	data,	more	than	400	billion	hryvnias	(equivalent	to	$16	billion)	are	‘locked	

up’	 in	 unenforced	 civil	 claims	 pending	 with	 public	 bailiffs	 in	 the	 Kyiv	 headquarters	 unit	 of	 the	 State	
Enforcement	Service	(SES)	Department	under	the	Ministry	of	Justice.	According	to	World	Bank	staff	estimates,	
at	least	a	quarter	of	this	amount	represents	debts	owed	to	the	state	by	private	sector	debtors,	and	another	
quarter	represents	debts	owed	by	private	sector	debtors	to	Ukraine’s	cash‐strapped	SOEs	including	Naftogaz.	

                                                               48 
 
	
                                     Public	Administration	Reform	
	
65.      Improving	 public	 sector	 performance	 requires	 professional,	 motivated	 and	 well‐
managed	personnel.		Public	administration	in	Ukraine	suffers	from	low	effectiveness,	an	ingrained	
culture	of	corruption	and	lack	of	a	service	culture,	all	of	which	translates	to	only	8	percent	of	the	
population	expressing	trust	in	the	government	according	to	the	2015	Gallup	poll.		The	public	sector	
in	 Ukraine	 employs	 a	 very	 large	 number	 of	 people,	 while	 the	 level	 of	 salaries	 is	 low	 and	
uncompetitive,	 reducing	 attractiveness,	 weakening	 retention	 of	 staff	 with	 high‐level	 competences	
and	skills,	and	leading	to	incentives	for	corruption.		The	public	wage	bill	amounted	to	9.4	percent	of	
GDP	 in	 2015,	 while	 public	 sector	 employment	 in	 2013	 was	 over	 1	 million	 employees	 in	 public	
administration	and	national	defense,	and	an	additional	1.7	million	in	education	and	1.2	million	in	
healthcare.		Over	1	million	employees,	almost	quarter	of	the	total	public	employment,	worked	in	a	
very	large	SOE	sector	represented	by	1,833	active	entities.		These	data	point	toward	system‐wide	
inefficiencies	and	poor	service	delivery.		According	to	the	Gallup	poll	barely	half	of	the	population	are	
satisfied	with	educational	services,	while	only	22	percent	are	satisfied	with	Ukraine’s	health	services.	
	
66.      The	 challenge	 facing	 the	 Government	 is	 to	 improve	 transparency	 in	 policy	 and	
administrative	decision‐making,	appoint	public	servants	based	on	merit	and	increase	salaries	
while	 streamlining	 state	 personnel	 and	 improving	 human	 resource	 management.	To	do	that	
effectively,	 it	 will	 be	 important	 to	 have	 access	 to	 accurate	 and	 up‐to‐date	 personnel	 information,	
including	 a	 central	 personnel	 database,	 which	 currently	 does	 not	 exist.	 	 In	 addition,	 opening	 the	
policy	 dialogue	 to	 increased	 citizen	 engagement	 and	 monitoring	 of	 the	 performance	 of	 public	
institutions	 should	 help	 to	 improve	 the	 effectiveness	 of	 Ukraine’s	 public	 administration.	 	 The	
Government	took	first	steps	in	this	directly	by	publishing	quarterly	reports	of	its	activities	online.		
The	 quarterly	 report	 for	 the	 second	 quarter	 of	 2016,	 includes	 information	 on	 the	 Government’s	
recent	initiatives	and	decisions,	including	the	initial	implementation	of	the	civil	service	law,	process	
of	institutional	streamlining	of	central	executive	bodies,	introduction	of	e‐licensing	for	construction	
permits,	creation	of	Business	Ombudsman	Office	and	enhancing	transparency	in	public	procurement.		
	
67.      The	 Government	 of	 Ukraine	 has	 identified	 a	 transparent	 public	 administration	 and	
professional	 civil	 service	 as	 one	 of	 priorities.	In	June	2016,	the	Government	approved	a	Public	
Administration	Reform	(PAR)	Strategy.	The	strategy	aims	at	improving	effectiveness,	efficiency	and	
transparency	 of	 the	 public	 administration	 in	 line	 with	 the	 Principles	 of	 Public	 Administration	
developed	 by	 SIGMA.	 	 The	 PAR	 Strategy	 seeks	 to:	 (i)	 overhaul	 the	 system	 of	 policymaking	 and	
strategic	planning	to	make	it	transparent,	accountable	and	results‐oriented;	(ii)	significantly	improve	
the	performance	and	accountability	of	the	civil	service;	(iii)	better	align	organizational	structure	of	
the	public	administration	with	the	key	government	functions	and	strategic	goals;	(iv)	improve	the	
quality,	access	and	efficiency	of	government	services;	and	(v)	achieve	effectiveness,	efficiency	and	
transparency	 in	 the	 management	 of	 public	 resources	 through	 enhancing	 the	 public	 financial	
management	 system.	 	 To	 implement	 the	 goals	 of	 Public	 Administration	 Reform	 Strategy,	 the	
Government,	particularly	the	Public	Administration	Reform	unit	of	the	Secretariat	of	the	Cabinet	of	



                                                      49 
 
Ministers	will	need	to	assume	a	leadership	role	to	coordinate,	monitor	and	support	reforms,	and	hold	
responsible	institutions	accountable.	
	
                                             Citizens’	Engagement	
	
68.      During	the	Euromaidan	protests	of	2013,	civil	society	emerged	as	a	central	vehicle	for	
change	 in	 Ukraine.	 	 The	 pivotal	 role	 played	 by	 civil	 society	 organizations	 (CSOs)	 and	 ordinary	
Ukrainian	citizens	in	pushing	for	change,	heightened	civic	activism	and	fundamentally	altered	the	
way	Ukrainians	engaged	in	the	governance	of	the	country.		The	Maidan	and	the	period	after	–	which	
included	 the	 Maidan‐appointed	 interim	 government	 –	 illustrated	 the	 real	 and	 potential	 role	 of	 a	
maturing	civil	society,	better	organized	and	a	stronger	force	on	key	issues.	The	strengthened	social	
capital	 also	 illustrated	 how	 young	 professionals	 could	 be	 empowered	 to	 stimulate	 change	 and	
demand	for	change.	These	transformations	are	only	partially	reflected	in	demand‐side	governance	
indicators.	Ukraine	reached	a	sub‐rating	of	3	(partly	free)	on	the	2016	Freedom	House	scale	(1=	most	
free	and	7	=least	free)	on	key	civil	rights	indicators,	up	from	4	under	the	Yanukovych	regime,	but	still	
pressured	by	the	struggle	in	conflict‐areas.		Disaggregated	indicators	show	that	while	the	voice	of	
Ukrainian	citizens	has	improved,	the	country	is	yet	to	see	a	marked	improvement	in	accountability.	
         	
69.      Civil	 society	 engagement	 to	 more	 systematically	 promote	 the	 design	 and	
implementation	of	the	reform	agenda	is	essential.	While	civil	society	has	played	a	central	role	in	
pushing	 for	 change	 in	 Ukraine	 since	 the	 Maidan,	 harnessing	 its	energy	 and	 enthusiasm	 to	 engage	
more	 systematically	 and	 effectively	 on	 the	 reform	 agenda	 going	 forward	 will	 be	 important.	 Civil	
society	is	now	composed	of	a	myriad	of	formal	and	informal,	active	and	inactive,	and	mostly	voluntary	
CSOs.		Despite	its	successes,	civil	society	organizations	lack	planning	and	management	skills,	are	yet	
to	develop	professional	communications	skills	with	its	members	and	the	press,	and	to	channel	high	
levels	of	motivation	into	coordinated	systems	necessary	for	effective	coexistence.	Moreover	forums	
for	 dialogue	 over	 reforms	 are	 immature,	 and	 platforms	 for	 coordination	 with	 government	 are	 far	
from	 effective	 (e.g.	 the	 civic	 councils).	 A	 key	 role	 for	 civil	 society	 organizations	 will	 be	 helping	 to	
change	the	mindset	of	citizens	from	that	of	passive	beneficiaries	–	a	legacy	from	the	Soviet	era	–	to	
active	 users	 of	 services.	 To	 optimize	 its	 potential,	 civil	 society	 will	 need	 to	 organize	 itself	 to:	 (i)	
maintain	 and	 focus	 the	 successful	 mobilization	 of	 2013‐14;	 (ii)	 ensure	 the	 engagement	 of	
professionals	and	the	media;	(iii)	act	as	transparently	as	possible,	ensuring	an	integrity	far	beyond	
the	 state;	 (iv)	 optimize	 the	 channels	 and	 openings	 made	 available	 by	 the	 shift	 of	 civil	 society	
representatives	 into	 parliament;	 (v)	 mobilize	 the	 youth	 and	 professionals	 to	 contribute	 to	 the	
dialogue;	and	(iv)	translating	the	technical	aspects	of	the	reform	process	into	meaningful,	tangible	
discourse	that	citizen	understand.	
	
70.      Improving	 the	 performance	 of	 state	 institutions	 and	 functions	 will	 require	 the	
continued	 engagement	 of	 Ukrainian	 citizens,	 and	 an	 active	 and	 informed	 civil	 society.	 The	
momentum	and	transformational	capacity	demonstrated	by	civil	society	in	Ukraine	now	needs	to	be	
sustained	and	harnessed	by	all	actors	to	support	medium	and	long	term	reform.	This	reform	agenda	
is	 complex	 and	 far	 reaching,	 but	 there	 is	 much	 benefit	 to	 be	 gained	 from	 direct	 and	 immediate	
engagement	 with	 citizens	 and	 CSOs:	 more	 targeted	 allocation	 of	 local	 resources,	 improved	


                                                          50 
 
accountability	 and	 responsiveness	 of	 service	 providers,	 greater	 ownership	 of	 reforms	 and	
sustainability	of	investments,	as	well	as	the	emergence	of	a	more	open	and	responsive	government	
in	 which	 citizens	 have	 voice	 and	 agency.	 	 This	 engagement	 will	 require	 vast	 improvement	 in	
transparency	and	access	to	information,	the	platforms	for	average	citizens	to	participate	at	the	local	
and	national	levels	as	well	as	efforts	to	tailor	approaches	to	suit	the	significant	regional	variation.		
Opportunities	for	eastern	populations	to	engage	the	national	Government	and	increased	avenues	for	
dialogue	 and	 outreach	 will	 also	 combat	 growing	 east‐west	 divides,	 and	 contribute	 to	 overall	
confidence	in	the	reform	process.	
	
71.     Enhancing	 citizens’	 engagement	 on	 the	 quality	 and	 effectiveness	 of	 service	 delivery	
will	 require	 access	 to	 reliable	 and	 timely	 information,	 as	 well	 as	 the	 opportunity	 to	 better	
understand	 and	 use	 information.	 Citizens	 and	 users	 of	 services	 need	 to	 know	 their	 rights	 and	
responsibilities,	national	targets	and	standards,	the	budgets	available,	and	about	performance	–	how	
the	 services	 they	 receive	 compare	 with	 others.	 Data	 from	 2014	 (DIF)	 suggests	 that	 9	 percent	 of	
Ukrainians	 are	 fully	 satisfied	 that	 government	 was	 informing	 them	 about	 its	 work,	 39	 percent	 of	
citizens	report	that	the	information	provided	does	not	correspond	to	reality.	Yet	there	is	experience	
of	successful	pockets	of	action,	even	in	the	most	problematic	reforms.	Government	efforts	to	raise	
awareness	for	the	need	for	higher	energy	tariffs	and	the	energy	efficiency	measures	that	can	help	
households	cope	with	higher	prices	radically	improved	the	way	information	on	an	issue	critical	to	
livelihoods	was	imparted.	It	involved	public	opinion	research,	a	redesign	of	a	TV‐based	awareness	
campaign	and	the	development	of	understanding	of	journalists	and	other	intermediaries.	As	a	result	
of	these	efforts,	in	8	months,	enrollment	in	the	subsidy	program	increased	from	1.25	million	to	5.5	
million	 households,	 energy	 consumption	 dropped	 significantly	 in	 2015	 and	 the	 new	 government	
appears	to	be	committed	to	continuing	the	reforms.	
	
	                                   	




                                                     51 
 
VI.     Pathway	1:	Macroeconomic	Stability	
	
72.      Safeguarding	 macroeconomic	 stability	 is	 a	 critical	 pathway	 to	 sustainable	 recovery	
and	 shared	 prosperity.	 	 The	 crisis	 of	 2014‐15	 exacerbated	 large	 fiscal	 and	 external	 imbalances,	
along	 with	 a	 fragile	 banking	 sector.	 	 Such	 large	 macroeconomic	 imbalances	 seriously	 undermine	
investor	confidence.		Furthermore,	the	analysis	of	growth	in	the	pre‐crisis	period	showed	that	such	
imbalances	 contributed	 to	 a	 volatile	 and	 unsustainable	 growth	 path	 in	 the	 pre‐crisis	 period,	 with	
growth	essentially	stagnating	on	average	during	2008‐13.		In	light	of	the	tremendous	vulnerabilities	
facing	the	economy,	reducing	macroeconomic	imbalances	and	safeguarding	macroeconomic	stability	
will	be	critical	to	put	Ukraine	on	a	path	toward	sustainable	recovery.	
	
73.      Addressing	a	number	of	structural	priorities	in	the	areas	of	fiscal	and	financial	sector	
stabilization	 will	 be	 important.	 	 In	 fact,	 many	 of	 the	 drivers	 of	 macroeconomic	 imbalances	 in	
Ukraine	are	structural	in	nature.		Some	of	the	greatest	fiscal	vulnerabilities,	for	example,	come	from	
a	 narrow	 tax	 base	 and	 weak	 tax	 administration,	 and	 an	 ineffective	 pensions	 system.	 	 As	 a	 result,	
reducing	structural	fiscal	imbalances	will	require	a	focus	on	tax	reform	to	broaden	the	tax	base	and	
strengthen	tax	administration;	and	pension	reform	to	reduce	the	large	pension	fund	deficit.		Until	
recently,	 the	 gas	 sector	 has	 also	 been	 the	 source	 of	 a	 large	 structural	 deficit,	 so	 going	 forward,	
monitoring	the	drivers	of	the	Naftogaz	deficit	will	be	important.		In	the	financial	sector,	deep‐rooted	
related	party	lending	and	weaknesses	in	supervision	have	combined	with	the	economic	downturn	to	
result	 in	 large	 numbers	 of	 bank	 closures	 and	 an	 increase	 in	 non‐performing	 loans	 (NPLs).		
Strengthening	the	financial	sector	will	require	implementing	the	framework	put	in	place	to	resolve	
and	 recapitalize	 banks	 and	 strengthen	 supervision,	 but	 also	 put	 in	 place	 measures	 to	 strengthen	
corporate	 governance	 of	 state	 owned	 banks	 and	 facilitate	 work	 out	 of	 NPLs.	 	 The	 following	 table	
summarizes	the	priority	interventions	for	safeguarding	fiscal	and	financial	sector	stability	identified	
through	the	analysis	in	this	chapter.	
	
                                  Priorities                                    Criticality       Time	horizon
Tax	Reform:	Broaden	tax	base	by	removing	exemptions	and	loopholes;	
                                                                                   High          Immediate,	Short
improve	international	taxation	treaties;	and	strengthen	tax	administration
Pension	Reform:	Restructure	benefit	package	to	better	link	contributions	
                                                                                                 Immediate,	Short,	
to	benefits;	parametric	reforms	to	address	categorical	benefits,	early	           Critical
                                                                                                    Medium
retirement,	and	provide	incentives	to	retire	later
Strengthen	Financial	Sector:	Implement	framework	to	recapitalize	and	
resolve	banks	and	strengthen	supervision;	restore	credit	growth	by	putting	
                                                                               Critical,	High    Immediate,	Short
in	place	effective	NPL	resolution	framework;	and	improve	governance	of	
state	owned	banks                                                                                                     	
	
                                               Fiscal	Consolidation	
	
74.     Large	 fiscal	 deficits	 with	 structural	 roots	 are	 a	 major	 source	 of	 macroeconomic	
vulnerability	for	Ukraine.		Ukraine	has	been	running	fiscal	deficit	over	the	last	20	years.	The	fiscal	
position	 deteriorated	 considerably	 since	 2009	 when	 budget	 revenues	 declined	 as	 a	 result	 of	 the	
macroeconomic	slowdown,	while	expenditure	continued	to	grow	due	to	increase	in	social	spending	
related	 to	 the	 political	 cycle.	 	 In	 addition,	 the	 structural	 deficit	 of	 Naftogaz	 grew	 rapidly	 as	 the	

                                                         52 
 
authorities	refused	to	adjust	gas	tariffs	in	line	with	the	increase	in	import	gas	prices.		Conflict	in	the	
east	and	the	2014‐2015	economic	crises	exacerbated	fiscal	problems	further	due	to	revenue	loses	
and	 increased	 security	 spending.	 	 In	 addition,	 the	 quasi‐fiscal	 deficit	 of	 Naftogaz	 widened	 due	 to	
increased	 import	 gas	 value	 in	 Hryvnia	 terms	 following	 devaluation	 and	 lower	 sales	 to	 industrial	
consumers	 because	 of	 weak	 economic	 activity.	 Despite	 some	 fiscal	 tightening	 and	 increase	 in	 gas	
tariffs,	 the	 consolidated	 fiscal	 deficit	 including	 Naftogaz	 reached	 10.1	 percent	 of	 GDP	 in	 2014.	
Banking	sector	capitalization	added	1.7	percent	of	GDP	to	these	fiscal	financing	needs.		While	fiscal	
tightening	measures	(nominal	expenditure	restraint	coupled	with	high	inflation)	and	an	increase	in	
gas	tariffs	helped	to	significantly	reduce	the	consolidated	fiscal	deficit	in	2015	and	2016,	the	fiscal	
outlook	remains	challenging.	
	
       Figure	29.	Fiscal	and	quasi‐fiscal	balances             Figure	30.	Public	and	Guaranteed	Debt	(PPG)	
                    (percent	of	GDP)	                             and	Interest	Payments	(percent	of	GDP)	




Source:	World	Bank	staff	estimates	                          Source:	Ministry	of	Finance,	World	Bank	staff	estimates	

	
75.     Public	 debt	 is	 very	 high	 in	 Ukraine	 and	 represents	 a	 major	 source	 of	 vulnerability.		
Public	debt	became	unsustainable	and	was	restructured.		Currency	depreciation,	accumulated	fiscal	
imbalances,	 large	 quasi‐fiscal	 losses	 of	 Naftogaz,	 and	 bank	 recapitalization	 needs	 led	 to	 a	 rapid	
expansion	of	public	and	publicly	guaranteed	debt,	which	exceeded	70	percent	of	GDP	in	2014	(vs	40	
percent	 of	 GDP	 in	 2013).	 	 Debt	 servicing	 became	 unaffordable,	 requiring	 Ukraine	 to	 negotiate	 a	
restructuring	of	its	external	public	debt	with	private	creditors	in	November	2015.		As	a	result,	public	
and	 publicly‐guaranteed	 debt	 stabilized	 at	 86	 percent	 of	 GDP	 at	 end‐2016,	 although	 this	 remains	
large	and	a	major	source	of	vulnerability	for	Ukraine	going	forward.	
	
76.     In	 the	 face	 of	 crisis	 during	 2014‐2015,	 an	 ambitious	 fiscal	 adjustment	 program	 has	
been	 implemented	 to	 reduce	 the	 general	 government	 deficit.	 	 Tight	 controls	 on	 nominal	
spending	across	the	board,	coupled	with	inflation,	as	well	as	energy	tariff	increases,	helped	to	reduce	
the	general	government	deficit,	including	Naftogaz,	to	2	percent	of	GDP	in	2015	and	1.2	percent	in	
2016.		At	the	same	time,	many	of	the	expenditure	controls	implemented	during	the	last	three	years	
have	 been	 done	 in	 crisis	 mode	 (including	 the	 wage	 bill	 in	 social	 sectors,	 including	 health	 and	

                                                      53 
 
education,	and	social	protection)	and	are	not	sustainable	over	the	medium	term.		Furthermore,	the	
revenue	 measures	 that	 have	 contributed	 to	 the	 adjustment	 have	 been	 temporary,	 rather	 than	
durable.	
          	
77.       Despite	 the	 recent	 consolidation,	 the	 fiscal	 outlook	 remains	 challenging,	 and	 a	
systematic	 fiscal	 consolidation	 effort	 linked	 to	 durable	 improvements	 in	 expenditure	
efficiency	 will	 be	 needed.		The	fiscal	framework	actually	projects	an	increase	in	the	consolidated	
fiscal	deficit	to	3.2	percent	of	GDP	in	2017	(because	of	medium	term	fiscal	pressures,	along	with	the	
recent	 cut	 in	 the	 social	 security	 contribution	 rate	 and	 the	 increase	 in	 the	 minimum	 wage).	 The	
consolidated	deficit	is	projected	to	decline	to	about	2	percent	by	2020	if	structural	reforms	to	manage	
the	medium	term	fiscal	pressures	move	forward.	Meeting	this	deficit	target	will	prove	challenging	
because	 of	 the	 weak	 growth	 outlook	 and	 the	 challenging	 nature	 of	 the	 necessary	 reforms.	 A	
systematic	fiscal	consolidation	strategy	based	on	durable	improved	in	tax	revenues	and	increased	
efficiency	of	expenditures	will	be	particularly	important	to	reduce	public	debt.	
	
78.       Ukraine	is	subject	to	considerable	fiscal	risks	arising	from	a	wide	range	of	quasi‐fiscal	
liabilities.		The	largest	quasi‐fiscal	liabilities	arise	from	subsidies	to	the	energy	sector,	subsidies	to	
other	 state	 owned	 enterprises	 (SOEs),	 and	 financing	 for	 bank	 recapitalization	 and	 the	 deposit	
guarantee	fund	(DGF).		In	2015,	while	the	Naftogaz	deficit	had	been	reduced	to	0.9	percent	to	GDP,	
subsidies	 to	 all	 other	 SOEs	 amounted	 to	 roughly	 2	 percent	 of	 GDP,	 while	 financing	 for	 bank	
recapitalization	and	the	DGF	amounted	to	2.4	percent	of	GDP.		The	finances	of	SOEs,	including	budget	
subsidies,	are	not	transparent	and	their	fiscal	risks,	as	well	as	the	efficiency	of	their	investments,	are	
not	under	consistent	government	supervision.	For	example,	the	Naftogaz	deficit	is	not	disclosed	in	
its	financial	reports,	which	only	include	loss	incurred	by	the	company.		Beyond	these	quasi	fiscal	risks	
associated	with	SOEs	and	the	financial	sector,	Pension	Fund	expenditures	(about	a	third	of	general	
government	expenditures	in	2015)	use	their	own	charts	of	account,	with	their	reports	neither	linked	
to	public	finance	reporting	nor	subject	to	Parliament	scrutiny.		On	the	whole,	quasi‐fiscal	risks	are	
considerable	and	not	adequately	managed.		Improving	transparency	and	predictability	of	quasi	fiscal	
liabilities	is	critical	to	reducing	fiscal	vulnerabilities	in	Ukraine.	
	

                                                 Tax	reform	

79.      Tax	 reform	 is	 an	 important	 part	 of	 addressing	 fiscal	 vulnerabilities	 and	
complementary	 challenges	 going	 forward.	 	 Despite	 recent	 reforms,	 the	 current	 system	 is	 still	
complex,	inequitable,	and	eroded	by	exemptions.		The	large	number	of	exemptions	and	loopholes	for	
special	 interests	 results	 in	 a	 narrow	 tax	 base	 and	 a	 high	 effective	 tax	 burden	 on	 the	 law‐abiding	
citizens	and	companies.	Second,	the	tax	administration	is	large,	inefficient	and	widely	perceived	to	
be	 corrupt.	 Third,	 international	 taxation	 and	 related	 profit	 shifting	 and	 tax	 base	 erosion	 are	
particularly	 weak	 areas	 for	 Ukraine.	 All	 three	 of	 these	 problems	 undermine	 Ukraine’s	
competitiveness	 and	 a	 level	 playing	 field	 for	 firms,	 encourage	 widespread	 informal	 economic	
activities,	and	stunt	the	country’s	growth	prospects.	
	



                                                       54 
 
80.      The	 cut	 in	 the	 payroll	 tax	 rate	 in	 2016	 undermines	 medium	 term	 fiscal	 stability	 and	
raises	 the	 urgency	 of	 broader	 tax	 reform.	 	Since	January	 2016,	the	social	security	contribution	
(SSC)	rate	was	cut	from	40	percent	to	22	percent	through	amendments	to	the	Tax	Code	approved	by	
Parliament.	 	 Overall,	 the	 motivation	 to	 reform	 the	 Tax	 Code	 was	 well	 placed,	 as	 the	 tax	 regime	
undermined	the	country’s	competitiveness	and	created	strong	incentives	to	under‐report	wages	and	
employment.		The	cut	in	the	SSC	rate	brought	the	total	tax	on	labor	income	in	Ukraine	down	from	56	
percent	to	38	percent,	which	is	in	line	with	the	average	for	European	countries.	The	reduction	of	SSC	
rate	 was	 also	 aimed	 at	 shrinking	 the	 informal	 economy	 and	 improving	 compliance.	 However,	 the	
necessary	complementary	measures	to	strengthen	tax	administration	have	not	yet	been	addressed.		
As	a	result,	the	estimated	short	term	revenue	losses	were	about	4	percent	of	GDP.		This	raises	the	
urgency	of	reforms	to	broaden	the	tax	base,	strengthen	tax	administration,	and	rationalize	current	
expenditures.	
	
                         Table	7:	Tax	Expenditures	from	VAT	exemptions	(percent	of	GDP)	
 		                                   2011	                      2012                    2013                    2014
 Agriculture	                         1.29	                      1.01                    1.01                    1.21	
 Printing	                            0.06	                      0.07                    0.06                    0.04	
 Pharmaceutical	                       0.2	                      0.22                    0.21                    0.07	
Source:	State	Statistics	Committee,	Tax	Administration	
	
      Figure	31:	Firms	expected	to	pay	bribes to	tax	                             Figure	32:	Taxpayers	per	Staff:
                  officials,	percent,	2013	                                          Ukraine	vs	Comparators	
                                                                                                                     882
          50




                                                                                                         472   481
                                                    22.3
                                                                                                   351
                                                                                       262   285
                                             10.8
                  6
                        2     2.5                                                 73
                                      0                    0.2               62




    Source:	World	Bank	Enterprise	Survey.	                             Source:	IOTA	
	
81.     Ukraine’s	tax	base	has	been	eroded	by	exemptions,	tailor‐made	waivers,	and	loopholes	
that	 have	 enabled	 special	 interests	 to	 engage	 in	 tax	 avoidance	 and	 tax	 evasion.	In	particular,	
Ukraine	is	prone	to	considerable	profit	shifting	and	tax	base	erosion	arising	from	its	international	
taxation	 arrangements.	 	 The	 Cyprus	 treaty	 is	 notable	 in	 this	 regard	 as	 Cyprus	 maintains	 a	 very	
preferential	status	even	after	the	2012	renegotiation	of	the	treaty,	accounting	for	over	30	percent	of	
FDI	into	Ukraine	and	90	percent	out	of	Ukraine.		Removal	of	these	exemptions,	tailor‐made	waivers	
and	lucrative	loopholes	would	not	only	broaden	the	tax	base	and	increase	revenue	collection,	it	will	
also	help	promote	a	level‐playing	field	for	the	private	sector.	This	should	be	a	top	priority	for	any	tax	
reform	in	Ukraine.	In	addition,	VAT	has	been	subject	to	several	exemptions,	with	major	ones	being	
agriculture,	 publishing	 and	 pharmaceuticals.	 At	 present,	 the	 exemption	 for	 agriculture—which	


                                                                 55 
 
previously	enabled	agriculture	producers	to	keep	VAT	for	reinvesting	in	their	fixed	assets—has	been	
removed.	 Furthermore,	 printing	 services	 in	 the	 publishing	 sector	 are	 exempt	 from	 VAT.		
Pharmaceutical	products	and	medical	equipment	were	not	subject	to	VAT	before	2014	and	then	a	
reduced	 rate	 of	 7	 percent	 was	 imposed.	 	 As	 a	 result,	 in	 2013,	 actual	 VAT	 collection	 was	 only	 44	
percent	of	potential	VAT	collections	‐	the	VAT	revenues	that	would	be	generated	if	the	statutory	rate	
were	applied	to	all	tax	payers.	
	
82.      Second,	 tax	 administration	 is	 large,	 inefficient,	 and	 widely	 perceived	 to	 be	 corrupt.	In	
Ukraine,	over	54,000	staff	work	in	the	tax	administration	agencies	–	that	is	one	tax	administration	
official	for	every	74	tax	payers,	compared	to	882	in	Sweden,	481	in	Poland,	351	in	Slovakia,	262	in	
Germany,	and	146	in	Bulgaria.	While	SFS	staff	was	reduced	to	41,178	full	time	equivalents	in	2016,	
inefficient	tax	administration	continues	to	result	in	a	high	cost	of	compliance.		In	Ukraine,	firms	spend	
350	hours	a	year	filing,	preparing	and	paying	taxes.		This	compares	with	an	average	of	247	hours	for	
Central	Asia	and	Eastern	Europe,	and	an	even	lower	average	of	173	hours	for	EU	and	EFTA	countries.		
The	revenues	lost	from	compliance	gap	are	sizeable,	with	the	estimated	VAT	compliance	gap	for	2014	
at	over	5	percent	of	GDP.		Tax	administration	reform	should	therefore	be	part	and	parcel	of	any	tax	
reform	 proposal	 in	 Ukraine.	 Tax	 administration	 in	 Ukraine	 is	 also	 associated	 with	 perceived	 high	
levels	of	corruption.	According	to	the	latest	Business	Enterprise	Survey,	2013	released	in	May	2014,	
15	percent	firms	stated	that	bribery	is	frequent	in	dealing	with	taxes,	over	50	percent	stated	they	
were	 expected	 to	 give	 gifts	 in	 meetings	 with	 tax	 inspectors,	 while	 only	 19	 percent	 considered	
corruption	to	not	be	not	a	problem.		In	addition,	limited	use	of	risk	management	in	tax	administration	
results	in	poor	collection	effort.	The	bulk	of	the	State	Fiscal	Service	(SFS)	audit	coverage	is	achieved	
through	unplanned	audits,	which	are	triggered	by	criteria	within	the	law.		Planned	audits,	for	which	
companies	are	selected	based	on	risk	profiling,	yield	much	better	results.	The	2015	data	shows	that	
planned	audit	on	average	yielded	7	times	better	results	than	unplanned.	
	
                                                  Pensions	

83.      The	 pensions	 system	 in	 Ukraine	 represents	 a	 major	 fiscal	 vulnerability.	 Pension	
expenditures	amounted	to	13.4	percent	of	GDP	or	31	percent	of	total	public	expenditures	in	2015.		
While	 this	 is	 down	 from	 17	 percent	 of	 GDP	 in	 2013,	 the	 deficit	 of	 the	 pension	 system	 remains	
significant.		Payroll	taxes	amounted	to	9.6	percent	of	GDP	in	2015,	and	fiscal	transfers	to	the	pensions	
system	constituted	3.8	percent	of	GDP.	Following	the	cut	in	the	social	contribution	rate,	payroll	taxes	
declined	 to	 5.8	 percent	 of	 GDP	 in	 2016,	 and	 fiscal	 transfers	 to	 the	 pension	 fund	 increased	 to	 6.5	
percent	 of	 GDP.	 This	 represents	 a	 major	 fiscal	 burden	 for	 Ukraine,	 undermines	 macroeconomic	
stability,	and	crowds	out	resources	for	public	investment	and	other	critical	expenditures.	As	a	result	
of	 large	 current	 expenditure	 obligations,	 public	 investment	 has	 been	 chronically	 low	 in	 Ukraine,	
averaging	only	2.3	percent	of	GDP,	which	undermines	growth	prospects.	
	
84.      Fiscal	 vulnerabilities	 from	 pensions	 have	 been	 exacerbated	 by	 the	 recent	 cut	 in	 the	
social	contribution	rate,	which	raises	the	urgency	of	pension	reform.	To	stimulate	participation	
in	the	formal	pension	system,	the	social	contribution	(SSC)	rate	was	reduced	from	40	to	22	percent	
effective	 2016.	 	 The	 authorities	 anticipated	 that	 cutting	 the	 SSC	 rate	 would	 shrink	 the	 informal	
economy	and	improve	compliance.	However,	the	short‐term	revenue	losses	were	about	4	percent	of	

                                                       56 
 
GDP,	which	has	created	a	larger	long	term	deficit	in	the	pension	system	and	raised	the	urgency	of	
pension	reform,	along	with	measures	to	broaden	the	tax	base	and	strengthen	tax	administration.	
	
                          Figure	33.	                                                   Figure	34.	
          Fiscal	burden	from	Pension	Fund	(%	GDP)		                               Tax	revenue	(%	of	GDP)	




Source: IMF WEO, World bank estimates                       Source: IMF WEO, World Bank estimates

	
85.       Demographic	 pressures	 going	 forward	 are	 considerable.	The	country	now	has	around	
12.3	 million	 pension	 beneficiaries	 and	 about	 14	 million	 contributors.	 Demographic	 projections	
indicate	 that	 going	 forward,	 the	 cohorts	 entering	 retirement	 will	 be	 considerably	 larger	 than	 the	
young	cohorts	entering	the	labor	 market.	As	 a	result,	system	 dependency	 would	increase,	further	
burdening	the	system.		Estimates	indicate	that	in	20‐25	years,	the	ratio	of	contributors	to	pensioners	
will	fall	to	two	thirds.	
	
86.       The	 fiscal	 burden	 is	 amplified	 by	 a	 host	 of	 categorical	 benefits	 and	 the	 minimum	
subsistence	 top‐up,	 which	 also	 undermine	 incentives	 to	 contribute.	 The	structure	of	pension	
expenditures	are	heavily	influenced	by	the	costs	of	various	categorical	benefits,	privileges,	and	the	
minimum	 subsistence	 top‐up,	 which	 jointly	 constitute	 over	 one‐third	 of	 the	 total	 pension	
expenditures.	 This	 translates	 into	 a	 heavy	 fiscal	 burden	 and	 creates	 non‐transparent	 subsidies	
between	different	programs	administered	by	the	Pension	Fund,	leading	to	erosion	of	incentives	to	
participate	in	the	pension	system.	
          	
87.       The	system	is	on	a	path	of	converting	from	an	earnings‐related	benefit	to	a	de‐facto	flat	
benefit	 program,	 undermining	 incentives	 to	 contribute.	 The	 government	 tops	 any	 pension	
benefit	 up	 to	 the	 subsistence	 minimum	 level,	 irrespective	 of	 the	 degree	 of	 the	 individual’s	
participation	 in	 the	 system.	 This	 undermines	 the	 fundamental	 premise	 of	 a	 contributory	 pension	
program,	which	is	to	grant	benefits	proportional	to	past	wages	and	length	of	service.	Furthermore,	
benefit	indexation	remains	complex	and	ad‐hoc,	eating	up	considerable	value	of	individual	benefits	
over	time	and	producing	a	benefit	structure	that	is	non‐transparent	and	unmanageable.	
          	
88.       The	adequacy	of	pension	benefits	is	undermined	by	the	current	policy	of	indexing	only	
the	 minimum	 pension	 amount	 at	 or	 below	 inflation.	 Indexation	 to	 inflation	 or	 below	 was	
intended	to	contain	pension	expenditure	pressures,	but	the	large	proportion	of	beneficiaries	under	

                                                      57 
 
the	subsistence	minimum	implies	that	costs	have	not	been	reduced	much.	Furthermore,	under	such	
scenario,	the	replacement	rates	for	existing	benefits	will	fall	to	around	20	percent	of	the	average	wage	
in	the	long	run.	This	will	in	turn	exert	pressures	on	the	political	system	to	address	social	inequities.	
         	
89.      Initiatives	 to	 reform	 pensions	 have	 been	 ad	 hoc	 to	 date.	 	 In	 2015,	 the	 authorities	
introduced	some	saving	measures	by	cutting	benefits	of	working	retirees	and	by	unifying	provisions	
for	 eligibility	 and	 pension	 benefit	 calculations	 for	 various	 categories.	 The	 indexation	 of	 pension	
benefits	was	also	temporarily	suspended.	A	draft	pension	bill	also	proposed	a	mandatory	defined	
contribution	component,	which	could	slightly	improve	individual	benefits	but	only	in	the	very	long	
run,	given	the	time	needed	to	accumulate	savings.	The	fundamental	challenges	of	the	current	pension	
program,	however,	remained	unaddressed.	
         	
90.      A	 comprehensive	 strategy	 and	 vision,	 supported	 by	 assessments	 of	 fiscal	 costs	 and	
adequacy	of	resulting	benefits,	are	needed	as	part	of	considering	reform	options.	A	number	of	
reform	 options	 are	 available	 to	 both	 improve	 financial	 sustainability	 of	 the	 pension	 system	 and	
enhance	its	adequacy	and	transparency.		Parametric	options	for	improving	financial	sustainability	of	
pensions	include:	(i)	Gradually	increasing	the	retirement	age	for	both	men	and	women	or	creating	a	
retirement	age	corridor	between	a	lower	and	regular	level	of	benefits;	(ii)	Increasing	the	minimum	
service	required	for	normal	retirement;	(iii)	Increasing	the	eligibility	age	for	social	pension	from	63	
to	65	years,	which	will	initially	affect	a	small	number	of	citizens	but	will	produce	considerable	savings	
over	time	as	the	share	of	individuals	ineligible	for	the	old	age	pension	will	steadily	increase	over	the	
next	decade;	(iv)	Including	all	categorical	and	compensatory	payments,	and	the	earnings	of	working	
pensioners,	in	the	calculation	of	the	subsistence	top‐up;	and	(v)	Adopting	a	moratorium	on	reducing	
statutory	retirement	age	any	special	categories	or	professions,	unless	properly	funded.	
         	
91.      Beyond	the	parametric	reforms	under	consideration,	restructuring	the	current	benefit	
package	 can	 help	 improve	 both	 sustainability	 and	 adequacy,	 as	 well	 as	 enhancing	
transparency	 of	 the	 pensions	 system.	 A	 key	 option	 in	 this	 regard	 would	 be	 to	 restructure	 the	
current	benefit	package	into	either	two	separate	elements,	including	a	basic	income	component	that	
is	 universal	 and	 flat	 for	 all	 retiring	 individuals,	 funded	 from	 the	 general	 budget,	 as	 a	 new	 social	
contract	between	the	state	and	citizens;	and	an	earnings‐related	insurance	component	funded	from	
contribution	 revenues.	 	 Another	 key	 element	 would	 be	 to	 introduce	 clear	 and	 equitable	 rules	 for	
indexation	of	individual	pension	benefits.	It	is	important	to	institute	rules	that	preserve	the	benefit	
value	and	that	are	simple	to	understand	and	fiscally	affordable.	Indexation	formula	could	be	some	
combination	of	price	inflation	and	the	wage	growth,	which	is	consistent	with	both	the	historic	trend	
in	 Ukraine	 and	 international	 precedents.	 The	 indexation	 should	 be	 clearly	 defined	 for	 basic,	
insurance,	and	poverty	components.		Finally,	when	conditions	are	right	for	a	Defined	Contribution	
component,	it	could	be	introduced	as	a	supplementary	mechanism.	It	could	operate	on	a	voluntary	
basis	funded	by	employee	contributions	and	would	help	fund	early	retirement	and/or	higher	future	
benefits.	However,	important	preparatory	work	would	be	required,	so	this	should	component	should	
not	be	rushed.	
	
	


                                                        58 
 
                                     Financial	Sector	Strengthening	

92.      The	 financial	 sector	 has	 been	 under	 severe	 stress	 since	 2014,	 as	 a	 result	 of	 the	
economic	 shocks	 and	 long	 standing	 structural	 bottlenecks,	 which	 has	 amplified	
macroeconomic	 instability.	 	 Bank	 liquidity	 and	 asset	 quality	 were	 hit	 hard	 by	 the	 precipitous	
depreciation	of	the	Hryvnya	(by	65	percent	since	the	start	of	2014),	the	large	contraction	in	GDP	(16	
percent	over	two	years),	and	the	security	crisis.		This	stress	was	magnified	by	accumulated	risks	from	
deep‐rooted	structural	problems	persisting	for	over	20	years,	including	widespread	related	lending,	
substantial	 banking	 supervision	 weaknesses,	 inefficiencies	 in	 financial	 markets,	 and	 an	
underdeveloped	 financial	 infrastructure.	 All	 this	 triggered	 an	 outflow	 of	 deposits	 and	 decline	 in	
capital	 adequacy	 of	 banks.	 The	 stress	 in	 the	 financial	 sector	 has	 in	 turn	 reinforced	 the	 economic	
downturn	and	macroeconomic	vulnerabilities.	
		
Reforms	to	safeguard	financial	sector	stability	
	
93.      The	authorities	have	responded	proactively	to	put	in	place	a	framework	to	resolve	and	
recapitalize	 banks	 and	 strengthen	 supervision,	 which	 is	 helping	 to	 stabilize	 confidence.		The	
authorities’	banking	sector	reform	program	is	focused	on	three	areas:	(i)	strengthening	the	financial	
and	operational	capacity	of	the	Deposit	Guarantee	Fund	(DGF);	(ii)	ensuring	that	the	largest	banks	
are	adequately	capitalized;	and	(iii)	improving	regulation	and	supervision	of	the	banking	system.		As	
a	result,	an	unprecedented	cleanup	of	weak	and	nontransparent	banks	has	been	underway.		A	total	
of	 85	 banks	 (including	 several	 large	 and	 medium‐sized	 banks)	 out	 of	 180	 banks	 were	 declared	
insolvent	and	sent	for	resolution	to	the	DGF.	
	
                         Table	8.	Key	characteristics	of	the	banking	sector	
                                                       March	2016 End	2015 End	2014	 End	2013

 Banking	sector	assets	to	GDP	(%)	                              ‐           64.08         85.19	        88.18
 Banking	sector	assets	(UAH	million)                        1,288           1,220         1,316	        1,278
 			o/w	domestic	private	banks	(%)	                          35.6            36.2          48.4	         56.2
 			o/w	domestic	public	banks	(%)	                           30.1            28.1          21.8	         18.2
 			o/w	foreign	banks	(%)	                                   34.3            35.7          29.8	         25.6
 Top	5	banks	asset	concentration	ratio	(%)                     56              55            43	           40
 Number	of	banks	                                             109             117           163	          180
 			o/w	domestic	private	banks	                                78              86           131	          150
 			o/w	domestic	public	banks	                                  6                6            8	             8
 			o/w	foreign	banks	                                         25              25            24	           22
Source:	NBU	website	
         	
94.      Bank	 restructuring	 and	 recapitalization	 plans	 have	 been	 adopted	 following	 asset	
quality	 reviews.	The	authorities	have	conducted	asset	quality	and	related	party	exposure	reviews	
in	 2014	 and	 2015	 which	 revealed	 significant	 capital	 shortfall	 in	 the	 largest	 banks	 that	 cover	 85	
percent	of	the	banking	system.	Following	the	diagnostic,	the	National	Bank	of	Ukraine	(NBU)	adopted	
recapitalization	and	restructuring	plans	for	affected	banks,	with	three	year	plans	adopted	to	bring	
capital	 requirements	 and	 the	 level	 of	 related	 party	 exposures	 in	 line	 with	 NBU’s	 prudential	


                                                      59 
 
regulations.		In	most	instances	where	owners	were	unable	to	bring	in	the	necessary	capital,	banks	
were	resolved.	While	monitoring	the	implementation	of	adopted	recapitalization	and	restructuring	
plans,	NBU	intends	to	complete	the	AQR	and	related	party	exposure	review	for	the	rest	of	the	banking	
system	in	 2017	as	well.	In	December	2016,	the	Cabinet	of	Ministers	approved	a	decision	on	state	
participation	in	the	recapitalization	of	PrivatBank,	the	largest	 and	systemic	bank	in	Ukraine,	with	
transfer	of	full	ownership	to	the	state.	This	became	necessary	after	the	failure	of	the	former	owners	
to	implement	recapitalization	plans,	and	is	an	important	part	of	the	authorities’	broader	policy	to	
safeguard	 financial	 sector	 stability.	 Going	 forward,	 professional	 management	 and	 an	 independent	
supervisory	board	to	effectively	restructure	the	Bank	will	be	important.	
	
95.      The	NBU	has	undertaken	significant	steps	to	improve	regulation	and	supervision	of	the	
banking	 sector,	 though	 further	 important	 reforms	 are	 underway.	 	 The	 measures	 adopted	
include	improving	the	process	for	identifying	problem	banks;	bolstering	the	operational	capacity	of	
the	 banking	 supervision	 and	 licensing;	 enhancing	 supervisory	 and	 regulatory	 requirements	 for	
systemic	 banks;	 and	 creating	 the	 Financial	 Stability	 Council	 to	 improve	 coordination	 among	
regulators,	ensure	early	identification,	and	minimize	risks.		A	key	focus	has	been	to	make	progress	in	
addressing	 high	 levels	 of	 related‐party	 lending	 in	 the	 system.	 	 To	 this	 end,	 the	 banking	 law	 and	
associated	 regulations	 have	 been	 amended	 to	 broaden	 the	 definition	 of	 bank	 related	 parties	 and	
increased	accountability	for	violations,	including	criminal	charges	in	cases	where	a	bank	was	brought	
to	insolvency	by	unlawful	actions	of	bank	managers	and	owners.		These	actions	are	expected	to	create	
a	level	playing	field	for	banks	with	a	good	governance	and	transparent	ownership	structure,	which	
do	 real	 lending	 to	 the	 economy.	 Albeit	 significant	 progress	 was	 achieved	 so	 far,	 further	 essential	
reforms	are	requires	to	bring	bank	regulatory	and	supervisory	framework	in	line	with	Basel	Core	
Principles	and	EU	directives.	
	
96.      Reforms	 to	 stabilize	 the	 financial	 sector	 help	 mitigate	 vulnerability	 of	 the	 poor	 to	 the	
crisis	and	can	support	economic	recovery.		Global	experience	has	shown	that	financial	crises	lead	
to	an	increase	in	poverty.		In	Ukraine,	strengthening	the	Deposit	Guarantee	Fund’s	institutional	and	
financial	 capacity	 to	 ensure	 continuous	 payout	 of	 insured	 deposits	 serves	 as	 a	 safeguard	 against	
higher	poverty	from	loss	of	vital	savings	by	the	vulnerable	population,	with	close	to	30	percent	of	
insured	deposits	transferred	to	the	DGF.		Reforms	to	recapitalize	and	clean	the	system	of	non‐viable	
banks	can	also	support	economic	recovery	by	forcing	bank	owners	to	bring	capital	back	to	the	system.	
	
97.      The	authorities	will	need	to	further	enhance	the	bank	resolution	framework,	complete	
restructuring	 of	 the	 banking	 system,	 and	 continue	 to	 strengthen	 supervision.	 	 It	 will	 be	
important	to	invest	in	the	institutional	capacities	of	DGF	and	effectively	utilize	new	bank	resolution	
powers	in	line	with	good	international	standards.		Significant	progress	was	made	by	transforming	
DGF	into	a	bank	resolution	agency	in	2012	and	streamlining	deposits	payout	and	resolution	functions	
in	2014‐15	to	give	DGF	more	legal	powers,	enhance	resolution	tools,	and	expedite	time	of	payouts	to	
insured	depositors.		However,	additional	work	is	needed	to	further	strengthen	DGF	as	an	institution	
and	 bring	 the	 bank	 resolution	 and	 deposit	 insurance	 framework	 in	 line	 with	 good	 international	
practice	and	EU	Directives.	
	


                                                      60 
 
Facilitating	credit	growth	through	NPL	resolution,	corporate	governance	reforms	and	enhanced	access	
to	finance	
	
98.      In	addition	to	continuing	to	safeguard	financial	sector	stability,	reforms	to	facilitate	a	
resumption	 of	 credit	 growth	 will	 be	 important.	 	 While	 the	 banking	 sector	 has	 pretty	 much	
stabilized,	credit	growth	has	not	resumed.		Furthermore,	the	cost	of	capital	remains	elevated.		As	the	
banking	sector	continues	to	de‐leverage	and	the	government	attracts	a	greater	share	of	local	currency	
savings	to	cover	fiscal	needs,	the	private	sector	continues	to	suffer	from	limited	access	to	finance.	
Households	and	SMEs	have	restrictive	access	to	credit.	Restoring	the	ability	of	the	banking	sector	to	
resume	credit	growth	will	help	support	economic	recovery.		This	will	require	reforms	to	reduce	non‐
performing	loans	and	improve	governance	specifically	of	state	owned	banks.	
	
99.      An	 effective	 NPL	 resolution	 framework	 will	 be	 important.	 	 The	 crisis	 has	 resulted	 in	
higher	non‐performing	loans	(NPLs).		Officially	reported	NPLs	increased	15	percentage	points	over	
2014‐2015	to	31	percent	at	end‐September	20168,	this	share	could	continue	to	increase	(due	to	the	
time	needed	for	deteriorating	asset	quality	to	be	fully	reflected	in	balance	sheets).		Furthermore,	the	
real	level	of	NPLs	(using	a	broader	definition)	may	be	higher.		Since	higher	NPLs	lead	banks	to	become	
more	conservative	in	lending,	an	effective	NPL	resolution	framework	is	needed	to	facilitate	NPL	work	
out,	sale,	and	transfer,	including	a	multi	creditor	out	of	court	debt	restructuring	facility.		This	is	also	
crucial	 for	 DGF	 where	 the	 failure	 of	 85	 banks	 has	 resulted	 in	 a	 significant	 volume	 of	 asset	
accumulation	to	be	sold	or	worked‐out	in	the	process	of	bank	liquidation.		The	institutional	capacity	
of	the	DGF	to	work	with	these	assets	has	been	significantly	enhanced	in	2015	and	needs	to	lead	to	
increased	asset	recoveries	via	operationalizing	the	Consolidated	Office	for	asset	management	and	
sales.	
	
100. Governance	 of	 state	 owned	 banks	 needs	 profound	 reform.	 State‐owned	 banks	 (SOBs)	
represent	 25	 percent	 of	 deposits.	 	 The	 AQR	 has	 revealed	 significant	 weakness	 in	 the	 governance	
structure	 of	 the	 core	 SOBs	 and	 highlighted	 a	 need	 for	 comprehensive	 reform.	 Currently	 the	
authorities	 possess	 significant	 influence	 over	 decision	 making	 in	 those	 banks	 which	 historically	
resulted	 in	 poor	 credit	 quality	 and	 significant	 costs	 for	 the	 government.	 The	 authorities	 should	
introduce	 independent	 governance	 structures	 and	 enhance	 the	 risk	 management	 practices	 to	
prevent	use	of	these	banks	to	fund	political	interests	using	the	savings	of	the	population.	Currently	
the	second	and	third	largest	banks	in	the	country	are	state	owned	and	improving	their	governance	
and	 business‐models	 making	 them	 self‐sustainable	 is	 essential	 for	 possible	 privatization	 in	 the	
future,	 while	 the	 state’s	 exit	 from	 other	 non‐core	 banks	 would	 give	 a	 clear	 message	 that	 the	
government	is	committed	to	enhancing	competition	in	the	market.	
         	
101. Post	 crisis	 growth	 and	 access	 to	 finance	 oriented	 developmental	 policies	 are	 needed.	
After	the	stabilization	of	the	banking	system	following	the	2014‐2015	crisis,	Ukrainian	authorities,	
besides	 implementing	 policies	 aimed	 at	 general	 improvement	 of	 financial	 setor	 policies,	 will	 also	
have	to	turn	their	attention	to	policies	stimulating	long‐term	developmental	credit	growth	and	access	
                                                            
8	System‐average	IFRS	based	NPLs	ratio,	as	estimated	by	the	rating	agencies,	stood	at	about	44	percent	in	

end‐2015	

                                                               61 
 
to	 finance,	 especially	 for	 SMEs	 and	 exporters,	 who	 are	 now	 adjusting	 to	 the	 fundamental	
reorientation	 of	 terms	 of	 trade	 for	 Ukraine	 from	 Eastern	 to	 EU	 markets	 driven	 by	 EU‐Ukraine	
Association	Agreement.			
	
Enhancing	the	diversification	of	the	financial	sector	and	improving	financial	infrastructure	
	
102. Developing	 non‐bank	 financial	 institutions	 (NBFIs)	 will	 help	 diversify	 the	 financial	
sector	and	enhance	access	to	finance	in	the	country.	Currently	the	NBFI	sector	is	underdeveloped	
with	a	poor	regulatory	framework	and	an	unjustified	large	number	of	weak	institutions	operating	in	
different	 markets.	 The	 unification	 of	 supervisory	 functions	 in	 the	 country	 is	 a	 vital	 first	 step	 to	
enhance	the	quality	of	sectoral	supervision,	mitigate	the	possible	regulatory	arbitrage	and	clean‐up	
the	system	from	non‐viable	institutions.	This	would	create	a	level	playing	field	for	healthy	NBFIs	and	
further	foster	competition	and	access	to	alternative	financial	instruments	in	the	market.	
         	
103. Developing	effective	financial	market	infrastructure	in	Ukraine	can	help.	Although	the	
private	credit	reporting	market	is	well	developed,	it	is	not	well	regulated	and	is	quite	fragmented	in	
terms	of	information	coverage.	Improved	supervision	and	access	to	other	debt	information	sources	
could	effectively	improve	the	credit	reporting	framework	and	thus	improve	credit	decision	making	
by	 the	 banks.	 The	 development	 of	 the	 payment	 systems	 infrastructure	 and	 secured	 transaction	
framework	 are	 other	 strategic	 aspects	 of	 financial	 infrastructure	 for	 the	 authorities	 to	 consider.	
Capital	 and	 money	 markets	 development	 in	 the	 country	 will	 depend	 on	 quality	 financial	
infrastructure	as	well.	
	
	
	                                	




                                                       62 
 
VII.    Pathway	2:	Private	Sector	Productivity	
	
104. Weak	 private	 sector	 productivity	 growth	 has	 been	 at	 the	 heart	 of	 the	 unsustainable	
model	 of	 growth	 and	 poverty	 reduction	 in	 Ukraine.		Productivity	growth	has	averaged	a	paltry	
1.2	 percent	 per	 year	 over	 the	 last	 fifteen	 years.	 	 Even	 in	 the	 pre‐crisis	 period,	 after	 a	 spurt	 in	
productivity	 during	 2000‐07,	 productivity	 essentially	 stagnated	 during	 2008‐13,	 leading	 to	
stagnation	in	economic	growth.		The	sharp	economic	downturn	of	2014‐2015	has	exacerbated	these	
trends	 by	 undercutting	 private	 sector	 confidence.	 	 Thus,	 in	 order	 to	 achieve	 sustained	 economic	
recovery	and	growth,	it	will	be	important	to	unlock	productivity	and	confidence	of	the	private	sector.		
This	will	require	conditions	to	support	more	dynamic	entry	of	more	productive	firms	and	exit	of	less	
productive	firms,	as	well	as	productivity	improvements	within	firms.		It	will	also	require	diversifying	
into	new	products	and	markets	for	Ukraine’s	exports.		This	means	that	 existing	subsectors	within	
manufacturing,	services	and	agriculture	must	modernize	and	raise	productivity‐levels.	In	addition,	
new	subsectors	with	higher	productivity	levels	would	need	to	be	added	to	each	sector.		Labor	will	
need	to	increasingly	move	from	lower	productivity	jobs	to	higher	productivity	ones.	
	
105. Improving	 productivity	 is	 all	 the	 more	 important	 in	 an	 environment	 with	 a	 declining	
working	 age	 population	 and	 also	 helps	 support	 improved	 employment	 outcomes.	 Raising	
incomes	 in	 Ukraine	 will	 require	 higher	 productivity	 growth	 to	 offset	 the	 fall	 in	 labor‐force.		
Furthermore,	 improved	 employment	 outcomes	 are	 also	 important	 in	 creating	 a	 more	 sustainable	
model	 of	 poverty	 reduction.	 	 Unemployment	 stands	 at	 about	 9.5	 percent	 though	 hidden	
unemployment	 is	 larger	 given	 that	 informal	 workers	 comprise	 a	 significant	 portion	 of	 total	
employment.		Many	of	the	employed	are	thus	in	low‐productivity	and	low‐wage	jobs.		Measures	to	
improve	 private	 sector	 productivity	 can	 help	 improve	 employment	 outcomes	 by	 moving	 workers	
from	lower	productivity	to	high	productivity	jobs.	
          	
106. Ukraine	would	need	to	generate	a	shift	in	its	export	and	production	structure	into	new	
products	and	markets.		Productivity	growth	has	often	been	associated	with	an	expansion	of	exports	
into	 higher‐value	 skill‐intensive	 goods	 and	 services.	 	 While	 three‐fifths	 of	 Ukraine’s	 current	
merchandise	exports	comprise	of	minerals,	metals	and	agriculture,	a	greater	share	of	exports	going	
forward	 can	 consist	 of	 highly	 differentiated,	 higher‐value,	 and	 higher‐productivity	 metal	 and	
agricultural	products.		The	same	can	be	true	of	current	machinery	and	service	exports.		While	rapidly	
expanding	 and	 shifting	 the	 composition	 of	 exports	 can	 be	 challenging,	 it	 has	 been	 done	 by	 other	
countries	in	the	region.		Open	access	to	the	markets	of	European	Union	(EU)	countries	is	a	great	start	
but	 a	 lot	 more	 will	 have	 to	 be	 done	 behind	 the	 border	 at	 home	 to	 make	 domestic	 markets	 more	
competitive	and	increase	export	competitiveness.	
          	
107. Boosting	 private	 sector	 productivity	 will	 require	 strengthening	 infrastructure	
investment,	 creating	 a	 level	 playing	 field	 in	 the	 private	 sector,	 reforming	 land	 markets,	 and	
tapping	 trade	 opportunities.		Ukraine	has	made	important	progress	in	streamlining	its	business	
environment	in	recent	years,	with	its	Doing	Business	ranking	improving	from	140th	in	2013	to	84th	
in	 2016.	 	 However,	 deeper	 structural	 bottlenecks	 remain	 that	 have,	 for	 an	 extended	 period,	
undermined	 the	 emergence	 of	 a	 more	 productive	 private	 sector	 and	 a	 more	 sophisticated	 export	

                                                        63 
 
structure.		These	bottlenecks	include	weak	infrastructure,	a	highly	concentrated	and	anticompetitive	
market	structure,	and	weak	land	management.		Improving	infrastructure	will	require	creating	fiscal	
space	 for	 public	 investment	 and	 strengthening	 public	 investment	 management,	 while	 improving	
governance	and	transparency	in	the	important	energy	and	transport	sectors.		Creating	a	level	playing	
field	 for	 the	 private	 sector	 will	 require	 further	 deregulation,	 more	 effective	 implementation	 of	
competition	legislation,	and	improving	corporate	governance	of	ineffective	state	owned	enterprises.		
Perhaps	 most	 critical	 for	 the	 private	 sector	 is	 to	 reform	 land	 markets.	 	 Weak	 land	 governance	
seriously	undermines	investment	and	productivity	in	the	high‐potential	agriculture	sector,	as	well	as	
other	sectors.		Reforming	land	markets	will	require	improving	state	land	management	through	a	new	
legal	framework,	while	gradually	opening	sales	for	private	agricultural	land	ensuring	transparency	
and	 equal	 access.	 	 The	 following	 table	 summarizes	 the	 priority	interventions	 for	 boosting	 private	
sector	productivity	identified	through	the	analysis	in	this	chapter.	
	
                                    Priorities                                      Criticality   Time	horizon
Strengthen	PIM	and	Expand	Infrastructure:                                              High          Short	
  •Create	fiscal	space	for	public	investment	and	strengthen	PIM	systems              Critical/      Medium
  •Energy	sector	–	improve	governance	and	transparency,	reduce	losses,	and	
                                                                                       High         Medium
  reduce	high	energy	intensity
  •Transport	sector	–	promote	efficient	multimodal	transport	system	to	
                                                                                     Medium
  unleashing	Ukraine’s	trade	potential
Create	Level	Playing	Field	in	Private	Sector:                                          High          Short
    •Deregulation	–	further	streamline	business	regulatory	environment                 High       Short/Medium
    •Competition	Policy	–	enhance	capacity	of	AMC	to	implement	legislation	
                                                                                       High         Medium
    and	streamline	state	aid	for	enterprises	to	reduce	distortion	of	competition
    •SOE	Reform	–	triage	of	SOEs;	strengthen	accounting	and	financial	
                                                                                       High          Short
    reporting;	and	improve	corporate	governance
Land	Reform:	Increase	efficiency	of	state	land	management	through	new	
legal	framework;	open	sales	market	for	private	agricultural	land	ensuring	           Critical     Short/Medium
transparency	and	equal	access;	and	clear	status	of	unclaimed	property.
Trade	Facilitation:	Strengthen	and	harmonize	quality	and	standards	
                                                                                     Medium          Short
arrangements	to	tap	potential	of	international	trade	agreements                                                  	
	

                                             Public	Investment	Management	&	Infrastructure	
	
108. Supporting	 productivity,	 job	 creation,	 and	 exports	 will	 require	 improved	 public	
investment	and	infrastructure	to	reduce	costs	and	equip	firms	to	produce	more	competitively.	
With	levels	of	private	and	public	investment	hovering	at	around	16	percent	and	2	percent	of	GDP	
respectively	during	2009‐14,	the	necessary	expansion	of	investment	is	daunting9.		Private	investment	
depends	on	the	incentives	that	investors	–	both	domestic	and	foreign	–	face	in	the	country.		Improved	
incentives	 depend	 on	 macroeconomic	 stability,	 a	 competitive	 and	 level	 playing	 field	 including	 a	
favorable	business	and	regulatory	environment,	and	good	quality	infrastructure	services.		Ukraine	is	

                                                            
9	Strong	and	enduring	growth	requires	high	levels	of	investment.		According	to	the	Growth	Commission	

report;	countries	with	strong	growth	of	productivity	and	GDP	had	average	total	investment	rates	of	25	
percent	with	public	investment	in	infrastructure	of	5‐7	percent	of	GDP.		

                                                                  64 
 
starting	from	a	low	base	on	all	these	counts	and	the	challenge	is	not	only	to	improve	on	the	current	
situation,	but	also	to	improve	sufficiently	to	be	competitive	in	the	region.		
	
           Figure	35.	Private	Investment               Figure	36.	Public	and	Private	Investment,	
           (percent	of	GDP,	2010‐2015)	                              (percent	of	GDP)	
                        18.4
                                                    16.6           16.8 16.3 16.5
                                                                                      17.5            Private investment                Public investment
                                      16.2
                 14.8                                      14.9
                               14.4                                                           30
          12.5
                                             11.3
                                                                                              25

                                                                                              20

                                                                                              15

                                                                                              10

                                                                                               5

                                                                                               0

                                                                                                    2000
                                                                                                    2001
                                                                                                    2002
                                                                                                    2003
                                                                                                    2004
                                                                                                    2005
                                                                                                    2006
                                                                                                    2007
                                                                                                    2008
                                                                                                    2009
                                                                                                    2010
                                                                                                    2011
                                                                                                    2012
                                                                                                    2013
                                                                                                    2014
    Source:	IMF	WEO,	World	Bank	staff	estimates.	                                             Source:	IMF	WEO,	World	Bank	staff	estimates.	
    	                                                                                         	
	
       Figure	37.	Gen.	government	expenditures,	                                                      Figure	38.	Public	capital	expenditure
             (percent	of	GDP,	2010‐2015)	                                                                 (percent	of	GDP,	2010‐2015)	
          47.0                                                                                                                    8.6
                 43.1                                                                43.2
                                                                                                                                           7.1
                        36.8 36.8 35.7 35.1
                                                                         34.2 35.2                                                               5.8
                                                                  31.0                                                      5.2                        5.1
                                                28.8 27.4                                                             4.6
                                                                                                                4.2
                                                                                                          3.2
                                                                                                    2.4
                                                                                                                                                             1.9




  Source: IMF WEO, World Bank staff estimates.	     Source: IMF WEO, World Bank staff estimates.	
	
109. Improving	 infrastructure	 in	 Ukraine	 will	 require	 creating	 fiscal	 space	 for	 capital	
expenditures	 and	 also	 improving	 public	 investment	 management	 (PIM).		While	overall	public	
spending	in	Ukraine	is	higher	than	comparator	countries,	public	capital	expenditures	are	among	the	
lowest	of	comparator	countries.		This	is	because	public	spending	in	Ukraine	is	skewed	toward	current	
expenditures,	 including	 social	 transfers,	 subsidies,	 and	 the	 wage	 bill,	 all	 of	 which	 crowd	 out	
government	 investment.	 	 In	 fact,	 during	 2010‐2015,	 public	 investment	 in	 Ukraine	 averaged	 2.4	
percent	of	GDP,	compared	to	4.2	percent	in	Turkey,	4.6	percent	in	Poland,	and	8.6	percent	in	Vietnam.		

                                                                                             65 
 
Social	 expenditures	 have	 absorbed	 a	 large	 and	 growing	 share	 of	 public	 resources	 in	 Ukraine.	
Spending	on	social	benefits	including,	most	importantly,	pensions,	expanded	from	an	already	high	
19.6	percent	of	GDP	in	2007	to	23.4	percent	in	2013.		This	increase	was	driven	both	by	increasing	
benefits	(many	of	which	are	indexed	to	wages)	and	larger	number	of	beneficiaries	which	is	rising	due	
to	demographic	developments.	Since	2014,	the	authorities	reduced	social	security	expenditures	by	
temporarily	freezing	pension	benefits	in	nominal	terms	and	by	reducing	some	pensions	for	special	
categories.		However,	the	fiscal	space	was	absorbed	by	interest	payments.		Thus,	capital	expenditures	
dropped	to	1.3	percent	of	GDP	in	2014	and	increased	only	modestly	in	2015	to	2.4	percent	of	GDP.	
	
110. Ukraine	 needs	 to	 make	 further	 progress	 in	 strengthening	 its	 public	 investment	
management	 (PIM)	 systems.	 	 The	 2012	 Public	 Investment	 Management	 Assessment	 (PIMA)	
considered	 public	 investment	 management	 as	 one	 of	 the	 weakest	 aspects	 of	 Public	 Finance	
Management	(PFM)	in	Ukraine	and	an	area	which	is	vulnerable	to	corruption	because	of	a	high	level	
of	discretion	at	various	stages	of	the	PIM	cycle.	As	a	result	of	inefficiencies	of	the	PIM	system	and	
governance	issues,	the	cost	of	construction	in	Ukraine	is	22	percent	higher	than	in	the	EU,	despite	
lower	labor	costs.	These	problems	are	magnified	by	vast	investment	needs	of	Ukraine	estimated	at	
$100	 billion	 over	 the	 next	 10	 years.	 	 Despite	 some	 improvements	 implemented	 in	 2015,	 the	 PIM	
system	is	still	fragmented	and	not	conducive	for	efficient	targeting	of	resources	to	strategic	policy	
priorities.		The	latest	version	of	the	Budget	Code	 required	selection	of	public	investment	projects	
based	on	cost‐benefit	analysis	and	clearly	established	criteria.		However,	the	new	rules	do	not	include	
SOEs’	investment	projects,	projects	implemented	by	state	guarantees,	or	those	implemented	by	the	
Fund	for	Regional	Development	or	the	State	Road	Fund.		As	such,	the	reforms	have	affected	a	low	
share	of	total	capital	spending	in	2015.	
	
111. Enhancing	infrastructure,	especially	in	transport	and	energy,	is	an	important	priority	
for	 raising	 private	 sector	 productivity.		Increased	public	investment	and	institutional	reforms	in	
these	important	infrastructure	areas	will	be	key	to	improving	efficiency	and	quality	of	infrastructure	
services.	 As	 discussed,	 the	 crowding	 out	 of	 infrastructure	 investment	 by	 current	 spending	 is	 a	
longstanding	issue	in	Ukraine.		However,	the	ongoing	fiscal	consolidation	presents	an	opportunity	to	
create	the	fiscal	space	necessary	for	higher	public	investment.	
	
Energy	Sector	

112. Energy	supply	reliability	and	security	is	a	source	of	major	vulnerability	in	Ukraine	that	
also	 undermines	 productivity	 growth	 and	 job	 creation.	Possible	disruptions	of	electricity,	gas,	
and/or	heat	supply	can	have	serious	repercussions	for	productivity	and	output,	particularly	given	
the	high	energy	intensity	of	Ukraine’s	economy.		In	addition,	universal	access	to	electricity	and	gas	
coupled	with	the	cold	climate	means	that	the	reliability	and	security	of	supply	are	an	essential	need	
for	the	population,	and	particularly	the	poor	who	cannot	afford	alternatives.	
	
113. Despite	 improvement,	 Ukraine	 continues	 to	 be	 reliant	 on	 gas	 imports,	 which	 are	 not	
well	 diversified.		In	2015,	Ukraine’s	gas	consumption	was	34	billion	cubic	meters,	of	which	about	
20	billion	cubic	meters	was	produced	domestically	and	the	rest	was	imported.	Diversification	of	gas	
imports	 improved	 in	 2015	 with	 European	 gas	 supplies	 accounting	 for	 about	 63	 percent	 of	 gas	

                                                    66 
 
imports.	According	to	the	International	Energy	Agency,	Ukraine	can	achieve	self‐sufficiency	in	the	
next	decade	by	utilizing	its	conventional	and	non‐conventional	gas	reserves	and	realizing	its	energy	
efficiency	potential.	However,	this	will	require	improving	the	investment	climate	and	the	licensing	
regime	and	investing	in	supply	and	demand	side	energy	efficiency.	
	
114. The	 energy	 sector	 suffers	 from	 low	 efficiency	 and	 lack	 of	 investments;	 underlying	
these	challenges	are	poor	sector	governance	and	lack	of	transparency.	The	gas	sector	is	largely	
state	owned	and	dominated	by	the	vertically	integrated	oil	and	gas	company,	Naftogaz,	which	has	
operations	 in	 exploration	 and	 production	 of	 crude	 oil	 and	 natural	 gas;	 processing	 and	 supply	 to	
customers,	and	transit	of	Russian	gas	via	Ukraine	to	European	markets.	The	organizational	structure	
of	Naftogaz	is	complex;	nine	subsidiaries	and	affiliates	carry	out	day‐to‐day	operations	but	general	
operational	and	financial	decisions	as	well	as	the	functions	of	asset	management	are	entrusted	to	the	
holding	 company.	 The	 ownership	 of	 the	 regional	 gas	 distribution	 and	 supply	 companies	 is	
concentrated	 and	 the	 lack	 of	 transparency	 hinders	 competition	 and	 operational	 efficiency	
improvement	in	the	gas	distribution	and	supply.	Losses	in	the	gas	network	are	estimated	to	be	nearly	
twice	as	high	as	in	Western	Europe	and	gas	flows	and	balances	are	difficult	to	trace	due	to	incomplete	
metering	and	reporting	and	inadequate	system	of	checks	and	balances.	
	
115. An	 ambitious	 reform	 program	 in	 the	 energy	 sector	 is	 underway	 with	 largely	 positive	
outcomes,	 and	 it	 is	 essential	 to	 continue	 the	 reform	 momentum	 going	 forward.	 The	 reform	
agenda	includes:	(i)	bringing	household	gas	and	district	heating	prices	to	import	parity	price	levels	
by	 201710;	 (ii)	 mitigating	 the	 impact	 of	 price	 increases	 on	 vulnerable	 households	 with	 social	
assistance;	(iii)	supporting	Naftogaz	restructuring	to	reduce	losses	and	improve	its	governance;	and	
(iv)	promoting	efforts	to	enhance	energy	efficiency	and	raise	investment	and	domestic	production.	
Immediate	actions	should	be	taken	toward	strengthening	sector	governance	and	accountability	and	
improvement	of	its	financial	viability.	
	
116. The	unbundling	of	gas	transmission	operations	from	Naftogaz	is	a	priority	reform	step.	
To	 facilitate	 Government’s	 informed	 decision	 making	 about	 the	 unbundling	 model,	 a	 study	 of	
unbundling	options	compliant	with	the	EU’s	3rd	Energy	Package	was	commissioned	under	the	joint	
EC	 ‐	 World	 Bank	 Facility.	 Based	 on	 a	 multi‐criteria	 assessment	 and	 the	 overarching	 objectives	 of	
achieving	 an	 efficient	 and	 fully	 competitive	 market	 in	 Ukraine,	 the	 study	 recommended	 that	 the	
immediate	 restructuring	 step	 should	 be	 separation	 of	 transmission,	 storage	 and	 system	 operator	
functions	 from	 the	 production	 and	 supply	 functions	 of	 Naftogaz.	 Consistent	 with	 the	
recommendations	of	this	study,	in	July	2016	the	Government	approved	ownership	unbundling	model	
for	 transmission	 and	 storage	 operations	 through	 establishment	 of	 two	 new	 entities.	 The	
implementation	of	the	unbundling	plan	will	need	to	begin	without	additional	delay,	be	transparent,	
accompanied	by	reform	of	the	regulatory	framework,	and	take	advantage	of	the	transition	period	to	
foster	improvements	in	transmission	and	storage	operations. 
	
                                                            
10	 The	 Government	 is	 estimated	 to	 have	 accomplished	 this	 a	 year	 earlier	 in	 2016,	 taking	 advantage	 of	 low	

import	prices.	


                                                               67 
 
                        Figure	39.	Energy	intensity	level	of	primary	energy	in	2012	(MJ/$2011PPP)11	
     20

     15

     10

     5

     0




                   Czech	Republic
                        Denmark




                     Netherlands




                        Tajikistan

                         Slovenia

                          Sweden




                       Uzbekistan
                           Turkey




                          Norway


                           Croatia
                            Greece
                         Romania

                        Lithuania




              Russian	Federation
                         Hungary




                      Montenegro




                           Kosovo

                          Finland




                          Belarus
                      Kazakhstan
                      Switzerland
                           Ireland
                          Albania

                              Italy




                     Luxembourg


                         Germany




                          Ukraine
                           Poland




          Bosnia	and	Herzegovina




                           Iceland
                         Portugal




                         Bulgaria
                             Spain
                           Cyprus

                 United	Kingdom




                       Azerbaijan




                            France




                 Kyrgyz	Republic
                          Georgia




                          Belgium




                    Turkmenistan
                           Austria




                             Latvia




                  Slovak	Republic
                  Macedonia,	FYR




                         Armenia




                           Estonia




                         Moldova
                            Serbia
                                                                                                                   	
	
117. Ukraine’s	energy	intensity	is	very	high	(see	figure),	which	will	require	both	efficiency	
investments	and	sustaining	 pricing	reforms.	Energy	intensity	in	Ukraine	is	among	the	highest	of	
comparator	countries.		The	potential	for	energy	efficiency	improvement	is	significant	in	power	and	
heat	supply,	in	industry	and	in	residential	buildings.		For	example,	comprehensive	thermal	retrofit	of	
buildings	constructed	during	the	Soviet	era	could	potentially	reduce	heat	load	by	up	to	50	percent	or	
more,	which	would	make	a	significant	contribution	to	reducing	demand	for	natural	gas.		On	the	other	
hand,	while	sustained	increases	in	tariffs	to	cost	recovery	levels	would	help	to	moderate	demand,	
complementary	 investments	 in	 energy	 efficiency	 are	 also	 needed	 to	 contain	 total	 energy	
expenditures,	improve	resilience	of	the	population,	and	limit	fiscal	liabilities.		
	

                                      Figure	40.		Quasi‐fiscal	deficits	in	Energy	Sector	(%	of	GDP)12	




                                                                                                         	

118. Quasi	 fiscal	 deficits	 of	 the	 energy	 sector	 have	 been	 large	 in	 recent	 years	 but	 reduced	
significantly	 in	 2015‐16,	 and	 sustaining	 pricing	 reforms	 will	 be	 critical	 in	 maintaining	 this	
progress.	 	 Until	 recently,	 energy	 pricing	 policies	 have	 generated	 substantial	 quasi‐fiscal	 deficits,	
                                                            
11
     Source: World Bank SCD database, GTF
12	Source:	World	Bank	analysis	


                                                                    68 
 
encouraged	excessive	use,	discouraged	investments,	and	created	opportunities	for	corruption	and	
rent	seeking.		In	2013,	residential	tariffs	for	gas,	electricity,	and	heat	were	18,	19	and	64	percent	of	
cost,	 with	 delayed	 adjustment	 to	 world	 prices.	 To	 deal	 with	 this,	 the	 authorities	 increased	 gas,	
electricity	and	heating	tariffs	considerably	during	2014‐2016.		As	a	result,	the	Naftogaz	deficit	has	
been	reduced	from	5.5	percent	of	GDP	in	2014	to	0.9	percent	in	2015	and	a	projected	0.3	percent	in	
2016.	 	 To	 mitigate	 the	 impact	 on	 the	 vulnerable	 population,	 up	 to	 5	 million	 households	 received	
benefits	from	the	new	Housing	and	Utilities	Subsidy	Program	at	end‐2015.		The	program	improves	
significantly	the	resilience	of	the	poor	population	to	further	fluctuations	in	energy	prices.	
	
                     Figure	41:	Electricity	transmission	and	distribution	losses	(%)13	
                               25

                               20

                               15

                               10

                                 5

                                 0
                                       1990
                                       1991
                                       1992
                                       1993
                                       1994
                                       1995
                                       1996
                                       1997
                                       1998
                                       1999
                                       2000
                                       2001
                                       2002
                                       2003
                                       2004
                                       2005
                                       2006
                                       2007
                                       2008
                                       2009
                                       2010
                                       2011
                                       2012
                                       2013
                                       2014
                                       2015
                                                        Average ECA    Ukraine   Average EU
                                                                                              	
	
119. Electricity	supply	unreliability	is	a	major	vulnerability	undermining	growth	in	private	
sector	productivity.	The	security	and	supply	reliability	of	electricity	is	exacerbated	by	the	wear	and	
tear	 of	 its	 infrastructure	 and	 shortages	 of	 peaking	 power	 capacity.	 The	 electricity	 sector	 needs	
significant	 investments	 to	 modernize	 the	 generation	 capacity,	 to	 remove	 bottlenecks	 in	 the	
transmission	capacity,	and	to	reduce	losses	in	distribution	system.	Despite	reduction	in	transmission	
and	distribution	losses,	they	remain	high	compared	to	EU‐28	countries.	Power	supply	reliability	is	
further	jeopardized	by	low	peaking	capacity14.	The	unreliability	of	supply	is	also	reflected	in	2016	DB	
ratings	on	getting	electricity	where	Ukraine	is	rated	as	137th	globally.		It	is	difficult	for	producers	and	
exporters	 to	 be	 competitive	 with	 others	 when	 it	 has	 to	 pay	 high	 cost	 of	 supply	 disruptions	 and	
shortages	that	others	do	not	face.	
	
120. Lack	 of	 cost	 recovery	 and	 resulting	 poor	 financial	 viability	 undermine	 Ukraine’s	
energy	 security.	 Ukraine	 needs	 to	 attract	 financing	 to	 upgrade	 and	 expand	 aging	 generating	
capacities	to	meet	the	demand	for	electricity/heat	and	to	start	implementing	measures	to	integrate	
the	 power	 system	 of	 Ukraine	 into	 the	 European	 Network	 of	 Transmission	 System	 Operators	 for	
Electricity	 (ENTSO‐E).	 Investments	 in	 the	 sector	 and	 energy	 efficiency	 have	 been	 hampered	 by	
below‐cost	 recovery	 pricing	 and	 extensive	 cross‐subsidies	 between	 sub‐sectors	 and	 different	
                                                            
13	Source:	World	Bank	SCD	database,	GTF	
14	With	a	25GW	available	power	generation	capacity,	the	capacity	margin	for	2015	is	estimated	at	‐6%	against	

the	recommended	minimum	of	15%.	

                                                                      69 
 
consumer	categories.	The	2015	decision	of	the	National	Energy	and	Utilities	Regulatory	Commission	
(NEURC)	to	gradually	bring	electricity	tariffs	to	cost	recovery	level	for	the	population	by	2017	while	
eliminating	cross‐subsidies,	is	an	important	step,	which	should	be	consistently	enforced.	
	
121. Power	 market	 reforms	 aimed	 at	 increased	 sector	 transparency,	 unbundling	 and	
liberalization	 have	 been	 slow	 and	 without	 a	 clear	 roadmap	 for	 their	 timely	 planning	 and	
implementation.	 Power	 market	 reforms	 are	 part	 of	 Ukraine’s	 commitments	 as	 part	 of	 its	
membership	to	the	European	Energy	Community.	An	important	step	for	establishing	new	electricity	
market	rules,	mechanisms	and	adequate	market	monitoring	is	the	adoption	of	the	new	Electricity	
Market	Law#4493	and	the	Energy	Regulator	Law.	In	addition,	the	Government	will	need	a	roadmap	
that	will	outline	the	detailed	implementation	steps	for	market	reforms,	including	initiation	of	Day	
Ahead,	Intraday,	Balancing	and	Ancillary	Services	markets,	unbundling	needed	to	align	with	EU	3rd	
Energy	Package,	increasing	competition,	and	stimulating	efficiency	improvements.		
	
122. The	 conflict	 had	 mixed	 impacts	 on	 the	 energy	 security	 and	 supply	 reliability.	The	on‐
going	 conflict	 has	 reduced	 access	 to	 domestic	 energy	 sources:	 coal	 is	 a	 major	 source	 of	 domestic	
energy,	 but	 the	 government	 currently	 has	 no	 access	 to	 60	 percent	 of	 coal	 mines	 and	 has	 started	
importing	coal.	At	the	same	time,	the	conflict	fostered	diversification	of	sources	of	gas	supply;	thus	in	
2014,	share	of	non‐Russian	imports	reached	one	third	of	the	imported	natural	gas	in	Ukraine	while	
in	2015	this	share	increased	to	63	percent.	

	
Transport	
	
123. High	 quality	 transport	 is	 a	 prerequisite	 to	 unleashing	 private	 sector	 productivity.	
Ukraine’s	geography	and	structure	of	output	generates	five	times	the	transport	volume	per	unit	of	
GDP	compared	to	the	EU‐15	countries	implying	that	transport	costs	make	up	a	proportionately	large	
part	of	the	final	price	of	many	goods.	To	be	successful	in	tapping	trade	opportunities,	greater	regional	
connectivity	and	improvements	to	transit	corridors	will	be	needed.	
	
124. An	 efficient	 multimodal	 transport	 system	 is	 critical	 to	 unleashing	 Ukraine’s	 trade	
potential,	 including	 its	 central	 role	 in	 the	 global	 food	 supply	 chain.		This	includes	realizing	the	
full	 potential	 of	 the	 association	 agreement	 with	 the	 EU,	 the	 Deep	 and	 Comprehensive	 Free	 Trade	
Agreement,	 and	 removing	 constraints	 from	 the	 development	 of	 the	 domestic	 agricultural	 and	
manufacturing	industry.	The	current	transport	strategy	for	Ukraine	seeks	a	balanced	development	
of	different	transport	modes,	with	rail	transport	retaining	its	role	as	the	dominant	mode	for	heavy	
bulk	goods	and	the	road	network	being	developed	to	serve	higher‐value	goods	and	to	support	better	
connection	with	Ukraine’s	neighbors.	Increasingly,	emphasis	is	also	being	given	to	the	waterways	
sector	 as	 a	 means	 of	 relieving	 some	 of	 the	 harvest‐time	 bottlenecks	 on	 the	 railways	 but	 also	 as	 a	
means	of	getting	bulk	cargoes	off	the	roads	to	reduce	congestion	and	road	deterioration.		
	
125. Ukraine	 is	 ranked	 80th	 from	 a	 total	 of	 160	 countries	 in	 the	 World	 Bank’s	 Logistics	
Performance	Index	2016	(LPI).	With	the	ranking	going	down	over	the	last	five	years,	Ukraine	lags	
the	best	performers	in	the	region	and	all	EU	member	states.	According	to	the	2016	LPI,	Ukraine	still	

                                                       70 
 
requires	substantial	reforms	to	improve	customs	performance,	infrastructure,	competency	of	logistic	
operators,	international	shipments,	and	the	capacity	to	track	and	trace	shipments.		The	logistics	costs	
for	 moving	 grain,	 the	 Ukrainian	 key	 export	 commodity,	 from	 farms	 to	 the	 Black	 Sea	 ports	 are	
approximately	 40	 percent	 higher	 than	 costs	 for	 comparable	 services	 in	 France	 and	 Germany,	 and	
about	30	percent	higher	than	costs	in	the	United	States.	In	addition	to	the	overall	logistics	framework,	
there	 is	 also	 a	 need	 for	 sub‐sectoral	 reform,	 particularly	 in	 the	 rail	 and	 road	 sectors,	 to	 increase	
efficiency	and	ensure	that	these	key	sectors	are	operating	on	a	sustainable	financial	basis.	The	Bank	
is	providing	advice	in	all	these	areas	with	trust	funded	activities	in	logistics,	railways	reform,	and	
road	reform. 	
         	
126. Given	 the	 strong	 private	 sector	 focus	 of	 the	 logistics	 industry	 and	 the	 need	 for	
government	 to	 facilitate	 the	 productive	 areas	 of	 the	 economy,	 there	 is	 a	 strong	 interest	 in	
developing	the	logistics	industry.	The	Bank	has	undertaken	analytical	work	on	Agro‐Logistics	and	
is	 working	 with	 other	 development	 partners	 on	 developing	 a	 more	 comprehensive	 and	 green	
logistics	action	plan	for	the	country.	Some	of	the	areas	being	looked	at	include:	(i)	reviewing	tariff	
policies	in	the	railways	and	ports	sectors;	(ii)	supporting	with	prioritization	of	road	corridors	and	
addressing	overloaded	trucks	on	road	network;	(iii)	assessing	the	option	for	the	railways	to	expand	
into	the	provision	of	logistics	services	through	adding	value	to	line‐haul	services	and	attracting	multi‐
modal	traffic	to	railways;	and	(iv)	developing	the	waterways	to	alleviate	peak	time	pressure	on	rail	
and	roads. Investing	in	port	logistics,	developing	transparent	methodologies	for	raising	fees	at	the	
port,	 and	 facilitating	 cross‐border	 trade	 logistics	 by	 introducing	 automatic	 customs	 procedure	
systems	will	be	crucial	to	support	competitiveness	of	Ukrainian	Black	Sea	ports.	
	
127. Roads:		current	financial	and	institutional	arrangements	in	the	road	sector	in	Ukraine	have	
not	 delivered	 results	 and	 the	 shortage	 of	 maintenance	 funding,	 combined	 with	 a	 large	 share	 of	
overweight	 trucks,	 has	 resulted	 in	 premature	 deterioration	 of	 the	 network.	 Ukraine	 has	 a	 road	
network	of	about	169,600	km,	of	which	49,200	km	are	national	roads	and	120,400	km	are	regional	
and	local	roads.	It	is	now	estimated,	that	roughly	51	percent	of	the	national	network	does	not	meet	
national	 road	 roughness	 requirements	 and	 39	 percent	 does	 not	 meet	 the	 strength	 requirements.	
With	traffic	growth,	standard	two	lane	roads	have	begun	facing	capacity	bottlenecks,	compounding	
the	road	safety	issue	resulting	from	the	overall	poor	condition	of	the	network.	Ultimately	average	
traffic	speeds	are	affected,	with	average	speeds	ranging	between	one‐	half	and	one‐third	of	Ukraine’s	
western	European	neighbors.	
         	
128. A	 road	 map	 for	 road	 sector	 development	 in	 Ukraine	 for	 2015–2017	 was	 published	 by	
the	 Ministry	 of	 Infrastructure	 in	 June	 2015.	The	strategic	objectives	of	the	road	map	areas	are	
threefold:	(a)	the	protection	of	roads	from	early	deterioration,	(b)	the	reform	of	Ukravtodor	and	their	
dependent	construction	and	maintenance	companies;	and	(c)	a	sustainable	financial	structure	and	
collection	 of	 new	 revenues.	 The	 first	 priority	 will	 be	 dealt	 with	 through	 improved	 weight	 control	
(particularly	from	overloaded	grain	trucks),	the	implementation	of	a	road	asset	management	system	
and	the	rolling	out	of	a	modern	system	of	maintenance.	The	second	priority	area	will	lead	to	a	more	
dynamic	 market,	 with	 private	 sector	 involvement	 in	 the	 design	 and	 maintenance	 of	 roads.	 It	 will	
include	restructuring	of	the	joint	stock	companies	that	currently	maintain	the	network	and	transfer	


                                                        71 
 
of	assets	from	Ukravtodor	to	the	oblast	state	administrations	and	the	divestiture	of	non‐key	assets	of	
Ukravtodor,	including	the	design	institutes.	The	third	priority	area	aims	to	secure	existing	revenues	
from	fuel	levies	and	so	on	to	the	road	sector	and	to	raise	new	revenues	through	the	introduction	of	a	
truck	tolling	scheme.	
	
129. The	 roads	 sector,	 particularly	 maintenance,	 is	 underfinanced.	Although	there	has	been	
a	continuous	increase	in	the	revenues	from	excise	duties	on	fuels,	expenditures	on	road	maintenance	
have	 been	 falling	 since	 2011	 and	 debt	 servicing	 has	 almost	 tripled	 since	 2012.	 The	 shortfall	 in	
resources	will	affect	sustainability	of	the	network,	with	the	current	level	of	funding	for	maintenance	
of	 the	 network	 at	 about	 half	 the	 minimum	 level.	 Addressing	 these	 shortages	 will	 require	 higher	
charges	on	road	users	including	through	increasing	the	fuel	levy,	increasing	vehicle	registration	fees	
and	by	starting	to	toll	(or	use	vignette)	the	main	highways	in	the	country.	In	the	short	term,	it	is	also	
important	 that	 the	 authorities	 enforce	 axle	 load	 controls	 and	 introduce	 systematic	 monitoring	 of	
existing	maintenance	expenditures.	

                   Figure	42:	Road	Safety	(Fatalities	per	year	per	100,000	population)	




130. Road	 safety	 is	 a	 problem	 which	 requires	 more	 attention	 and	 commitment	 to	 deliver	
continuous	 improvement.	 During	 the	 period	 from	 2004‐2014,	 fatalities	 from	 road	 accidents	 fell	
from	7,000	deaths	per	year	in	2004	to	just	under	4,500	deaths	in	2014.	Over	the	last	few	years	the	
reduction	in	road	traffic	fatalities	has	stagnated	with	fatality	rates	over	four	times	those	found	in	the	
better‐performing	European	countries.	.	Road	traffic	injury	was	estimated	by	the	2013	Global	Burden	
of	Disease	study	to	be	the	main	cause	of	death	for	Ukrainians	Aged	15‐24	and	the	second	main	cause	
of	death	for	Ukrainians	Aged	5‐14.	While	improved	safety	conditions	and	some	new	infrastructure	
have	 helped	 stabilize	 the	 number	 of	 road	 traffic	 fatalities	 and	 injuries,	 these	 activities	 are	 not	
sufficient	to	deliver	improvements	to	the	level	of	the	European	context	and	to	half	road	deaths	by	
2020.	Ukraine’s	road	safety	institutional	capacity,	management	practices	and	standards	need	to	be	
significantly	improved	to	sustainably	reduce	road	death	toll.	Serious	improvements	in	road	safety	
are	therefore	among	the	priority	objectives	for	road	transport	system	development.		
	
131. Railways:	 Railways	 carry	 over	 70	 percent	 of	 non‐pipeline	 freight	 traffic	 (measured	 in	
ton/km)	 and	 around	 38	 percent	 of	 public	 long‐distance	 passenger	 traffic	 (measured	 by	
passenger/km).	An	efficient	rail	network	is	therefore	essential	for:	(i)	efficient	and	environmentally	


                                                      72 
 
sustainable	 transportation	 of	 Ukraine’s	 natural	 resources	 and	 metallurgical	 products;	 (ii)	 transit	
traffic;	and	(iii)	connecting	 many	of	 Ukraine’s	large	cities	located	200‐600	km	from	Kyiv.	Ukraine	
ranks	 well	 (25th	 out	 of	 104	 countries)	 in	 the	 Global	 Competitiveness	 Index	 on	 the	 quality	 of	 its	
railroad	infrastructure.	However,	shrinking	profits,	over‐aged	assets	(70	percent	of	the	rolling	stock	
was	purchased	in	the	1980s	and	needs	urgent	replacement)	and	lack	of	timely	renewal,	rehabilitation	
and	 upgrading	 of	 assets	 will	 ultimately	 lead	 to	 the	 deterioration	 in	 the	 quality	 of	 service	 and	
adversely	affect	the	safety	of	the	railway	network.	
         	
132. The	key	sector	challenge,	and	major	risk,	is	the	lack	of	sustainable	financing	for	railway	
investment	and	operations.	This	risk	is	further	exacerbated	by	the	uncertainty	regarding	the	traffic	
from/to	Russia	and	the	need	for	reconstruction	of	railway	infrastructure	destroyed	in	the	east	of	the	
country.	The	Government	of	Ukraine	has	embarked	on	a	major	reform,	many	years	in	the	making,	to	
modernize	Ukrzaliznytsia	(UZ)	and	enhance	its	organizational,	operational	and	financial	efficiency.	A	
law	 adopted	 by	 Parliament	 in	 2013	 enabled	 creation	 of	 a	 joint	 stock	 company	 for	 public	 railway	
transport.	UZ	has	potential	to	be	 financially	sustainable	 given	its	strong	traffic	base	 and	its	dense	
railway	 network	 with	 a	 total	 length	 of	 track	 of	 about	 22,000	 km,	 the	 14th	 largest	 network	 in	 the	
world.	UZ’s	freight	transport	task	is	about	260	billion	ton	km.	This,	together	with	about	450	million	
passenger	trips	per	year,	makes	the	Ukrainian	railways	the	6th	most	densely	operated	railway	in	the	
world	(measured	in	ton	km	plus	passenger	km	per	route	km).	
         	
133. Urban	 transport:	 Good	 urban	 mobility	 (passenger	 and	 freight)	 is	 particularly	 relevant	 to	
increase	productivity	while	improving	the	quality	of	life	of	the	citizens.	This	is	particularly	relevant	
in	 an	 environment	 like	 Ukraine	 which	 has	 one	 of	 the	 highest	 urbanization	 rates	 in	 Europe,	 with	
around	69%	of	the	total	population	living	in	urban	areas.	However,	due	to	the	lack	of	investments	in	
public	transport	infrastructure	 and	rolling	stocks	over	the	recent	 years,	their	condition	has	 much	
deteriorated.	The	service	integration	among	public	transport	modes	is	generally	weak;	in	particular,	
the	services	operated	by	private	operators	are	entirely	separate	from,	and	often	compete	with,	those	
operated	by	municipal	companies.	Moreover,	the	urban	mobility	plans	have	not	fully	responded	to	
the	spatial	expansion	of	the	cities,	growing	motorization	and	changing	mobility	patterns.	Under	these	
circumstances,	urban	areas	experience	increasing	traffic	congestion,	and	consequently,	deterioration	
of	the	air	quality,	increase	in	travel	time	and	costs,	and	increase	in	road	traffic	crashes	and	casualties.	
	
	
                              Private	Sector:	Creating	a	Level	Playing	Field	
	
134. Ukraine’s	 highly	 concentrated	 and	 anticompetitive	 production	 structure,	 along	 with	
the	 absence	 of	 a	 level	 playing	 field	 in	 the	 private	 sector,	 are	 serious	 impediments	 to	
productivity	and	job	creation.		The	2014	WBG	report	on	“Opportunities	and	Challenges	for	Private	
Sector	Development”	found	that	Ukraine’s	tepid	private	sector	growth	is	reflected	in:	(i)	the	stagnant	
structure	of	the	country’s	industry	and	exports,	where	old	industries	such	as	steel,	machine‐building	
and	chemicals	continue	to	dominate	and	operate	at	low	levels	of	productivity;	(ii)	the	low	inflow	of	
high	 value‐added	 FDI,	 especially	 in	 export‐oriented	 manufacturing;	 and	 (iii)	 the	 relatively	 limited	
role	of	SMEs	in	the	private	sector,	with	larger	firms	and	business	groups	dominating.		All	these	factors	


                                                       73 
 
suggest	 that	 the	 market‐driven	 and	 competitive	 process	 of	 entrepreneurship,	 innovation,	 and	
productivity	growth	does	not	function	properly	in	Ukraine.	
	
135. Creating	 a	 more	 competitive	 and	 level	 playing	 field	 in	 the	 private	 sector	 will	 require	
streamlining	 the	 regulatory	 environment,	 strengthening	 competition	 policy,	 and	 reforming	
state	 owned	 enterprises.	 	 Complicated	 regulatory	 barriers	 hinder	 market	 contestability,	 fuel	
corruption	 opportunities,	 and	 ultimately	 lead	 to	 an	 environment	 where	 only	 a	 small	 number	 of	
politically	connected	firms	are	able	to	function	at	low	levels	of	productivity.		Despite	recent	progress	
in	streamlining	the	regulatory	environment	in	selected	areas,	Ukraine	lags	comparator	countries	by	
a	considerable	distance.		Second,	with	many	sectors	exhibiting	high	concentration	of	firms	and	low	
rates	of	firm	entry	and	exit,	weak	implementation	of	competition	policy	does	not	help	address	the	
problem.	 The	 Anti‐Monopoly	 Committee	 (AMC),	 the	 competition	 watchdog,	 is	 supported	 by	 a	
relatively	 strong	 legal	 framework,	 while	 the	 main	 challenge	 is	 weak	 implementation	 of	 the	 law.		
Third,	the	large	and	inefficient	state‐owned	enterprise	(SOE)	sector	is	often	able	to	operate	at	low	
levels	of	productivity	and	transparency	with	preferential	access	to	resources,	markets,	and	influence,	
thus	 crowding	 out	 entry	 and	 growth	 of	 more	 productive	 firms.	 	 Generating	 a	 more	 competitive	
private	sector	in	Ukraine	will,	therefore,	require	comprehensive	reform	of	SOEs,	including	improving	
transparency,	governance,	and	accelerating	preparations	for	transparent	privatization.		

Deregulation:	streamlining	the	regulatory	environment		
	
        Figure	43.	Doing	Business	Ranking                        Figure	44.	Doing	Business	Ranking
         Ukraine	and	Comparators,	2017                          Regulatory	Dimensions,	Ukraine,	2017	
              Latvia    14                                            Getting	Credit    20
             Georgia     16
                                                                  Starting	Business     20
           Lithuania         21
         Kazakhstan               35                           Registering	Property          63
            Romania               36
                                                                 Minority	Investors           70
             Belarus              37
            Bulgaria               39                           Enforcing	Contracts               81
            Hungary                41                                  Paying	Taxes                84
             Croatia                   43
                                                             Trading	Across	Borders                     115
            Moldova                    44
              Serbia                    47                        Getting	Electricity                     130
             Turkey                          69
                                                               Construction	Permits                           140
            Ukraine                               80
    Bosnia	&	Hrzgvna                              81           Resolving	Insolvency                           150


  Source:	World	Bank	Group	                               Source:	World	Bank	Group
	
136. Ukraine	 has	 taken	 steps	 to	 improve	 its	 regulatory	 environment,	 but	 still	 lags	 other	
countries	 in	 the	 region	 by	 a	 considerable	 distance.	 	 Improving	 the	 business	 environment	 is	
critical	 not	 only	 for	 encouraging	 private	 investment	 but	 also	 for	 moving	 investment	 to	 more	
productive	and	more	profitable	subsectors.		The	2017	Doing	Business	(DB)	Report	ranks	Ukraine	
80th	globally,	which	makes	it	22nd	in	the	region.		Ukraine’s	ranking	has	improved	significantly	from	
140th	 in	 2013,	 112th	 in	 2014,	 and	 96th	 in	 2015,	 indicating	 steady	 progress	 over	 time.	 	 However,	
Ukraine’s	 ranking	 lags	 those	 of	 the	 new	 EU	 member	 states	 that	 rank	 among	 the	 top	 20‐50.		


                                                       74 
 
Furthermore,	while	Ukraine	has	improved	its	ranking	in	some	areas	(20th	in	getting	credit	and	20th	
in	starting	a	business	in	2017)	in	recent	years,	it	ranks	poorly	in	several	other	important	areas	(150th	
in	Resolving	Insolvency,	140th	in	Getting	Construction	Permits,	130th	in	Getting	Electricity,	and	115th	
in	Trading	across	Borders).		Also,	it	is	important	to	note	that	the	Doing	Business	rankings	represent	
only	a	small	part	of	a	larger	investment	climate.	Ukraine	is	79th	in	the	Global	Competitiveness	Index	
2015‐2016,	 down	 from	 being	 73rd	 just	 three	 years	 earlier.	 The	 European	 Business	 Association	
Investment	Attractiveness	Index	shows	little	improvement	in	the	business	environment	from	2011	
to	2015.		Findings	from	IFC	surveys	consistently	show	that	Ukrainian	firms	describe	the	framework	
of	permits,	licenses,	certifications,	and	inspections	as	burdensome.	
	
137. Reform	 efforts	 to	 streamline	 the	 regulatory	 environment	 so	 far	 have	 not	 been	
systematic	and	comprehensive.		Instead,	reforms	have	been	sporadic	and	have	had	a	limited	effect	
on	 businesses.	 This	 has	 resulted	 in	 continuing	 dissatisfaction	 of	 businesses	 with	 the	 regulatory	
environment.	 For	 example,	 the	 business	 start‐up	 process	 has	 been	 streamlined,	 but	 voluntary	
business	exit	remains	highly	difficult,	and	completing	mostly	non‐reformed	licensing	requirements	
for	many	types	of	licenses	is	still	time‐consuming.	Business	inspections	and	permitting	procedures	
continue	to	be	viewed	by	businesses	as	cumbersome,	especially	by	SMEs.	Despite	reduction	in	the	
number	 of	 permits	 during	 recent	 years,	 a	 large	 number	 of	 permits	 and	 licenses	 have	 not	 been	
eliminated	 or	 streamlined,	 but	 simply	 renamed	 in	 order	 to	 bypass	 relevant	 laws.	 	 Poor	
implementation	 of	 the	 2007	 Law	 on	 Inspections	 is	 aggravated	 by	 an	 excessive	 number	 of	
inspectorates	with	a	mandate	to	visit	businesses	in	Ukraine	and	international	best	practice	on	risk‐
based	inspections	is	not	followed.		Regulatory	policy	is	also	plagued	by	low	transparency	and	weak	
impact	 assessment.	 	 The	 quality	 of	 the	 Regulatory	 Impact	 Assessment	 (RIA),	 with	 a	 main	 goal	 to	
assess	the	economic	effects	of	proposed	legislation	and	ensure	that	the	benefits	of	a	policy	action	are	
likely	to	be	greater	than	the	costs,	is	generally	poor	and	does	not	meet	the	requirements	of	the	RIA	
Methodology.	As	a	result,	many	regulatory	acts	are	not	business‐friendly.	
	
138. Going	 forward,	 Ukraine	 will	 need	 to	 take	 a	 number	 of	 systematic	 steps	 to	 streamline	
its	 regulatory	 environment.	 	 These	 include:	 implementing	 reforms	 in	 the	 areas	 of	 construction	
permits,	resolving	insolvency	and	trading	across	borders,	as	measured	by	Doing	Business;	bringing	
the	 Regulatory	 Impact	 Assessment	 (RIA)	 in	 line	 with	 international	 practice	 and	 the	 Methodology,	
including	 the	 SME	 Test;	 improving	 regulations	 governing	 business	 inspections	 and	 canceling	 the	
moratorium	imposed	on	such	inspections;	making	an	inventory	and	revision	of	‘hidden’	permits	and	
permitting	procedures	outside	the	scope	of	the	Law	on	the	Licensing	of	Commercial	Activity	and	the	
Law	on	the	List	of	Permits;	and	increasing	the	use	of	declarations	instead	of	permits	or	licenses	and	
improving	the	procedure	of	submission	of	such	declarations	to	state	authorities.	

Competition	Policy		

139. Enterprise	ownership	in	Ukraine	remains	concentrated	in	a	few	large	business	groups.		
While	 other	 transition	 economies	 have	 shifted	 toward	 more	 diversified	 industries	 and	 dynamic	
markets,	the	concentration	of	ownership	of	Ukraine’s	key	resources	in	a	few	large	business	groups	
has	 prevented	 dynamism	 and	 diversification	 from	 taking	 hold,	 a	 missed	 opportunity	 for	 growth.		
Promoting	competition	is	not	easy	in	this	environment,	but	a	fair	and	balanced	enforcement	of	anti‐

                                                     75 
 
monopoly	 rules,	 enforcing	 disclosure	 of	 ultimate	 owners,	 identifying	 and	 limiting	 related‐party	
lending	to	prudential	norms	can	all	help.	
	
140. The	 Anti‐Monopoly	 Committee	 (AMC)	 is	 supported	 by	 a	 relatively	 strong	 legal	
framework,	 while	 the	 main	 challenge	 is	 weak	 implementation	 of	 the	 law.		 The	Antimonopoly	
Committee	 generally	 has	 adequate	 legal	 powers	 but	 needs	 to	 reinforce	 its	 independence,	 and	 its	
capacity	to	apply	anti‐monopoly	rules	in	a	fair	and	balanced	way.	It	should	also	have	the	obligation	
to	disclose	ultimate	owners	of	businesses.	Enforcement	is	also	a	problem,	with	less	than	10	percent	
of	fines	imposed	by	the	AMC	actually	paid.		The	Committee	is	over‐burdened	with	cases	that	do	not	
pose	 risk	 to	 competition,	 and	 the	 Committee	 is	 empowered	 to	 excessively	 intervene	 in	 ordinary	
market	activity.	Going	forward,	it	will	be	important	to	fully	harmonize	Ukrainian	legislation	with	that	
of	 the	 European	 Union	 and	 international	 good	 practice	 as	 well	 as	 implementing	 the	 National	
Competition	 Program	 2014‐2020,	 including	 enhancing	 capacity	 of	 AMC	 to	 carry	 out	 its	
responsibilities	 and	 providing	 adequate	 resources	 to	 ensure	 that	 the	 AMC	 can	 maintain	 high	
standards	 of	 performance	 and	 accomplish	 its	 mission.	 Moreover,	 enhanced	 competition	 would	
require	 better‐trained	 judges	 adjudicating	 competition	 cases,	 including	 a	 checks	 and	 balances	
approach	 in	 reviewing	 the	 imposed	 fines,	 truly	 competitive	 public	 procurement	 and	
nondistortionary	 state	 aid,	 and	 stronger	 awareness	 and	 involvement	 of	 the	 civil	 society.	 The	
legislation	on	state	aid	has	been	adopted	but	its	enactment	is	planned	for	August	2017.	As	a	result,	
there	is	no	the	control	of	state	support	for	sectors	and	companies	that	risks	distorting	competition.	
	
State	Owned	Enterprise	(SOE)	Reform	
	
141. SOEs	 have	 a	 large	 share	 in	 the	 Ukrainian	 economy,	 contributing	 approximately	 20	
percent	of	GDP,	but	are	grossly	inefficient.		In	2015,	Ukraine	had	about	3,500	SOEs,	of	which	only	
half	were	operating.		SOEs	have	a	strong	presence	in	several	sub‐sectors,	including	energy,	transport,	
agriculture,	and	machine‐building.	The	government	owns	25	percent	of	total	farmland	and	provides	
product‐specific	subsidies	in	agriculture,	including	area	payments	for	horticulture,	viticulture	and	
hops;	as	well	as	substantial	support	for	poultry	and	sugar	production.		SOEs	are	the	largest	employer	
in	Ukraine:	about	1	million	people,	roughly	5	percent	of	the	work	force.		The	SOE	sector	reported	an	
aggregate	loss	of	UAH	115	billion	in	2014,	about	7	percent	of	the	GDP.		Out	of	the	largest	100	SOEs,	
only	57	were	profitable	in	2014	and	net	profit	margins	were,	on	average,	very	low.		Furthermore,	
these	 entities	 are	 non‐transparent,	 poorly	 supervised	 and	 governed,	 and	 plagued	 by	 corruption,	
which	undermines	public	trust	in	both	SOEs	and	the	larger	public	sector.		With	reported	profits	and	
losses	likely	distorted	due	to	vested	interests	of	officials	and	specific	business	groups,	a	good	first	
step	 is	 to	 introduce	 transparent	 and	 competitive	 recruitment	 of	 top	 management	 of	 the	 most	
important	 SOEs	 and	 to	 insist	 on	 international	 corporate	 governance	 principles.	 The	 SOE	 sector	
requires	urgent	reforms	as	these	enterprises	distort	the	economy	and	limit	growth	opportunities	for	
the	 private	 sector.	 	 Trading	 enterprises	 and	 alcohol	 production	 are	 important	 examples,	 among	
others.	
	
142. Improving	 transparency	 and	 accountability	 in	 SOEs	 and	 the	 private	 sector	 is	
important.		Ukraine	needs	to	strengthen	its	corporate	financial	reporting	standards	and	practices,	


                                                    76 
 
as	well	as	transparency	and	public	availability	of	reliable	financial	information.		This	is	important	to	
improve	public	trust	in	financial	reports	of	SOEs	and	private	companies,	but	will	require	improving	
regulation	 and	 building	 capacity	 to	 comply.	 	 Although	 national	 accounting	 standards	 were	
approximated	 to	 the	 International	 Financial	 Reporting	 Standards	 (IFRS)	 in	 2000,	 and	 direct	
application	of	IFRS	by	certain	categories	of	businesses	was	introduced	since	2012,	most	entities	in	
Ukraine	 continue	 using	 outdated	 accounting	 standards	 to	 report	 their	 financial	 statements.	 	 This	
leads	to	incomplete	financial	reporting	by	SOEs	and	private	enterprises.		Audit	regulations	also	need	
reform:	Ukraine	adopted	the	International	Standards	on	Auditing	(ISA)	in	2003,	but	effectiveness	of	
the	 regulatory	 system	 proved	 to	 be	 inefficient.	 	 The	 EU	 Association	 Agreement	 requires	
approximating	financial	reporting,	accounting	and	audit	laws	to	those	of	the	EU.	
	
143. Improving	governance	of	SOEs	is	important	to	provide	a	stronger	commercial	focus	to	
SOE	 operations.	 	 At	 the	 moment,	 there	 is	 no	 oversight	 body	 in	 charge	 of	 managing	 the	 state’s	
commercial	 assets.	 SOEs	 are	 managed	 by	 various	 individual	 line	 ministries	 or	 agencies,	 in	
cooperation	with	private	shareholders,	in	cases	of	joint	ownership.	As	a	result,	SOEs	are	governed	by	
a	 complicated	 and	 heterogeneous	 set	 of	 management	 practices,	 with	 no	 clear	 delineation	 of	
responsibilities	 between	 SOE	 management,	 relevant	 state	 agencies	 and,	 where	 applicable,	 private	
shareholders.	Such	a	situation	undermines	accountability.	
	
144. Restructuring,	privatization,	and	in	some	cases,	liquidation,	of	SOEs	on	a	case‐by‐case	
basis	 will	 be	 needed.	 Cumbersome	 and	 outdated	 procedures	 greatly	 impede	 the	 efficient	
privatization,	 restructuring	 or	 liquidation	 of	 SOEs.	 An	 assessment	 of	 the	 current	 framework	 is	
planned,	following	which	the	legal	and	regulatory	framework	for	privatization	would	be	updated	and	
simplified,	followed	by	a	Privatization	Action	Plan.	
	
                                              Land	Reform	
	
145. Weak	 land	 governance	 seriously	 undermines	 investment	 and	 productivity	 in	
agriculture	 and	 other	 sectors	 in	 Ukraine.		The	full	realization	of	Ukraine’s	agricultural	potential,	
especially	in	ways	that	include	small	and	medium	scale	producers,	is	possible	only	if	land	tenure	is	
secure	for	the	long	term	and	land	rights	are	transferable.	As	Ukraine	is	a	major	global	exporter	of	
agricultural	products,	the	quality	of	land	governance	in	Ukraine	also	has	implications	for	global	food	
security.	About	71	percent	of	Ukrainian	territory	(42.7m	ha)	is	classified	as	agricultural	land.		State	
land	 comprises	 25	 percent	 of	 Ukraine’s	 agricultural	 land	 base.	 	 There	 are	 about	 23m	 private	
landowners	and	users	(of	which	90	percent	are	natural	persons)	and	about	5m	users	of	state	land	
(10.5m	ha).		About	21.5m	ha	of	agricultural	land	is	cultivated	by	about	45,000	commercial	producers	
(of	which	about	36,000	are	below	200	ha).	Thus,	the	quality	of	land	governance	affects	the	wellbeing	
of	a	significant	portion	of	country’s	population	and	efficiency	of	several	industries	that	use	land	as	a	
factor	of	production	or	are	vertically	integrated	with	such	industries.	
	
146. Results	 of	 a	 monitoring	 survey	 point	 toward	 a	 number	 of	 considerable	 challenges	
associated	 with	 land	 governance.		The	results	show	that	the	level	of	registration	of	state	land	is	
significantly	lower	than	that	of	private	land	(24	vs	71	percent),	which	is	a	source	of	non‐transparent	


                                                    77 
 
practices	and	considerable	losses	of	state	revenues.		Second,	the	rental	price	for	agricultural	land	is	
one	 of	 the	 lowest	 in	 Europe	 and	 CIS	 countries,	 reducing	 the	 wellbeing	 of	 rural	 land	 owners	 and	
providing	 for	 inefficient	 use	 of	 land	 resources.	 	 Third,	 the	 sales	 market	 for	 land	 (outside	 of	
Moratorium	for	agricultural	land)	is	extremely	thin	primarily	due	to	lack	of	financial	instruments	and	
difficulties	with	using	property	and	rental	rights	as	a	collateral.	The	primary	type	of	transactions	for	
agricultural	 land	 is	 rent	 (about	 4.7	 rental	 agreements	 with	 average	 duration	 of	 7.6	 years)	 with	
substantial	 informal	 rental	 market	 reinforced	 by	 recent	 legal	 initiatives	 to	 increase	 the	 minimum	
duration	of	rental	contracts	to	7	years.		Fourth,	the	number	of	taxpayers	for	land	tax	(about	7.3	mln)	
is	substantially	lower	than	the	number	of	private	land	owners	and	land	users.	
          	
147. In	 order	 to	 address	 the	 challenges	 associated	 with	 land	 governance,	 a	 number	 of	
initiatives	 will	 be	 important.	 	 These	 include	 (i)	 improving	 institutional	 arrangements	 and	
transparency	of	land	governance	including	establishment	of	permanent	land	governance	monitoring	
system	 based	 on	 administrative	 records	 of	 Land	 Cadaster	 and	 other	 government	 authorities;	 (ii)	
increasing	 efficiency	 of	 state	 land	 management	 through	 a	 new	 legal	 framework	 and	 transparent	
procedure	 to	 clearly	 demarcate	 the	 state	 land	 and	 transfer	 it	 out	 of	 state	 ownership	 by	 either	
auctioning	or	transferring	to	communal	ownership	(preferably	at	rayon	level)	based	on	clear	criteria;	
(iii)	clearing	legal	status,	formally	registering	and	establishing	a	clear	management	arrangement	over	
unclaimed	property	and	unclaimed	privatization	shares,	land	of	former	collective	farms	(windbreak,	
forest	strips,	farm	yards,	field	roads),	(iv)	opening	up	of	the	sales	market	for	private	agricultural	land,	
possibly	in	a	decentralized	way	and	(iv)	testing,	monitoring,	evaluating	and	improving	efficiency	of	
land	reform.	
	
                                              Trade	Facilitation	

148. Ukraine	 needs	 a	 balanced	 trade	 policy	 to	 increase	 export	 sophistication	 and	 linking	
domestic	 with	 global	 value	 chains.	 It	 will	 be	 important	 to	 promote	 more	 sophisticated	 export	
products	with	higher	value	addition	in	the	country	(from	 grains	to	meat	and	dairy,	from	wood	to	
furniture,	 from	 steel	 to	 machinery).	 Market	 opening	 and	 targeted	 investment	 promotion	 will	 be	
important	to	reach	this	goal.	However,	it	should	be	noted	that	export	sophistication	and	commodity	
exports	 are	 not	 necessarily	 mutually	 exclusive.	 Many	 developed	 countries,	 including	 France,	
Germany	and	the	USA	are	successful	net	exporters	of	commodities	and	high	tech	products	at	the	same	
time.	 Due	 to	 limited	 domestic	 commodity	 markets	 with	 shrinking	 population	 future	 growth	 will	
mainly	be	generated	by	export	growth.	Every	ton	of	commodity	produced	will	lead	to	almost	one	ton	
more	export.	However,	trade	logistics	are	under‐developed	and	logistics	costs	are	much	higher	in	
Ukraine	to	cope	with	future	export	growth.	For	example	port	logistics	costs	at	Ukrainian	Black	Sea	
ports	are	about	20	$	per	ton	of	grain	and	7.5	$	in	France	and	Germany.	Investments	in	infrastructure	
and	logistics	(ports,	railcars,	river	transport,	storage,	just‐in	time	supply	systems)	combined	with	
regulatory	reforms	are	important	means	to	facilitate	trade	and	to	make	specific	industries	stronger	
and	competitive.	For	Ukraine	to	overcome	its	crisis,	it	needs	to	integrate	with	Europe	and	the	world.	
	
149. Trade	 facilitation,	 standards	 and	 competitiveness.	The	trade	agreement	with	the	EU	is	
deep	(it’s	about	tariffs	and	standards)	and	comprehensive	(it	covers	almost	everything).	EU	markets	
are	highly	competitive	and	Ukraine	feels	this	challenge	already.	Ukraine	needs	strong	commitments	

                                                     78 
 
to	adapt	its	trade	procedures	and	standards	to	facilitate	trade	across	borders	for	its	own	industries	
to	integrate	into	global	markets	and	value	chains.	Also,	the	WTO	Trade	Facilitation	Agreement	with	
its	focus	on	removing	non‐tariff	barriers	to	trade	would	be	an	important	reform	anchor.	Key	reform	
measures	 would	 focus	 on	 the	 operating	 environment	 for	 traders,	 simplifying	 border	 clearance	
procedures,	 improving	 the	 National	 Quality	 Infrastructure	 (investing	 in	 metrology,	 adapting	
conformity	 assessment	 to	 trade	 partners,	 internationalize	 private	 and	 public	 safety	 and	
sustainability	standards,	promote	mutual	recognition	of	accreditation	bodies)	and	modernization	of	
logistics	infrastructure	and	trade	services.	
         	
150. Ukraine	has	considerable	potential	across	the	broad	agribusiness	sector.		This	potential	
is	 capable	 of	 helping	 to	 address	 global	 food	 security	 challenges	 over	 time.	 The	 sector	 has	 shown	
remarkable	 resilience	 and	 competitiveness	 in	 times	 declining	 global	 commodity	 prices	 and	 crisis,	
increasing	its	export	share	to	about	40	percent	of	total	exports.	However,	its	potential	has	been	only	
partly	 realized	 as	 specific	 challenges	 in	 the	 sector	 include	 raising	 farming	 efficiency	 and	 yields,	
improving	farmers’	access	to	financing,	developing	storage,	transport	and	distribution	infrastructure,	
modernizing	 food	 processing	 and	 agricultural	 processing	 especially	 in	 industries	 with	 strong	
linkages	 to	 other	 sub‐sectors	 across	 the	 whole	 economic	 value	 chain,	 and	 supporting	 the	
development	of	local	companies	with	high	potential	which	have	been	among	those	the	hardest	hit	by	
the	 crisis.	 Uncertainty	 about	 the	 future	 of	 the	 land	 ownership	 limits	 investment	 and	 yields	 in	 the	
sector	as	significant	shares	of	agricultural	land	remain	underutilized.	
	
	
	
	                                  	




                                                       79 
 
VIII.     Pathway	3:	Effective	services	and	targeted	assistance	
	
151. Effective	 service	 delivery	 is	 important	 not	 only	 to	 enhance	 skills	 and	 labor	 market	
outcomes,	 but	 also	 to	 ensure	 that	 the	 benefits	 of	 growth	 are	 broadly	 shared	 in	 a	 sustainable	
way.		Social	sector	expenditures	are	high	in	Ukraine:	5.8	percent	of	GDP	on	education	and	4.5	percent	
on	 health.	 	 However,	 the	 population,	 including	 the	 bottom	 40	 percent,	 has	 not	 been	 well	 served.		
Health	outcomes	are	poor	relative	to	comparators	and	though	general	education	outcomes	(e.g.	years	
of	schooling,	completion	of	secondary/tertiary	education)	are	better,	firms	in	Ukraine	find	that	skills	
for	 highly‐skilled	 and/or	 middle‐skilled	 jobs	 are	 in	 short	 supply.	 Similarly,	 while	 expenditures	 on	
social	 protection	 (pensions	 and	 other	 social	 assistance–17	 percent	 and	 4	 percent	 of	 GDP	
respectively)	are	one	of	the	highest	in	the	region,	social	assistance	is	not	well	targeted.		The	bulk	of	
payments	 for	 social	 assistance	 go	 to	 those	 outside	 the	 bottom	 40	 percent	 and	 many	 vulnerable	
groups	are	not	adequately	protected	via	social	care	services.		In	fact	to	become	more	effective,	social	
care	 services	 in	 Ukraine	 need	 to	 address	 problematic	 funding	 and	 accountability	 arrangements.	
Finally,	there	 are	concerns	that	social	expenditures	in	Ukraine	 are	unsustainably	large,	squeezing	
resources	for	public	investment	and	raising	risks	of	macroeconomic	imbalances.		All	this	suggests	
that	service	delivery	in	Ukraine	needs	to	focus	on	greater	efficiency	and	effectiveness,	while	social	
assistance	will	require	improved	targeting.	
	
       Figure	45:	Composition	of	general	government	                   Figure	46:	Human	Development	Index Rank	
            expenditure,	Ukraine	vs	peers,	2013                        2014	(lower	rank	means	higher	development)

      Health   Education   Social protection   Other GG expenditures         Moldova
                                                                              Albania
           Hungary                                                            Ukraine
                                                                              Ukraine
            Ukraine
           Ukraine                                                            Georgia
    Slovak Republic
                                                                               Turkey
            Croatia
             Poland                                                          Romania
           Moldova                                                             Croatia
             Turkey                                                           Hungary
     Czech Repablic                                                          Lithuania
           Romania
                                                                               Poland
          Lithuania
            Albania                                                    Slovak Republic
            Georgia                                                     Czech Repablic

                      0      10       20       30      40         50                     0   20   40   60   80   100 120


  Source:	IMF	GFS	for	2013	                            Source: UNDP,	2014
	
152. General	government	spending	in	Ukraine	is	considerably	higher	than	that	of	countries	
at	similar	levels	of	income.		Ukraine’s	general	government	budget	revenue,	including	social	security	
contributions,	amounts	to	41	percent	of	GDP	on	average	for	the	last	ten	years,	which	is	notably	higher	
than	the	averages	for	ECA	and	lower‐middle	income	countries	of	33	and	31	percent,	respectively.		
Ukraine	also	spends	more	than	countries	at	similar	levels	of	income	and	countries	in	the	ECA	region.	


                                                            80 
 
At	 over	 45	 percent	 of	 GDP	 on	 average	 for	 the	 last	 ten	 years,	 Ukraine’s	 general	 government	
expenditures	 are	 about	 10	 percentage	 points	 higher	 than	 the	 ECA	 regional	 average	 and	 about	 15	
percentage	points	above	the	average	for	lower‐middle	income	countries.		
	
153. The	 high	 level	 of	 expenditure	 does	 not	 translate	 into	 higher	 quality	 of	 public	 service	
delivery.		Despite	falling	student	numbers,	expenditures	on	education	increased	from	5.9	percent	of	
GDP	 in	 2007	 to	 7.2	 percent	 in	 2013	 before	 declining	 back	 to	 5.8	 percent	 in	 2015.	 	 Health	 care	
expenditures	also	increased,	albeit	from	a	relatively	low	3.7	percent	of	GDP	in	2007	to	4.2	percent	of	
GDP	in	2013.	Wage	increases	pushed	up	spending	on	the	public	sector	wage	bill	from	10.1	percent	of	
GDP	 in	 2007	 to	 about	 11.5	 percent	 in	 2013.	 Interest	 payments	 have	 also	 picked	 up	 reaching	 2.5	
percent	of	GDP	in	2013	driven	by	greater	debt	issuances	during	the	crisis	period.	On	the	other	hand,	
capital	spending	contracted	most	sharply	over	the	same	period,	down	from	5.4	percent	of	GDP	in	
2007	to	2	percent	of	GDP	in	2013.	
	
154. More	 effective	 services	 and	 targeted	 assistance	 will	 require	 optimizing	 the	 financing	
and	 improving	 the	 quality	 of	 health	 and	 education,	 further	 improving	 targeting	 of	 social	
assistance,	 and	 providing	 effective	 support	 to	 conflict	 affected	 people.	 	 The	 most	 important	
priorities	are	in	the	areas	of	health,	social	assistance,	and	targeted	support	to	conflict	affected	people.		
In	health,	a	key	priority	is	to	reform	the	health	financing	model	from	a	focus	on	hospital	care	and	
input‐based	norms	toward	a	payment	system	where	money	follows	the	patient.		In	social	assistance,	
key	priorities	include	improving	the	targeting	of	the	housing	and	utilities	subsidy	(HUS)	program	
which	has	provided	temporary	relief	from	energy	tariff	increases,	but	also	continuing	to	move	from	
categorical	to	targeted	benefits	for	the	overall	social	assistance	package.		In	light	of	the	continuing	
conflict	and	large	numbers	of	IDPs,	providing	targeted	support	to	conflict	affected	people	is	a	high	
priority.		This	will	require	providing	effective	skills,	training,	and	enterprise	support	in	affected	areas	
and	extending	systematic	assistance	to	vulnerable	households.		The	following	table	summarizes	the	
priority	 interventions	 for	 providing	 more	 effective	 services	 and	 targeted	 assistance	 identified	
through	the	analysis	in	this	chapter.	
	
                                  Priorities                                     Criticality    Time	horizon
Health	Reform:	Revise	health	financing	model	from	input‐based	norms	
                                                                                    High            Short
toward	payment	systems	where	“money	follows”	the	patient
Education:	Implement	“hub	schools”	program	to	optimize	school	network	
                                                                                  Medium            Short
while	prioritizing	investments	in	quality‐enhancing	inputs
Subnational	delivery	mechanisms:	Improve	norm‐based	financing	for	
                                                                                  Medium            Short
services,	increase	financial	autonomy,	and	clarify	roles	and	responsibilities	
Social	Assistance:	Continue	shift	from	categorical	to	targeted	benefits	and	
                                                                                  Critical     Immediate,	Short
improving	targeting	of	the	housing	utility	subsidy	(HUS)	program
Targeted	support	to	conflict	affected	people:	skills,	training,	and	MSME	
in	affected	areas	and	host	communities	and	extend	systematic	assistance	to	         High       Immediate,	Short
vulnerable	households                                                                                             	

	
	
	


                                                           81 
 
More	Efficient	Health	Services	

155. Provision	of	better	and	more	comprehensive	health	care	is	a	priority.	Ukraine	is	facing	
a	serious	health	situation	and	needs	to	take	urgent,	appropriate	and	deep	reform	actions	to	improve	
its	health	services	and	to	reverse	the	progressive	deterioration	of	its	citizen’s	health.		The	overarching	
goal	of	these	reforms	should	be	to	create	a	health	system	that	is	responsive	to	clients,	transparent,	
effective	and	equitable	in	preventing	and	controlling	non‐communicable	diseases	(NCDs)	by	scaling	
up	preventive	and	primary	care.	
	
          Figure	47.	Distribution	of	resources	by	type	of	services/activities	(%	of	total),	2014	


                            Patient care institutions                                               62.7

                                                    
      Out‐patients’ clinics, ambulance departments,…                    12.1

                                 Primary health care                9.4

             Preventive care/ sanitary/ antiepidemic…        1.8

                               Sanatoria and resorts         1.8

            Research and development in the health…         0.6

                   Medical products and equipment           0.0

       Other activity in the health protection system                   11.5

                                                        0          10      20   30   40   50   60     70
                                                                                                           	
	
156. Most	resources	are	spent	on	in‐patient	and	specialized	outpatient	care	and	around	10	
percent	 on	 primary	 and	 preventive	 care.	Of	all	premature	deaths	(at	under	75	years	of	age)	in	
2004,	17	percent	could	have	been	avoided	with	adequate	prevention	of	major	risk	factors	(smoking,	
alcohol,	diet	and	road	traffic	accidents).	Also	80	percent	of	deaths	among	working‐age	males	and	30	
percent	 of	 deaths	 among	 working‐age	 females	 were	 from	 illnesses	 that	 could	 have	 been	 treated	
adequately	at	the	primary	care	level.	
	
157. The	Government	spends	about	12	percent	of	total	public	expenditure	on	health,	which	
is	 comparable	 to	 other	 countries	 in	 the	 region.		Most	government	health	financing	comes	from	
general	 taxation,	 and	 it	 is	 allocated	 according	 to	 inputs	 and	 mainly	 to	 cover	 recurrent	 costs	 (96	
percent	of	total	costs).		In	2013,	direct	funding	to	health	facilities	was	mainly	spent	to	cover	salaries	
of	personnel	(e.g.	84	percent	of	total	budget	spent	on	personnel	in	out‐patients	clinics	and	74	percent	
in	general	hospitals	in	2013,	BOOST	data).		Ukraine	has	an	oversized	health	care	infrastructure	with	
about	40	percent	more	beds	per	capita	than	the	WHO	European	Region	average.	This	infrastructure	
consumes	 most	 of	 the	 available	 funding,	 often	 providing	 only	 very	 basic	 inpatient	 and	 outpatient	
services.	In	2014,	more	than	a	half	of	public	spending	on	health	was	allocated	for	in‐patient	facilities	
and	less	than	a	tenth	on	primary	health	care	disease	prevention.	
	


                                                            82 
 
158. Out	 of	 pocket	 payments	 are	 high,	 which	 is	 a	 barrier	 to	 access	 for	 all	 and	 particularly	
for	 the	 rural	 and	 the	 poor	 population.	 High	 levels	 of	 out	 of	 pocket	 payments	 (OOPs)	 create	 a	
barrier	 to	 access	 health	 services	 for	 the	 poor	 and	 the	 bottom	 40	 percent	 and	 can	 generate	
catastrophic	expenses	for	those	seeking	urgent	care,	or	those	affected	by	chronic	diseases	requiring	
medicines.	Private	households’	expenditure,	mainly	patients’	out	of	pockets	(OOPs)	at	the	point	of	
service	delivery,	amounted	to	43.6	percent	of	total	health	expenditure	or	3.3	percent	of	GDP	in	2012,	
and	 have	 grown	 further	 since.	 De	 jure,	 all	 medical	 services	 should	 be	 provided	 free	 of	 charge	 for	
patients,	but	in	practice	patients	pay	for	treatment.	Anticipation	of	high	expenditures	associated	with	
use	of	health	care	services	puts	another	barrier	to	timely	and	regular	access	to	medical	service.	
	
159. Ukraine	 is	 losing	 its	 human	 capital	 due	 to	 ineffective	 and	 poorly	 performing	 health	
system,	something	it	can	ill	afford	with	a	declining	working‐age	population15.		Life	expectancy	
at	birth	(LEB)	is	low	(71	years	in	2013);	it	lags	more	than	10	years	behind	EU	and	OECD.	The	low	LEB	
is	mainly	explained	by	excess	mortality	due	to	non‐communicable	diseases	(NCD)	among	male	and	
rural	population.	Taken	together,	evidence	shows	that	Ukraine	is	facing	a	health	crisis	and	needs	to	
undertake	 urgent,	 appropriate,	 and	 deep	 reforms	 to	 reverse	 the	 progressive	 deterioration	 of	 its	
citizens’	 health	 and	 in	 their	 trust	 of	 the	 system.	 Better	 governance	 would	 be	 a	 key	 lever	 for	
implementation	of	the	needed	changes.	
	
160. The	main	reason	of	premature	deaths	and	disabilities	is	a	high	burden	of	NCDs,	and	it	
significantly	contributes	to	avoidable	productivity	loses.	NCD‐related	morbidity	and	mortality	is	
very	high	in	Ukraine:	the	age‐standardized	mortality	rate	from	NCDs	in	2012	accounted	for	749	cases	
per	 100,000	 population,	 while	 in	 neighboring	 Poland	 it	 was	 494	 cases,	 and	 533	 in	 Slovakia.	 The	
existing	healthcare	system	is	not	shaped	to	effectively	control	epidemic	of	NCDs	in	the	country.	The	
current	 health	 service	 delivery	 is	 not	 oriented	 towards	 prevention,	 early	 detection	 and	 effective	
management	 of	 NCDs;	 it	 stays	 mainly	 unchanged	 since	 country’s	 independency	 and	 focused	 at	
control	of	infectious	diseases	and	provision	of	curative	medicine	instead	of	health	promotion.	High	
levels	of	consumption	of	alcohol	(13.9	liters	of	pure	alcohol	per	person	per	year	)	and	tobacco	(21%	
prevalence	 as	 of	 2014	 ),	 unhealthy	 diets	 and	 low	 physical	 activity	 are	 among	 key	 risk	 factors	
explaining	high	burden	of	NCDs.	
         	
161. Strong	 leadership	 and	 the	 stewardship	 function	 at	 the	 central	 level	 are	 needed	
particularly	in	the	new	decentralized	environment.		At	present,	81.5	percent	of	total	government	
expenditure	 on	 health	 is	 channeled	 through	 local	 governments,	 and	 18.5	 percent	 through	 central	
institutions,	 including	 the	 Ministry	 of	 Health.	 In	 the	 new	 decentralized	 environment,	 MoH	 should	
develop	the	role	of	planner,	coordinator,	and	evaluator	of	health	services’	standards	and	results,	with	
local	authorities	at	regional,	city,	district,	and	community	levels	assuming	the	role	of	implementing	
actors.		Instead,	the	ministerial	orders,	often	outdated,	continue	to	impose	extremely	detailed	input‐
based	“norms”	(on	personnel,	infrastructure,	etc.)	on	all	individual	facilities,	and	has	focused	mainly	
on	procuring	(very	inefficiently)	inputs	such	as	drugs	for	the	national	programs.	The	local	authorities	

                                                            
15	Bloom	et	al	(2004)	find	that	increase	of	life	expectancy	by	1	year	raises	the	steady	state	GDP	per	capita	by	

about	4	percent.	

                                                               83 
 
are	 having	 limited	 flexibility	 for	 effective	 system	 management	 and	 act	 without	 clear	 mandates	 in	
terms	of	service	standards	and	results.	
	
Skilled	Labor	Force	

162. With	 firms	 complaining	 about	 the	 shortage	 of	 skilled	 labor,	 Ukraine’s	 training	 and	
education	 institutions	 need	 to	 become	 more	 responsive.	While	the	country	performs	at	the	top	
end	 in	 terms	 of	 educational	 outcomes	 like	 average	 years	 of	 schooling	 and	 tertiary	 education	
attainment,	there	is	increasing	evidence	that	skills	that	employers	need	are	deficient.		According	to	a	
firm	survey	in	2015,	most	firms	in	four	key	sectors	of	economy	(i.e.	agribusiness	food	processors,	
Agri‐business	growers,	ICT,	and	renewable	energy)	report	that	the	education	system	does	not	train	
students	to	get	the	skills	that	employers	need.	About	70	percent	of	the	firms	surveyed	reported	that	
graduates	of	the	general	education	system	and	technical	vocational	education	and	training	(TVET)	
system	do	not	have	practical	skills	or	up‐to‐date	knowledge.	Close	to	four	firms	out	of	ten	report	that	
their	employees’	skill	gaps	prevent	them	from	achieving	business	objectives.	This	is	true	for	roughly	
half	the	firms	in	the	food	processing	and	ICT	sectors	(Figure	48)	
	
                       Figure	48.	Share	of	firms	reporting	a	significant	skill	gap,	%	




                                                                                                        	
	        Source:	Del	Carpio	and	others	forthcoming	
	
163. The	 skills	 most	 demanded	 by	 employers	 include	 a	 mix	 of	 technical,	 socio‐emotional	
and	 advanced	 cognitive	 skills.	 The	 firm	 survey	 shows	 that	 advanced	 cognitive	 skills	 that	 allow	
workers	 to	 analyze	 and	 solve	 problems,	 manage	 their	 time,	 gain	 new	 knowledge	 and	 learn	 new	
methods,	and	communicate	effectively,	are	highly	demanded	in	Ukraine.	Employers	not	only	look	for	
workers	who	think	well	but	also	for	those	who	demonstrate	socio‐emotional	skills	that	help	manage	
one’s	emotions	and	behaviors	(like	self‐management,	resilience,	ethics),	goal	setting	and	willingness	
to	learn	(achievement	motivation),	and	the	ability	to	work	with	others	(teamwork).		The	technical	
skills	 sought	 are	 typically	 occupation	 or	 job‐specific,	 like	 sales	 skills,	 knowledge	 of	 markets	 and	
products,	and	advanced	computing	skills.	
	
164. Formal	 education	 institutions	 are	 the	 most	 fertile	 ground	 to	 build	 skills,	 but	 the	
current	 system	 lacks	 flexibility,	 quality	 standards,	 and	 relevance	 for	 today’s	 labor	 market	
needs.	Six	out	of	ten	firms	from	four	key	sectors	report	a	skills	gap.		Ukraine’s	eighth‐grade	students	

                                                      84 
 
scored	well	in	the	2011	international	assessment	conducted	as	part	of	the	Trends	in	International	
Mathematics	and	Science	Study	(TIMSS),	ranking	in	the	same	group	as	high‐income	countries	like	
Italy,	Norway,	or	Sweden.	However,	beyond	credentials	and	students’	basic	academic	skills,	there	are	
questions	 about	 the	 relevance	 of	 the	 workers’	 education,	 particularly	 those	 graduating	 from	
vocational	education	institutions.	Over	the	years,	the	supply	of	university	graduates	has	increased	
beyond	 actual	 demand,	 although	 there	 are	 questions	 about	 the	 quality	 of	 instruction.	 Curriculum	
formation	 is	 mostly	 a	 top‐down	 process	 with	 limited	 private	 sector	 involvement.	 This	 lack	 of	
interaction	 between	 employers	 and	 the	 formal	 education	 system	 exacerbates	 skill	 mismatches.	 A	
large	segment	of	the	labor	force	is	trained	for	professions	that	are	no	longer	in	demand,	creating	a	
surplus	of	unneeded	skills.	While	firms	also	seek	to	partner	with	education	institutions	to	provide	
inputs	to	their	curricula,	less	than	a	quarter	of	all	firms	surveyed	actually	have	regular	contact	with	
education	or	training	institutions.	
	
      Figure	49:	Public	expenditure	on	education,	                   Figure	50:	Pupil‐Teacher	Ratio	in	secondary	
               2010‐2015,	percent	GDP	                              education,	Ukraine	vs	comparators,	2010‐2015	
           6.5 6.3                                                                                                 21.5
                     5.8                                                                                    19.0
                                                            5.5                                         16.6
                           5.0 5.0          5.0 4.8                                                 14.8                 15.1
                                                      4.3                               12.612.8
                                                                                                13.6
                                                                                                                            11.812.2
                                     3.2                                            10.6
                                                                          8.5 9.4




    Source:	Find	My	Friends	using	the	Ed	Stats	Database	          Source:	Find	My	Friends	using	the	Ed	Stats	Database	
	
165. By	 most	 metrics,	 Ukraine’s	 public	 expenditure	 on	 education	 has	 been	 high	 in	 recent	
years.	However,	the	recent	economic	turmoil	took	its	toll	on	the	level	of	public	funding	for	education.	
Between	2013	and	2015,	budget	financing	of	the	sector	shrank	from	7.2	percent	of	GDP	to	5.8	percent	
(from	21	percent	to	17	percent	of	total	government	expenditures).	Following	the	sharp	devaluation	
of	the	hryvnia,	public	education	spending	declined	by	35	percent	in	real	terms	over	two	years.	This	
decline	brought	Ukraine	closer	to	international	benchmarks	in	terms	of	the	share	of	national	wealth	
devoted	to	the	financing	of	education.	Ukraine	is	now	on	par	with	such	countries	as	Slovenia,	Israel,	
France,	and	the	UK	and	closer	to	the	OECD	and	EU	averages	of	5.3	percent	of	GDP.	
	
166. However,	 the	 efficiency	 of	 public	 spending	 in	 education	 remains	 questionable.	 The	
public	budget	finances	the	maintenance	of	an	oversized	school	network.	The	number	of	teachers	and	
schools	 has	 remained	 nearly	 the	 same	 despite	 a	 severe	 decline	 in	 student	 population	 (by	 forty	
percent	over	the	last	two	decades).	Efficiency	indicators,	including	the	average	school	size	and	the	
student‐teacher	ratio,	have	been	falling	sharply—the	ratio	of	8.5	students	per	teacher	is	among	the	


                                                                  85 
 
lowest	 in	 the	 world.	 Large	 allocations	 to	 non‐personnel	 recurrent	 costs	 and	 non‐means	 tested	
scholarships	affect	all	levels	of	the	education	system—from	preschool	through	university.	
	
                          Figure	51:	Ukraine	Public	Expenditure	on	Education	
                    (%	of	GDP	and	%	of	Total	Government	Expenditure,	2007‐2015)	
                       25%
                                              21.7% 21.1%
                                                          20.7% 20.6% 20.9%
                              19.6% 19.7%                                         19.1%
                       20%
                                                                                          16.8%

                       15%


                       10%                           7.4%
                                              7.1%           6.6%   7.2%   7.2%
                              5.9%   6.2%                                         6.3%    5.8%

                        5%


                        0%
                              2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015

                                 % of Total Government Expenditures               % of GDP
                                                                                                  	
                  Source:	Ukraine	PFR	2016.
	
167. In	 2016,	 the	 Government	 has	 begun	 to	 address	 some	 of	 these	 concerns.	The	launching	
of	 the	 “hub	 schools”	 program	 is	 aimed	 at	 beginning	 the	 long	 overdue	 optimization	 of	 the	 general	
secondary	 school	 network	 in	 line	 with	 the	 declining	 student	 population.	 Further	 reallocations	 of	
public	 resources	 should	 prioritize	 investments	 in	 quality‐enhancing	 inputs	 to	 improve	 education	
quality	and	make	the	sector	adaptable	to	new	economic	needs.		Targeting	scarce	public	funds	toward	
their	 most	 optimal	 uses—such	 as	 capital	 investment	 and	 ensuring	 equitable	 access	 to	 learning	
materials	 and	 well‐qualified	 teachers	 for	 all	 students—should	 be	 the	 priority.	 Meanwhile	 shifting	
away	from	subsidizing	non‐quality	enhancing	expenditures—such	as	unnecessarily	small	class	sizes	
or	generous	scholarships	for	non‐needy	students—can	create	fiscal	space	for	more	pressing	budget	
needs.		
	
168. At	the	same	time,	concerns	regarding	declining	access	to	quality	education	for	the	poor	
and	the	bottom	40	percent	should	be	taken	seriously.	The	quality	of	basic	education	is	becoming	
highly	 differentiated	 for	 different	 groups	 within	 Ukrainian	 society.	 Unequal	 access	 to	 quality	
education	creates	barriers	for	social	mobility	and	negatively	affects	higher	levels	of	education.	There	
are	anecdotic	cases	providing	evidence	of	dramatic	differences	in	public	financing	among	elite	and	
non‐elite	 schools	 and	 preschool	 organizations.	 More	 than	 half	 the	 parents	 disagreed	 with	 the	
statement	that	secondary	education	give	equal	access	to	everybody	for	free,	in	a	recent	poll.	There	is	
also	public	perception	of	unequal	access	to	the	best	higher	education	institutions.	This	issue	has	not	
been	an	object	of	any	in‐depth	studies	so	far	but	may	require	further	investigation	in	the	future.	
	
	
	


                                                            86 
 
Subnational	Delivery	Mechanisms	and	Municipal	Utilities	
	
169. In	 fiscal	 terms,	 Ukraine	 is	 highly	 decentralized,	 although	 administrative	
decentralization	 is	 lagging	 considerably.	 	 Subnational	 expenditures	 account	 for	 31	 percent	 of	
consolidated	government	spending.	This	places	Ukraine	in	the	company	of	such	countries	as	Austria,	
Poland,	 and	 Italy,	and	ranks	it	considerably	 more	decentralized	than	Romania	 and	Bulgaria.	Most	
subnational	spending	occurs	at	the	second	(raion	and	city‐of‐oblast‐subordination)	tier.	Together,	
second‐tier	 subnational	 governments	 accounted	 for	 65	 percent	 of	 total	 subnational	 spending	 in	
2015.	 Top‐tier	 subnational	 governments	 (Kyiv	 and	 the	 oblasts)	 accounted	 for	 27	 percent	 of	
subnational	 spending.	 Third‐tier	 subnational	 governments	 accounted	 for	 the	 remaining	 seven	
percent.	
	
170. The	 vast	 majority	 of	 subnational	 spending	 is	 devoted	 to	 the	 social	 sectors,	 while	
spending	 on	 economic	 infrastructure,	 such	 as	 roads,	 accounts	 for	 only	 seven	 percent	 of	 total	
expenditure.	Local	governments	in	Ukraine	bear	the	full	cost	of	running	schools,	hospitals	and	social	
welfare	 facilities	 (including	 the	 wage	 cost	 associated	 with	 the	 provision	 of	 these	 services).	 In	
addition,	social	assistance‐related	cash	benefits,	which	are	usually	fully	administrated	by	relevant	
central	government	bodies	in	other	countries,	are	passed	through	the	budgets	of	local	governments	
in	Ukraine	as	well.	In	2015,	78	percent	of	total	subnational	spending	is	devoted	to	education,	health	
and	 social	 protection.	 Spending	 on	 ‘housing’	 including	 subsidies	 to	 cover	 the	 arrears	 of	 utility	
companies,	accounts	for	another	six	percent.	Capital	expenditure	at	the	local	level	is	low	for	a	lower	
middle	income	country.	Despite	notable	progress	to	increase	capital	expenditures,	which	were	scaled	
up	from	a	low	of	0.9	percent	of	GDP	in	2014	to	1.6	percent	of	GDP	in	2015,	the	level	is	yet	very	low	
given	the	transition	status	of	the	country	and	its	growing	needs	for	investments	injections.	
	
171. Ukraine’s	 intergovernmental	 fiscal	 relations	 provide	 an	 adequate	 level	 equalization,	
but	falls	short	of	promoting	efficient	service	delivery:	
        	
     The	inter‐budgetary	transfer	system	is	rigid	and	based	on	an	official	registered	number	of	
        citizens	and	outdated	input‐based	“norms”	dis‐incentivizing	rationalization	of	education	and	
        healthcare	networks.	It	not	only	undermines	efficient	service	provision	but	recently	became	
        a	 bottleneck	 for	 timely	 and	 effective	 financial	 support	 of	 conflict‐affected	 territory	 and	
        people.	
       Revenue	sharing	arrangements	are	not	aligning	resources	with	services	‐	corporate	income	
        tax,	for	example,	is	not	a	suitable	source	of	revenue	for	subnational	governments;	and	limited	
        tax	base	 for	 property	tax	(i.e.,	high	square	area	thresholds	and	exclusion	 of	industrial	and	
        commercial	property)	will	limit	the	yield	of	the	property	tax.	
       Ongoing	amalgamation	of	villages	and	settlements	may	fall	short	of	expectations	of	improved	
        service	delivery	and	local	accountability.	The	key	decentralization	goals,	such	as	determining	
        the	 territorial	 and	 administrative	 organization	 of	 different	 tiers	 of	 government	 to	 support	
        subsidiarity,	local	accountability	and	sound	fiscal	management	at	the	subnational	level	would	
        be	difficult	to	reach	within	existing	design	of	the	voluntary	amalgamation	of	communities.	


                                                     87 
 
		
172. Access	 to	 municipal	 utilities	 is	 more	 constrained	 for	 the	 B40	 population,	 with	 the	
sector	 suffering	 from	 decades	 of	 underinvestment,	 poor	 maintenance,	 and	 low	 quality	 of	
service	delivery.		Estimates	based	on	the	household	survey	indicate	that	in	2013,	only	27	percent	of	
the	B40	population	had	 access	to	district	heating,	compared	to	43	percent	of	the	 T60	 population.		
Similarly,	23	percent	of	the	B40	population	had	access	to	hot	water	compared	to	38	percent	of	the	
T60.		The	need	to	invest	in	enhancing	the	efficiency,	access,	and	quality	of	district	heating,	water,	and	
sanitation	is	considerable.		Furthermore,	low	tariff	levels	are	a	major	limitation	to	the	sustainability	
of	these	utilities.	
	
173. Protracted	 underinvestment	 in	 district	 heating	 sector	 has	 led	 to	 physical	 and	
economic	 inefficiency	 and	 high	 heat	 losses	 in	 production,	 transmission	 and	 distribution.	On	
the	demand	side,	building	energy	efficiency	in	Ukraine	is	estimated	to	be	about	2‐2.5	times	worse	
than	 in	 Western	 Europe.	 However,	 until	 recently,	 consumers	 have	 had	 very	 little	 incentive	 to	
conserve	heat	due	to	low	tariffs	and	the	low	level	of	heat	consumption	metering.	As	a	result,	about	
30	percent	of	all	heat	is	lost	during	end	use.		In	2012,	the	government	approved	a	master	plan	to	
improve	 energy	 efficiency	 in	 the	 DH	 sector	 based	 on	 a	 large	 scale	 investment	 program	 in	 energy	
efficiency	measures	and	reforms	of	the	social	safety	net	to	protect	vulnerable	consumers.		However,	
implementation	of	this	action	plan	has	been	slow.	Reforms	in	DH	sector	continued	with	moving	the	
regulatory	responsibilities	for	the	sector	to	the	newly	established	regulator.		However,	going	forward,	
this	new	regulator	requires	capacity	building,	especially	in	the	area	of	incentive‐based	regulation	for	
utilities.	
          	
174. The	 need	 for	 rehabilitation	 is	 exacerbated	 by	 high	 overall	 energy	 consumption	 in	
water	 production	 and	 wastewater	 treatment.	It	is	estimated	that	energy	intensity	in	Ukraine	is	
one	 of	 the	 highest	 in	 the	 region.	 Improving	 service	 delivery	 through	 the	 rehabilitation	 of	
infrastructure	 and	 the	 promotion	 of	 energy‐efficiency	 solutions	 offers	 the	 possibility	 of	 driving	
utilities	toward	financial	sustainability	while	providing	improved	services.	In	addition,	institutional	
capacity	building	for	water	and	sanitation	utilities	is	also	critical.	
	
Social	Assistance	
	
175. Ukraine	spends	a	considerable	amount	on	social	assistance,	although	much	of	it	is	not	
well	 targeted.		Social	assistance	spending	increased	significantly	between	2009	and	2012,	chiefly	
due	 to	 increases	 in	 child	 and	 family	 related	 benefits.	 Although	 spending	 has	 declined	 since	 2012,	
Ukraine	remains	one	of	the	highest	spenders	on	social	assistance	in	the	region.		Yet,	the	bulk	of	the	
spending	does	not	reach	the	poor.	According	to	prior	analysis,	only	a	third	of	all	transfers	reached	
the	poor.		Spending	is	dominated	by	the	child‐birth	benefit	and	various	categorical	benefits,	while	the	
means‐tested	low‐income	family	benefit	accounts	for	a	small	portion.		Prior	to	2014,	expenditures	
also	included	a	large	portion	on	universal	energy	subsidies.	
	




                                                      88 
 
    Figure	52:	Coverage	rate	for	various	countries,	               Figure	53:	Share	of	total	beneficiaries	by	deciles	
    2012	and	for	Ukraine,	2014                                     and	share	of	total	transfers	by	deciles	of	
                                                                   expenditure
     100                                                                                   Share of all beneficiaries
       90                                                                 14
                                                                                           Share of total transferes

       80                                                                 12
       70
                                                                          10
       60
                                                                           8
       50
                                                                           6
       40
                                                                           4
       30
       20                                                                  2

       10                                                                  0

        0
            MT LU NL HU UK DK SE SI LV RO LT EE BG PT CZ ES
                                                               


                                                                                     Income decile groups

    Sources: WB staff based on BOOST,                              Sources: WB staff based on BOOST
                                                                   Note: (Direct and indirect beneficiaries, 2014 HBS) 
	
176. Despite	the	high	rates	of	welfare	spending,	Ukraine	ranks	low	in	providing	protection	
through	 social	 assistance.	 The	 rate	 of	 coverage	 for	 poor	 in	 Ukraine	 is	 among	 the	 lowest	 in	 the	
region,	while	welfare	spending	is	sizeable.	In	other	words,	the	cost‐effectiveness	and	equity	resulting	
from	social	assistance	is	not	commensurate	with	the	amount	of	resources	spent.	Ukraine	only	covers	
around	 half	 of	 the	 poorest	 quintile	 through	 social	 assistance,	 lower	 than	 most	 other	 countries	 in	
Europe.	
	
177. Despite	 on‐going	 fiscally	 expansive	 efforts	 to	 support	 the	 population	 such	 as	 the	
enlarged	 Housing	 and	 Utilities	 Subsidy	 (HUS)	 program,	 overall	 support	 to	 vulnerable	
households	 suffers	 from	 both	 low	 coverage	 and	 low	 adequacy.	 Ukraine	 inherited	 a	 welfare	
system	dominated	by	categorical	benefits.	Many	of	these	programs	are	aimed	for	groups	that	are	not	
poor	on	average.	As	a	result,	despite	high	rates	of	spending	Ukraine	ranks	low	in	providing	protection	
through	 social	 assistance	 ‐	 Ukraine	 only	 covers	 around	 half	 of	 the	 poorest	 quintile	 through	 social	
assistance,	lower	than	most	other	countries	in	Europe.	The	generosity	of	targeted	social	assistance	is	
also	low;	on	average	social	programs	amounts	only	to	about	17	percent	of	expenditures	of	the	poorest	
quintile.	During	2014‐15,	the	Government	of	Ukraine	implemented	a	range	of	measures	to	reform	
social	assistance	programs	with	the	broader	aim	of	containing	spending	and	to	reallocate	resources	
to	increase	the	share	of	transfers	targeting	the	poor.	At	the	same	time,	overall	support	to	low‐income	
households	still	is	not	adequate.	
	
178. Since	2014,	the	authorities	have	implemented	a	number	of	measures	to	reform	social	
assistance	 programs.		These	measures	aim	to	put	in	place	fiscally	affordable	safety‐nets	programs	
and	mitigate	the	impact	of	the	crisis	on	the	poor	through	targeted	assistance.		The	reforms	should	
have	increased	the	share	of	targeted	assistance	reaching	low‐income	households	and	helped	contain	



                                                                  89 
 
social	assistance	spending.	However,	the	economic	crisis	and	the	rapid	escalation	of	energy	tariffs	
are	eroding	these	savings	as	the	need	for	social	assistance	has	increased.	
        	
179. Despite	 the	 efforts,	 challenges	 remain	 that	 suggest	 a	 number	 of	 areas	 for	 further	
attention	going	forward.		First,	on	the	composition	of	spending,	the	child	birth	grant	remains	a	poor	
policy	choice	with	attendant	high	cost	and	low	social	return.		Second,	while	overall	social	assistance	
reaches	 a	 large	 share	 of	 the	 population	 (with	 55	 percent	 of	 the	 population	 benefiting	 directly	 or	
indirectly	from	at	least	one	form	of	social	assistance),	adequacy	of	support	measured	by	generosity	
of	 payments	 is	 generally	 low.	 Third,	 the	 system	 is	 in	 need	 of	 administrative	 modernization,	 to	
improve	accessibility,	administrative	efficiency	and	targeting.	
        	
180. The	 HUS	 program	 has	 served	 an	 important	 function	 of	 mitigating	 the	 impact	 of	 the	
energy	 tariff	 increases	 on	 the	 population,	 but	 the	 program	 needs	 to	 be	 better	 targeted	 going	
forward,	including	possible	consolidation	with	the	GMI	program	in	the	longer	term.	While	the	
HUS	program	is	means‐tested,	the	benefit	is	received	by	around	six	million	households,	making	it	a	
poorly	targeted.	In	the	medium	term,	a	key	priority	is	to	improve	targeting	of	the	program	and	in	the	
longer	term,	it	should	also	be	considered	for	consolidation	with	the	GMI	program.	While	Ukraine	has	
a	number	of	targeted	programs,	these	have	their	own	eligibility	rules	and	targeting	methodologies	
which	are	not	achieving	the	needed	targeting	accuracy.	Therefore,	it	is	recommended	that	a	common	
targeting	 approach	 be	 adopted	 that	 takes	 advantage	 of	 economies	 of	 scale	 made	 possible	 by	 a	
common	 platform.	 The	 unified	 approach	 would	 enable	 better	 quality	 information,	 more	 effective	
cross‐checks,	verification,	data	sourcing,	analytics,	and	data	sharing	protocols	between	agencies.	In	
the	 short	 term,	 the	 HUS	 should	 continue	 to	 be	 given	 priority	 for	 improving	 the	 Management	
Information	 System	 (MIS),	 streamlined	 procedures,	 and	 improving	 human	 resources	 through	
training	and	appropriate	remuneration.	More	transparent	financial	management	of	the	HUS	is	also	
important	to	replace	an	opaque	system	of	inter‐institutional	settlements	that	results	in	waste,	fraud	
and	errors.	
	
Targeted	support	to	conflict‐affected	

181. Targeted	support	to	conflict	affected	people	is	an	urgent	priority.	The	direct	impacts	of	
the	 conflict	 are	 faced	 by	 the	 population	 in	 conflict	 affected	 areas,	 but	 also	 by	 internally	 displaced	
persons,	returning	combatants,	and	host	communities	across	Ukraine.		As	the	conflict	enters	its	third	
year,	while	there	is	still	an	urgent	need	for	humanitarian	assistance,	conflict‐affected	communities,	
displaced	 Ukrainians,	 and	 the	 communities	 that	 host	 them	 also	 face	 considerable	 broader	
development	 challenges,	 including	 employment,	 education,	 health,	 and	 psychological	 and	 social	
stress.	 Preexisting	 social	 inequalities	 and	 regional	 divides	 are	 often	 exacerbated	 and	 there	 are	
considerable	strains	on	service	delivery	systems	and	already	depressed	labor	markets.	
	
182. There	 is	 an	 urgent	 need	 for	 a	 national	 vision	 and	 development	 strategy,	 developed	
with	 conflict	 affected	 citizens,	 in	 response	 to	 the	 socio‐economic	 impacts	 of	 the	 conflict—
targeting	 both	 eastern	 populations	 and	 conflict‐affected	 communities	 across	 Ukraine	 (including	
IDPs,	 former	 combatants,	 and	 host	 communities).	 	 	 The	 2015	 Recovery	 and	 Peacebuilding	
Assessment	for	eastern	Ukraine	(jointly	prepared	by	the	World	Bank,	United	Nations,	and	European	

                                                        90 
 
Union	at	the	request	of	Government)	and	the	Ukraine	State	Target	Program	for	Peacebuilding	and	
Recovery	of	the	Eastern	Regions	(planned	for	release	in	late	2016)	and	led	by	MOT,	provide	priorities	
for	action	in	this	regard.		Target	areas	include:	

       Restoring critical infrastructure and key social services in such fields as education, health
        care, social protection, public buildings and housing, energy, transport, water supply and
        removal, and environmental protection. In areas hosting IDPs, this would also include
        reducing the burdens on overstretched service delivery systems;        
         
       Promoting economic recovery by considering viable options for economic revitalization in
        eastern Ukraine implementing local economic planning, creating new jobs, skill training and
        building human capital, providing support to micro-, small and medium-size business,
        expanding access to financial services;

       Strengthening social resilience, peacebuilding and community security by restoring citizen
        confidence; providing legal assistance and ensuring access to justice; monitoring the situation
        in communities in terms of vulnerability, risks and social bonds; providing psychological and
        social support to the conflict-affected populations.
	
183. Across	 all	 target	 areas,	 modified	 local	 delivery	 mechanisms	 and	 strengthened	 local	
governance	will	be	required,	including	innovative	mechanisms	for	delivering	services	and	support	
in	high‐risk	and	insecure	settings.	Engaging	conflict‐affected	citizens	is	a	critical	starting	point	for	the	
development	 of	 appropriate	 locally‐relevant	 responses.	 Government	 outreach	 and	 support	 to	
eastern	regions	will	help	build	confidence	and	trust	and	to	promote	longer‐term	stability,	integration	
and	development	progress.			
	
	
	                               	




                                                    91 
 
Acknowledgements	
	
This	Systematic	Country	Diagnostic	(SCD)	for	Ukraine	was	prepared	through	a	consultative	process	
involving	 the	 Government	 of	 Ukraine,	 development	 partners,	 civil	 society,	 and	 private	 sector	
representatives	held	between	April	and	December	2016.		Special	thanks	are	due	to	the	Ministry	of	
Finance,	Ministry	of	Economic	Development	and	Trade,	and	key	line	ministries	for	their	contributions	
to	 initial	 discussions	 on	 the	 evidence	 base	 and	 findings	 and	 subsequent	 consultations	 on	 the	
pathways	and	priorities	identified	in	the	draft	report.		
	
The	SCD	was	prepared	by	a	team	of	technical	and	policy	experts	nominated	by	Practice	Managers	
across	the	Global	Practices,	IFC,	and	MIGA.		The	table	of	SCD	team	members	and	focal	points	and	their	
respective	practice	managers	is	below.		The	work	of	the	SCD	was	steered	by	an	informal	advisory	
Group	 comprising	 the	 Country	 Director	 (Satu	 Kahkonen	 and	 previously	 Qimiao	 Fan),	 Gallina	
Vincelette/Ivailo	 Izvorski	 (MFM	 Practice	 Manager),	 Carolina	 Sanchez	 (Poverty	 Practice	 Manager),	
Rufat	Alimardanov	(IFC	Country	Manager),	Kartick	Kumar	(IFC	Strategy	Officer),	Alejandro	Cedeno	
(CPC),	Feng	Zhao	(HD	Program	Leader),	Ludmilla	Butenko	(SD	Program	Leader),	Faruk	Khan	(Lead	
Economist	and	EFI	Program	Leader,	co‐TTL),	and	Caterina	Laderchi	(Senior	Poverty	Economist,	co‐
TTL).	
	
Thanks	are	due	for	comments	and	suggestions	received	at	various	stages	of	the	analysis	from	the	
peer	reviewers	(Gallina	Vincelette,	Lars	Sondergaard,	and	Sebastian	Eckardt),	practice	groups,	and	
others	within	the	World	Bank	Group.		This	report	was	prepared	under	the	overall	guidance	of	Cyril	
Muller	 (Regional	 Vice	 President,	 ECA),	 Satu	 Kahkonen	 (Country	 Director),	 and	 Tomasz	 Telma	
(Director,	IFC).	

                                            UKRAINE	SCD	TEAM	

    Global	Practice	           Focal	Points	/	Team	Members	             Practice	Manager	
    Country	Director:	Satu	Kahkonen	
    CMU:	Alejandro	Cedeno,	Klavdiya	Maksymenko	
    Macroeconomics	&	Fiscal	   Faruk	Khan	(co‐TTL),	Anastasia	          Ivailo	Izvorski/Gallina	Vincelette	
    Mgmt.	                     Golovach		
                               Caterina	Ruggeri	Laderchi	(co‐TTL),	     Carolina	Sanchez	
    Poverty	
                               Mikhail	Matytsin	
    Finance	&	Markets	         Vahe	Vardanyan,	Yevhen	Hrebeniuk	        Aurora	Ferrari	
                               Oleksii	Balabushko,	Iryna	Shcherbyna,	   Adrian	Fozzard,	Hiba	Tahboub,	
    Governance	                Irina	Shmeliova,	Natalia	Manuilova,	     Soukeyna	Kane	
                               David	Bernstein,	Amit	Mukherjee	
    Trade	&	Competitiveness	   Heinz	Strubenhoff;	Eugeniu	Osmochescu	   Lisa	Kaestner	
                               Igor	Kheyfets	(Education	PER)	and	       Cristian	Aedo	
    Education	
                               Ximena	Del	Carpio	(Skills	Report)	
    Health,	Nutrition	&	                                                Enis	Baris	
                               Feng	Zhao	
    Population	



                                                      92 
 
    Social	Protection	and	    Katerina	Petrina,	Nithin	Umapathi,	      Andrew	Mason	
    Labor	                    Yuliya	Smolyar,	Oleksiy	Sluchynskyy	
    Agriculture	              Peter	Goodman	                           Marianne	Grosclaude	(Acting)	
                              Ani	Balabanyan,	Dmytro	Glazkov,	Elina	   Ranjit	Lamech	
    Energy	&	Extractives	
                              Hokkanen	
    Environment	&	Natural	
                              Alexei	Slenzak	                          Kulsum	Ahmed	
    Resources	
    Social,	Urban,	Rural	&	   Ludmilla	Butenko	(Urban	and	DRM),	       David	Sislen	(Urban	and	DRM),	
    Resilience	(SURR)	        Holly	Benner	(Social)	                   Nina	Bhatt	(Social)	
    Transport	&	ICT	          Simon	Ellis	                             Juan	Gavira	
    Water	                    Wilfried	Hundertmark	                    Steven	N.	Schonberger	
    IFC	                      Kartick	Kumar,	Elena	Voloshina	          Rufat	Alimardanov	
                              Franciscus	Johannes	Linden,	Paul	        Dan	Biller	
    MIGA	
                              Barbour	
	

	
	

	




                                                      93 
 
