         DISCUSSION PAPER                NO. 1614




   Urban Social Assistance: Emerging
Insights from Three African Countries
                 Vanessa Moreira and Ugo Gentilini




                               December 2016
                             Urban Social Assistance:
      Emerging Insights from Three African Countries

                                Vanessa Moreira and Ugo Gentilini 1

                                             December 2016


Abstract:

As countries implement social assistance (or safety net) programs, a range of technical
hurdles can affect their implementation differently in rural and urban areas. In urban areas,
the focus of this study, cost of living can be higher and more prone to economic slowdowns.
Poverty can be more severe than in rural areas and accompanied by high malnutrition rates.
Implementation challenges in most urban areas relate to the lack of proper identification,
outreach, intake, and registration of potential beneficiaries. These are in part due to the lack
of social cohesion and different channels of communication. Therefore, social workers are
likely to play an even more fundamental role in program implementation and M&E processes.



JEL Classification: O1, O2, O18, I38

Keywords: Social pension, non- contributory cash transfer program




1
 The paper greatly benefited from advice and support by Ngoc-Dung T. Tran, Phillippe Leite, and Ruslan
Yemtsov.
Acronyms and Abbreviations

CBT: Community-Based Targeting
CTC: Community Targeting Committee
M&E: Monitoring and Evaluation
MIS: Management Information System
NGO: Non-Governmental Organizations
NSO: National Statistical Office
PMT: Proxy Means Test
PMU: Project Management Unit
SAM: Severe Acute Malnutrition
SSN: Social Safety Nets
UNICEF: United Nations Children’s Fund


BENIN
CPS: Centre de Promotion Social
INSAE: National Institute of Statistics and Economic Analysis of Benin
MDGLAAT: The Ministry of Decentralization, Local Government, and Administration and
Development of the Territory
PSDCC: Projet de Services Décentralisés Conduits par les Communautés
SSDCC: Secretariat for Decentralized Community Driven Services - Benin


CONGO, Republic
MASAHS: Ministry of Social Affairs of Humanitarian Action and Solidarity
CAS: Social Welfare Center
CCS: Targeting Community Committee
GAC: Governance and Anti-Corruption
INS: National Statistics Office




                                              i
MALI
OM: Orange Money
BNDA: National Bank for Agricultural Development
INSTAT: National Statistical Office
SAM index: Severe Acute Malnutrition
UTGFS: SSN UGTFS Technical Management Unit




                                          ii
Table of Contents
ABSTRACT:...................................................................................................................................I
I. INTRODUCTION .................................................................................................................. 1
II. NATURE OF URBAN POVERTY ............................................................................................ 3
III. PROGRAM OBJECTIVES ...................................................................................................... 7
IV. KEY PROGRAM DESIGN FEATURES ..................................................................................... 7
4.1. PROGRAMS DESIGN SPECIFICITIES ..................................................................................... 8
V. KEY STEPS IN THE DELIVERY PROCESS ............................................................................. 10
5.1 OUTREACH & INTAKE ....................................................................................................... 10
5.2 SELECTION ........................................................................................................................ 13
5.3 TARGETING / REGISTRATION ........................................................................................... 16
5.4 PAYMENT / TRANSACTIONS ............................................................................................. 17
5.5 MONITORING &EVALUATION (M&E) ............................................................................... 19
5.6 GRIEVANCE & REDRESS .................................................................................................... 20
VI. KEY ISSUES EMERGED DURING PROGRAM IMPLEMENTATION IN URBAN AREAS .......... 21
VII. URBAN AREA CHALLENGES .............................................................................................. 23
VIII. EMERGING POLICY & OPERATIONAL OPPORTUNITIES .................................................... 24
IX. REFERENCES ..................................................................................................................... 26
ANNEX 1: BENEFIT LEVELS ...................................................................................................... 28
ANNEX 2: 3 COUNTRY COMPARISON ..................................................................................... 29

Figures
Figure 2. 1: GDP, PPP and Urbanization trends ........................................................................ 6

Tables
Table 2. 1: Key indicators .......................................................................................................... 6
Table A1. 1: Distribution of benefits in Benin ......................................................................... 28
Table A1. 2: Distribution of benefits in Mali ........................................................................... 28
Table A1. 3: Transfer amount by household composition ..................................................... 28




                                                                    iii
I.   Introduction

 As countries implement social safety nets programs, a range of technical hurdles affects their
 implementation. Given the fluid expansion and contraction of urban informal settlements
 over time and their specific characteristics, the development of an effective outreach strategy
 to inform and attract urban poor for safety nets programs or to effectively communicate with
 prospective beneficiaries about available programs is challenging.

 One challenge faced by the poor population in most urban areas is related to the lack of
 proper identification (ID), therefore preventing access to public services and programs
 demanding ID for verifying identity. Obtaining IDs can be costly, incurring private and
 administration costs and, a lot of times, travels back to their villages of origin. Interestingly
 enough, the three countries in this note have not described problems in this regard. In Benin,
 the program created its own IDs as the national ID card system has limited coverage. In
 Congo, newborn children leave the hospital with a birth certificate (provided guardians have
 paid the fee of FCFA 5,000). Lastly, the outcome of recent elections in Mali may brighten the
 prospects for ensuring individual IDs.

 One key process that is somehow weak in the urban areas presented in this study is related
 to the outreach, intake, and registration of potential beneficiaries. The challenge of
 communicating with potential beneficiaries and reaching pre-identified families is
 problematic in urban areas because of the larger catchment areas and the multiple
 communication channels available, minimizing effectiveness of communication campaigns.
 The same occurs regarding payments messages. In contrast, in rural areas, the existence of
 social cohesion together with a single community radio station/ church/ community leaders
 enables to convey the messages quickly and efficiently.

 Social workers are a fundamental part of program implementation and monitoring and
 evaluation (M&E) processes. Due to larger catchment areas and the lack of social cohesion in
 urban areas with high density of people, families’ identification and monitoring can be




                                                1
challenging and community committees are not very effective without participation of social
workers.

A strong and transparent system for identification and selection of beneficiaries is key to
ascertain credibility to the program. In urban areas, this can only be achieved with strong
participation of social workers who know the population of interest. Community committees
composed of youth associations, churches, community leaders, etc. tend to identify
participant families that are not necessarily the poorest, therefore increasing inclusion errors.
The poorest are often marginalized and excluded from such committees.

In urban areas, data collection and monitoring takes longer. Enumerators and M&E agents
have difficulties returning to pre-selected households due to the bad quality of the address
recording (houses disorderly numbered) and the differences in recorded names (household
members known by a nickname), causing enumerators to perform multiple household visits
in order to correctly identify families.

GSM payments are relatively uncomplicated and inexpensive. However, electronic payments
transactions that are not fully functional may adversely affect time to access benefits and
accountability.

Poverty can be more severe in urban areas. On top of the scarcity of basic services as
sanitation, the urban poor have difficulties in accessing good schools and health centers
because of their families’ income constraints.

Urban areas have high malnutrition rates. Individuals are subject to precarious and temporary
jobs as a way of generating income for meeting the end needs. Also, differently from rural
areas, families cannot produce for subsistence. Therefore, food intake can be compromised.

Living in urban areas is expensive and more vulnerable to an economic slowdown. Apart from
having to pay for rent and some basic services that are otherwise free in rural areas (for
example, health and education), the urban poor are subject to higher commodity prices and




                                                 2
      face higher unemployment rates. When an economic slowdown happens, social unrest and
      violence increase mainly in the poorest urban areas.

      In this study, we will look into urban and rural social safety nets program specificities from
      three countries: Benin, Republic of Congo, and Mali. What kinds of strategies were used to
      make the social safety nets programs adapted to the urban context and more effective to
      fight urban poverty. In the next sections, we will present (i) nature of urban poverty; (ii)
      programs objectives; (iii) key program design features; (iv) key steps in the delivery process;
      (v) key issues emerged during program implementation in urban areas; (vi) emerging policy
      and operational opportunities; and (vii) challenges.

II.      Nature of Urban Poverty

      Rural areas in all three countries are largely agriculture dependent and commonly affected
      by natural shocks such as droughts and floods. Therefore, poor people from rural areas move
      to urban areas to escape the difficulties. However, instead of finding relief, they are subject
      to worse conditions. For example, some public services, which are available for free in rural
      areas, are unavailable or fee-based in urban areas, such as schools and hospitals, creating
      additional costs for families.

      Poverty can be more severe in urban than in rural areas. On top of the scarcity of basic
      services as water, electricity, and sanitation; the poor in urban areas have greater difficulties
      in accessing good schools and health centers as their families’ income are constrained. The
      urban poor are subject to higher commodity prices and higher unemployment rates; and in
      any economy slowdown, social unrest and violence increase mainly in the poorest urban
      areas. Moreover, in urban areas, individuals are subject to precarious and temporary jobs as
      a way of generating income for subsistence. Food intake can be compromised. In contrast, in
      rural areas, most families may be less exposed to economic slowdown, with subsistence
      farming ensuring some basic access to food.




                                                     3
BENIN
Benin’s economy relies mostly on the cotton trade, and agriculture is the main source of
income for 70 percent of the country’s workforce, making the country very susceptible to
natural shocks. In 2010, Benin experienced awful losses due to floods—thousands of people
were forced to leave their houses, many schools and public buildings were damaged or
destroyed, and most crops were lost, worsening the food insecurity situation. Difficulties in
the rural life underline the continuous migration to urban areas, where migrants often settle
in highly dense, underdeveloped areas. The urban poor often live in poorly built, rented
accommodations without access to water, electricity, and sewage.

Urban areas of Benin have numerous pockets of poverty. People living in those areas lack the
access to basic services. Food insecurity is high as a consequence of irregular sources of
income and the lack of a family production whereas in rural areas, families can produce
something to eat. Violence is widespread; women are subject to prostitution and various
sorts of sexual abuse. High indices of child labor are observed as children work to help
increase the household income. Social unrest is observed as a reflection of diminishing jobs
in the formal sector.

CONGO
Since the oil discovery in the early 1980s, oil revenues and considerable external assistance
have motivated the economy in Congo. The formal economy was centralized by the state,
and as a result, public spending and relatively high wages in the public sector attracted
migration to Brazzaville and Pointe Noire—two important urban areas. Nonetheless, oil
wealth was not shared properly and poverty is still persistent with the rate standing at 40.9
percent in 2011. However, almost 50 percent of the poor live in urban areas due to the high
urbanization rates of the country. Gini inequality is high at 0.46. The sustained growth over
2000-2014 did not translate much into poverty and inequality reduction despite a slight
decline in urban poverty. It should be noted also that urban mobility is high in certain areas
(pockets of poverty) due to violence, lack of services, and the high cost of living (rental/ food
prices).



                                               4
Formal jobs, which are a leading factor of economic inclusion in Congo, are concentrated in
the hands of a few. The Congolese labor market has a very small formal sector, dominated by
the public sector and state-owned enterprises, leading the poor to informal, activities that
are not sustainable, mainly in urban areas.

The urban poverty rate in Congo is rather low. But the high concentration of people living in
poor urban areas has negative impacts on their access to the already weak health and
education services. For example, reflected by higher rates of children per teacher in public
schools compromising education quality.

MALI
Mali’s political and social situation remained fairly stable until March 2012, when a military
coup ousted the previously elected president. The presence of armed separatists and jihadist
groups in the north caused massive internal displacements, mostly to urban areas in the south
and neighboring countries. However, poverty is still predominantly rural where people
depend on subsistence farming and are therefore vulnerable to natural disasters.

Conflict in Mali nowadays is exacerbated by climate change and population growth. In urban
areas, people’s livelihoods are under stress mainly due to limited opportunities (jobs and
services) and persistently high levels of youth unemployment—an easy feeder into the
informal economy. Therefore, profound challenges remain due to economic fragility—
growing insecurity, rapid demographic growth, and the impact of climate change on
agricultural productivity.




                                              5
                          Figure 2. 1: GDP, PPP and Urbanization Trends




Source: WDI, World Bank



                                    Table 2. 1: Key Indicators

              Indicator                  Country         2010         2011          2012
                                      Benin                 2.12          2.96          4.64
 GDP growth (annual %)                Congo, Rep.           8.75          3.42          3.80
                                      Mali                  5.81          2.72          0.03
                                      Benin               732.95        799.04        807.69
 GDP per capita (current US$)         Congo, Rep.       2,953.19      3,453.22      3,191.16
                                      Mali                610.79        680.83        641.79
                                      Benin                1,710         1,750         1,810
 GNI per capita, PPP
                                      Congo, Rep.          4,120         4,180         4,470
 (current international $)
                                      Mali                 1,440         1,460         1,430
 Poverty headcount ratio at           Benin                    ..        36.20             ..
 national poverty lines (% of         Congo, Rep.              ..        46.50             ..
 population)                          Mali                     ..            ..            ..
                                      Benin            9,509,798     9,779,391    10,049,792
 Population, total                    Congo, Rep.      4,066,078     4,177,435     4,286,188
                                      Mali            15,167,286    15,639,115    16,112,333
                                      Benin                16.97         16.37         15.81
 Population in the largest city
                                      Congo, Rep.          61.23         61.38         61.54
 (% of urban population)
                                      Mali                 35.41         35.42         35.47

Source: WDI, World Bank (last Updated: 05/02/2016)




                                                6
III.      Program Objectives

       Although main objectives are similar when implementing a social safety nets program in the
       three countries, additional objectives are specific to each country’s needs. While all three
       countries are interested in establishing an efficient social safety nets system to protect the
       poor and/or vulnerable while reducing current poverty and smoothing household
       consumption; in Benin, the program Projet de Services Décentralisés Conduits par les
       Communautés (PSDCC) aims to also improve households’ ability to cope with shocks; while in
       Congo, the Lisungi program also aims to promote children’s access to education and health
       services; and in Mali, through the Jigiséméjiri, the effort is also to increase the food security
       for households, due to particularly high rates of food insecurity in the country.

       Programs vary in size and implementation areas. Although Benin’s and Mali’s programs are
       relatively large in scale (especially when compared to previous programs existing in the
       countries), only a small part of the benefits is destined to poor households in urban areas
       (main urban areas of both countries are included in the respective programs; namely,
       Cotonou, Benin’s capital city; and Bamako, Republic of Congo’s capital city). On the other
       hand, Lisungi, which is still in its pilot phase, is mostly implemented in urban areas due to the
       country’s urban population density and the program’s desired conditionalities. To guarantee
       that households can comply with school attendance and regular health care visits, minimum
       infrastructure was required for implementation, which proved to be hard in rural areas.

IV.       Key Program Design Features

       Programs’ outcomes are directly related to implementation. Hence, design issues become
       extremely relevant when implementing a determined program in any country where regions/
       areas have distinct characteristics. If such characteristics are not considered, the entire
       project and its relevance may be compromised (for not producing sufficiently good results).

       In general, community committees are set to facilitate the process but they are not working
       as expected in urban areas. Due to larger catchment areas and the lack of social cohesion in




                                                      7
areas with high density of people, identification of households and individuals in urban areas
can be challenging. Therefore, social workers become a fundamental part of the identification
process, as they are familiar with the families that ask for regular help. Ideally, every
community committees would have local social workers as its members, as their knowledge
of the families can help minimize both errors of inclusion and exclusion. But this is not always
the case. Community committees are often composed of youth associations, churches,
community leaders, etc. This structure works well in rural areas where families are close
together, but not so much in urban areas.

Identification of poor families in urban areas takes longer. In response to urban areas
specificities, social workers revise the preliminary lists formulated by community committees.
The limited number of social workers, however, prevents their participation in all urban
community committees, with implications for program accountability and possible delays due
to possible community claims and concerns of beneficiary selection.

In Benin’s PSDCC, about 10 percent of the selected household are in urban areas (1,187 out
of the total of 13,000). The program makes use of community targeting committees (CTC)
composed of members with good knowledge of the neighborhood and background in social
assistance, charity work or identification of those in need. Members are elected
democratically in neighborhood assemblies and committees. In rural areas, community
targeting is facilitated by social cohesion whereas in urban areas, CTCs coordinate with local
service providers (like women/youth associations) to help identify the households. Exclusion
errors are likely because the poorest are often marginalized and inclusion errors tend to be
higher because of a tendency to select people who are more connected to the local
structures. The program administration needs to work closely with social workers to revise
initial listing to minimize leakage and under-coverage. Districts and villages were selected
based on an index that combines poverty and access to services while poor households are
selected through the implementation of a proxy means test (PMT) to identify the poorest
households. Selected households receives FCFA 3,500 monthly as an unconditional transfer,
and some households with at least one adult, who is capable of working, can be selected for



                                               8
labor intensive public works. The public works option is available for 12 days a month during
four months at a daily rate of FCFA 800. Therefore, transfers are either FCFA 42,000 or 80,400
a year (US$ 84 or US$ 140), which represents in per capita terms about 1.5 or 2.4 percent of
the per capita GDP.

In Congo, six of the seven localities selected for the pilot of the program Lisungi are urban. As
the program aims to promote children’s access to education and health, it was a requirement
that selected areas had infrastructure facilities with supply of health care and primary
education that is adequate for implementation. Moreover, the program is implemented in
areas with well-established Social Welfare Centers (CAS). At the CAS, social workers are
organized into small catchment areas (social sector) and work with the community
committees to identify potential beneficiaries and organize local information campaigns. The
CAS are also present in rural areas. Starting in 2011, the government invested in
modernization of centers and CAS in urban areas. As of today about eight CAS are in place
with the infrastructure needed for implementing the program nationwide. Due to the
conditionalities imposed by the program, regions were selected based on the existing health
and education infrastructure in order to guarantee the program implementation. Extreme
poor households, with at least one child aged 0-14 or one elderly aged 60 or above, are
identified through a combination of community-based targeting and PMT. Selected
households receive FCFA 10,000 monthly as an unconditional transfer, and each child within
the households (for a cap of three per household) is eligible for FCFA 5,000 conditional on
visiting health centers and attending school, depending on their age. The elderly, defined as
those aged 60 or above, are eligible for an unconditional monthly transfer of FCFA 10,000.
Therefore, transfers per household range between FCFA 120,000 and 540,000 a year (US$
240 - 1,080), which represents in per capita terms 1.5 – 6.7 percent of per capita GDP.

In Mali, just one urban community of the capital city Bamako, Bamako III, is eligible for the
program. The program is decentralized and operated by different levels with different
attributions: National (Project management Unit – PMU), regional (focal points and M&E
agents), circles (M&E agents), communities committees, and villages (rural areas) or



                                               9
 neighborhood (urban area) committees. Although CTC members are supposed to work as
 volunteers in both urban and rural areas, they are often demanding some sort of payment as
 a result of the intense work to identify households. In urban areas, the pressure to
 remunerate CTCs was more intense, and often CTCs were not supporting program
 implementation activities such as monitoring payment activities. Therefore, as a correction
 to the original design, Mali is introducing a unique payment scheme destined to support the
 work of CTCs. Notice that as one of the objectives of the program is to improve children’s
 outcomes in human capital (health, nutrition, hygiene, and family savings), a series of
 information sessions delivered by NGOs are organized, and all households become
 beneficiaries of the program and are expected to participate in the sessions. Regions were
 classified according to an index combining poverty 2 and severe malnutrition 3 levels. Within
 each region, districts were ranked based on a weighted severe acute malnutrition index that
 combines poverty and infrastructure indicators while communes are selected based on
 geographical targeting using a combination of poverty maps and infrastructure indicators
 indices, which identify the potential availability of agencies for implementation of the
 accompanying measures and payments. All villages within each commune have a quota of
 eligible households, based on the population size. Selected households receive FCFA 10,000
 monthly as an unconditional transfer. The total annual transfer is FCFA 120,000 (US$ 240),
 which represents in per capita terms about 6 percent of per capita GDP.

V.      Key Steps in the Delivery Process

 5.1 Outreach & Intake

 In the urban areas of all three countries, enumerators have difficulties in returning to the
 households identified by the preliminary household lists. There are issues with the household
 information transmitted to the firms responsible for additional data collection (NSO in Congo
 and Mali and a private company in Benin) due to errors in address recording (a lot of times,


 2
     Provided by the National Statistical Office.
 3
     UNICEF.




                                                    10
house numbering when available is done in a disorderly manner) and also because names
recorded do not match household members’ names (it is common that people are known by
their nicknames). Another problem in urban areas is the fact that household heads and/or
reference adults are not found during the time of the survey because they were working or
looking for a job. Therefore, enumerators need to visit households multiple times in order to
collect the data, increasing the amount of time needed for data collection. To minimize this
issue, social workers are once more fundamental for the correct identification of households
and subsequent interview scheduling (to minimize the number of visits to each household).

In Benin, as part of the outreach, sensitization of national and local authorities is done
through the use of training modules explaining the approach and defining concepts of
poverty, extreme poverty, and household. The program administrators at the central level
organize the training sessions in the morning, followed immediately by the community
committees’ field activities to identify potential beneficiaries. The lists of poor households
produced by the committees are validated in public during neighborhood assemblies open to
the public. Households on the final validated list are subjected to the PMT survey to verify
their poverty status. As it is common in urban areas, families in Cotonou are not strongly
associated as in smaller towns/ rural areas. Therefore, more time is required to identify poor
households by the committees, and social workers from the centers for social promotion
(CPS) are needed to revise the initial list to mitigate potential targeting errors, mainly in urban
areas. Otherwise, no differences were observed between urban and rural areas. Data
collection uses smartphones without the need of connection to the Internet and data transfer
to the network happens when Wi-Fi network is available.

In Congo, 4 community committees are responsible for identifying poor and vulnerable
households, which are further selected through household social survey and data collection.


4
  The share of beneficiaries in each zone is defined by quotas given the population and poverty rates in each
zone by the PMU that later organizes departmental workshops to promote cash transfers awareness. Those
sessions are designed to city councils, sub-prefects and departmental directors. In a later stage, the PMU
organizes training sessions to the leaders of Social Welfare District (CAS), CCS chiefs, and basic education
inspectors.




                                                      11
Identification is made by CAS and targeting community committees (CCS) on the basis of the
existent indigence card (carte d’indigence), which contains information of population that
often asks assistance at CAS. The outreach process is similar in both urban and rural areas but
the challenge of communicating with potential beneficiaries and reaching the families pre-
identified is problematic in urban areas because of the multiple communication channels
available that minimize effectiveness of communication campaigns, the lack of good address
to locate the household in case social workers cannot accompany surveyors, and low social
cohesion.

In Mali, identification of households is performed by the members of the village committees
based on the poverty criteria explained during technical workshops organized by the SSN
Technical Management Unit (UTGFS). Identification methods vary according to the size of
villages: (i) in the districts of Bamako and in some rural towns, a sort of a census approach
was used to review the measureable conditions of dwellings and make sure that all families
would be identified. This work is done by the members of the village/ neighborhood
committee, where district/ village areas were divided in sectors and assigned to each
member/ team of two members; and (ii) in small villages where people are known to each
other and have daily interactions, the village committee held meetings for exchange of
information among its members, reviewed poorest households and established the
preliminary beneficiaries list taking into account the quota allocated to the village/
neighborhood by the UTGFS. In small villages, the work of identification and selection of poor
households took between two and three days. In rural towns, it took two to three weeks. In
Bamako, efforts were made to achieve results after one month (the deadline was set by the
program). It is important to note that field workers signaled this amount of weeks was
inadequate for collection of data in large areas where census could not be exhaustive. Despite
aiming for having a census approach to map all households in urban areas, the activity did
not reach all households in large neighborhoods. Therefore, it is likely that not all poor
households have been identified and pre-registered. In order to fix this problem, community
committees had to revise the analysis of the preliminary lists to make sure that the selection




                                              12
was not solely done by the neighborhood committees. Communities’ involvement is then
required to improve outreach but at an additional costs not considered by the program
(communications, travel, and meeting arrangements).

5.2 Selection

Geo-targeting and PMT are used for selection. In all three countries, a combination of
geographical, poverty, and social characteristic measurement is used to identify beneficiaries.

Benin

Selection follows a three-level selection process: (i) municipalities, (ii) villages, and (iii)
households.

Municipality selection: The program covers 12 municipalities with highest extreme poverty
levels, 5 about 15 percent of the country's municipalities. Selection was performed during a
national workshop and based on data provided by the National Institute of Statistics and
Economic Analysis of Benin (INSAE), according to an index on the access to basic
infrastructure.

Village selection is done in two stages:

    a) Use of poverty maps (based on census and household survey data) 6 to estimate the
         distribution of poverty in small geographic areas (such as counties and villages or city
         neighborhoods). The targeting criteria will also be based on the villages’ share of
         extreme poverty to the municipalities. Each commune will establish a broad list of
         eligible villages.




5
  Share of the number of people living below the food poverty line in a municipality, relative to the country’s
extreme poor population
6
  2002 census data and 2011 Household Living Conditions survey (Enquête Modulaire Intégrée sur les
Conditions de Vie des ménages - EMICoV).




                                                       13
   b) From the eligible list of villages, villages/ communities will be selected by the
        municipal councils.

Following the selection of municipalities and poverty map analysis, a total of 120 villages were
selected among the established lists of villages. Ultimately, the final number of participating
villages varies by municipalities with regards to the resources allocated by the program.

Household selection: In October 2013 Benin adopted a unique and rigorous method for the
identification of the poor for social protection programs. This approach recommends a pre-
identification of the poorest by the communities and further validation through the
implementation of PMT to estimate households’ poverty levels. The PMT takes into
consideration the accessibility to health, education, and other services and was prepared by
the national statistical office using 2011 household survey data. To account for differences
between urban and rural areas, different models are in place and the eligibility cut-offs were
defined differently, being higher in urban areas (adapted to the purchase power parity for
urban areas). The index developed is to be updated every two years.

Congo

Selection follows a three-level process: (i) regions, (ii) communities, and (iii) households.

Regions and communities were selected according to the adequacy of infrastructure facilities
to provide access to education and health for children, as those are conditionalities imposed
by the program. Furthermore, the program is implemented in areas with well-established
Social Welfare Centers (CAS). The program covers three regions and seven communities:
Brazzaville (Makélékélé, Bacongo, Moungali, Talangai), Pointe-Noire (Mvoumvou), and
Cuvette (Makoua and Oyo). The distribution of the number of beneficiaries between the
three regions and the CASs centers on quotas determined by the poverty rate and the
population of each region.

Household selection: During project preparation in Congo, the National Statistics Office (INS)
worked with the PMU to assess the characteristics of poor and vulnerable households in the




                                               14
country based on the data from the Congolese Household Economic Survey (ECOM). Based
on this analysis, the INS validated a PMT model that allows the PMU to estimate the
household per capita consumption for each household registered in the Unified Registry. The
management information system (MIS) uses this linear combination to generate a list of
potential beneficiaries per district by comparing the estimated welfare and food poverty line
estimated by the proxy, which by the way have different models for urban and rural areas.

Mali

Selection follows a four-level selection process: (i) regions, (ii) circles and towns, (iii)
municipalities, and (iv) households.

Regions, circles and towns, and municipalities are classified according to synthetic indexes
based on estimated indicators at the regional, circles and town and municipalities level. Three
different indexes are used (one for each selection level) and, among other things, they
comprise measures of poverty (provided by Mali’s National Statistical Office (INSTAT)), child
severe acute malnutrition (SAM) 7 rates and access to services (water, electricity). The index
ranges from 0 (rich) to 100 (very poor).

All villages from selected municipalities are eligible to receive the program. The distribution
of benefits is done at the community level. Each community will get a fixed budget to cover
program expenses, based on the percentage of extreme poor provided by INSTAT. Quotas
are calculated by the UTGFS team and evenly distributed in all villages, defined as the number
of households divided by number of villages

Household selection: Community/ village assemblies identify the poorest households at the
village level. Each identified household will receive a score to allow household classification
from the poorest to the least poor in an economic criterion (transparent and direct).
Validation of the beneficiaries list is done during neighborhood/ village general assemblies
under the supervision members of the municipal committee and the M&E program officer.

7
    UNICEF - normalized between 0 and 100




                                              15
The preliminary list is read publicly and, in some cases, heads of households are introduced.
Then the assembly is asked to rule. If there are no objections, the list is approved by
acclamation and is a definitive list. If there are objections, complaints are registered and
followed by immediate debate regarding eligibility. Households that are considered less poor
than others are excluded from the final list and replaced by households considered poor. But
public protests during general assemblies are rare mainly because people are reluctant to
speak in public on a sensitive issue.

5.3 Targeting/ Registration

Generally, in urban areas, registration was facilitated by the fact that people have
identification documents. When it happened that registration was lower in urban than in
rural areas, it was due to the higher urban mobility.

The electronic data collection 8 in the urban areas of Benin increased data quality while
preventing data entry mistakes (for example, out-of-range values) and facilitated the process
of identifying beneficiary though pictures of household heads. Pictures were taken by the
same device used for data collection and were used to issue beneficiary ID cards. The country
has an ID card system but coverage is limited. Therefore, the program has developed an
alternate ID in coordination with the National Statistics and the National Health Insurance
Program. Once the household selections trough the PMT is finalized, social workers deliver
ID cards and compare with documents to guarantee delivery to the correct person for final
registration in the program.

Each Community Committee in Congo organizes an information campaign amongst pre-
identified households. In Brazzaville, this process was more intense due to the lack of social
cohesion, which affects outreach. In rural areas, local radios, community leaders, social
assistance centers reach a larger number of people at once. Records team installed at


8
    GPS location of the household, roster, assets and standard living measures used by the PMT.




                                                       16
registration centers request households to register the vouchers which were handed in
during intake phase. At this stage, households have to present identity documents, birth
certificates, or any other documents required by the census strategy. Then, enumerators
collect the necessary additional information, take photos, and collect fingerprints of at least
two members in the household. Field data is transferred to local and central servers by
connecting laptops, used during registration, to local servers in each CAS. The processes are
identical in both urban and rural areas but take more time in urban areas as a result of the
lack of strong connections within families from the same community.

INSTAT performed additional data collection on selected households if needed and
subsequent program registration. INSTAT was responsible for instructing enumerators,
training and fieldwork. During this step, household heads and a second adult member were
photographed for purposes of identification and for provision of beneficiaries’ card to
conclude the registration process. In Bamako, the percentage of households in the final
beneficiaries list that were found to receive the registration card was slightly below than in
other regions (97.7 percent against 99.8 percent and 99.3 percent in other regions).
Replacement of households then were done with the help of village/ neighborhood
committees. Household heads who were not found or absent were replaced by other
members of the household.

5.4 Payment/ Transactions

Communication with families regarding payments in urban area is disadvantaged by the
absence of an efficient communication method, while in rural areas, radio/ church/
community leaders convey the message quickly and efficiently. Therefore, social workers and
community committees need to spend some days in the field, before payment, to spread
payment dates.

Benin and Mali opted to deliver payments in urban areas through the use of SIM cards. But
in Mali, the process is not entirely automated so beneficiaries have to go, in person, to
respective payment centers, which incurs some personal cost. As a developed structure for



                                              17
mobile payments is not yet available in Mali, payments are entirely manual and can take up
to three months. In the near future, with transactions changing to electronic, beneficiaries
will not need to show up at payment centers in order to receive cash transfer benefits, and
payments can be paid monthly as in Benin. In contrast, Congo uses the same payment agency
in both urban and rural areas, the Banque Postale du Congo, but beneficiaries still have to go
every three months to an agency instead of cashing the transfer monthly using ATM cards.

Benin uses distinct methods for payments in urban and rural areas. In Cotonou, cash benefits
are transferred through SIM card electronic payment from MTN Bénin Telecommunications
Service Provider. SIM cards are provided by the GSM operator while beneficiaries’ ID cards
by program administrators. The GSM operator has a copy of the beneficiary database
allowing for the monthly payment of all beneficiaries. Payments are made at any MTN
operator in the region, and beneficiaries knows that between the 24th and 31st of the month
they can demand payment at any MTN operator agency. As the transaction is electronic,
accountability is greater—within seven days program administrators have transaction
information ready to be archived. In rural areas, payment is through branches of the Caisse
Locale Credit Mutuel Agricol (CLCAM). Transactions are manual and can take up to three
months for being processed. In all areas of Benin, heads of social promotion centers have a
copy of the beneficiaries’ database in their catchment areas and handle any complaints about
missed payments.

Congo pays all beneficiaries through the same bank system. One to two weeks before a
payment date, the PMU provides interested stakeholders (internal auditor, the World Bank,
payment agencies, etc.) and the payment agency, Banque Postal do Congo (BPC), with the
nominal lists of beneficiaries that include the transfer amount to each household. Beneficiary
households are informed by social workers/ community committees to be physically present
at the associated BPC agency. Since BPC has created a virtual bank account, beneficiaries can
cash entire or partial benefits by keeping their virtual account as a savings account. In urban
areas there are more branches available therefore facilitating payment. In rural areas,
payment centers by BPC are created to reduce the time and distance to payment points for



                                              18
beneficiaries. Once more, in rural areas payments are manual, taking more time than in urban
areas.

Mali also uses distinct methods for payments in different areas. Following a study that was
conducted to identify all agencies with capability to implement money transfers in all regions
targeted by the program (banks and microfinance institutions that include mobile operators
and post offices), operators were pre-selected based on three criteria: (i) national coverage;
(ii) capacity to do large-scale operations; and (iii) experience in cash transfers. Selected
agencies differed in terms of their areas of operation. In the urban area (Bamako) the Orange
Money mobile operator was selected whereas in all other areas, the tender winner was the
National Bank for Agricultural Development (BNDA). In urban areas, Orange money created
an account to all beneficiaries and provided free SIM cards. Even though SIM cards are used,
payments are not electronically made yet. Consequently beneficiaries (or their substitutes)
have to present themselves at payment centers every three months during payment time,
which is informed by community committees, to withdraw the benefits upon presentation of
their beneficiary card and ID card. The main difference between urban and rural areas is that
BNDA, the payment agency in rural areas, has more experience with payment transactions
since it is a bank. As a result, payment cards are developed by BNDA and include the
recipient's name, ID code, date of birth, and a column for observations, and payments are
made upon presentation of the beneficiary card and national ID card (of the beneficiary or an
authorized replacement). Given that BNDA has the expertise in providing payments,
accountability is done on a timely manner; whereas in the urban areas, OM is inexperienced
in such transactions, resulting in increased time needed for accountability to the PMU.

5.5 Monitoring &Evaluation (M&E)

M&E allows government and all partners to regularly monitor the project progress and to
estimate the program impact. To ensure the program is operational and implemented in
compliance with its objectives, M&E is adopted in various ways. In Benin and Congo, M&E
agents visit households regularly while in Mali, agents work closely with community




                                             19
committees to make sure program procedures are being followed, evaluate problems, and
solve issues when they appear.

M&E agents in Benin visit households regularly in both urban and rural areas but the
dispersion in urbans areas makes the process longer. GPS data collected during identification
phase aides in the process since a lot of households do not have addresses or are not well
documented.

In Congo, M&E agents and social workers are in charge of following M&E activities and visiting
households. The coordination of health and education agents with social assistance is difficult
due to the limited number of agents in each circumscription and the high number of people
to be monitored. As a result, a partnership with UNICEF is being formulated to support M&E
activities. This issue is more relevant in urban areas due to the large catchment areas.

M&E agents in Mali work closely with the municipal and village committees (rural areas) or
neighborhood committees (urban areas), the social development service, and the payment
agency. M&E agents help the committees understand program procedures through regular
monitoring work, evaluating problems, and solving the issues. They also help during village/
neighborhood sensitization sessions to inform beneficiaries about payment dates and
locations and are there in person to monitor payment transactions, track problems if any,
and above all to make sure beneficiaries have all documents needed to receive the payment.
Moreover, in urban areas, monitoring is easily assisted by M&E agents and benefits from a
greater presence of the civil societies and partner NGOs physically located in the urban areas.
In rural areas, M&E agents are mostly alone to monitor the activities.

5.6 Grievance & Redress

The three countries have distinctive approaches to address grievance and redress. While in
Congo information is collected electronically; in Benin and Mali, social agents play an
important part in the collection and transmission of the information to program
administrators.




                                              20
  In Benin, CPS have computers that are not connected to the network, but have info of all
  beneficiaries. Social workers are present on-site to support and/or address complaints.
  Following the personalized service provided by social workers, demands and complaints are
  delivered to program administrators via e-mail or telephone. In rural areas, as CPSs are not
  present to centralize the collection of complaints, field agents collect complaints and
  demands and coordinate with program supervisors. Therefore, grievance and redress is less
  pronounced in rural areas.

  In Congo, grievance and redress is done through social workers and M&E agents located in
  each CAS. Information is digitalized in the system and processed automatically. There is no
  difference in the processes for urban and rural areas.

  In Mali, grievance and redress is not a well-established service. But the fact that NGOs are
  more present in urban areas facilitates collection of demands and complaints and also
  transmission of information to program administrators. Anyone can communicate with M&E
  agents, community committees, and community leaders.

VI.   Key Issues Emerged during Program Implementation in Urban Areas

  Program implementation needs to be adapted to the difficult and challenging environment
  in urban areas. When program administrators organize general assemblies to present the
  program or to discuss a new feature or even to talk about results and monitoring activities,
  participation of authorities and the public is modest when compared to similar assemblies
  organized in rural areas. Possible explanations are the larger catchment area and weaker
  social cohesion, meaning program administrators need to put more efforts and resources—
  both human and financial—to reach poor households for program participation.

  Inability to find and monitor families. Common characteristics of urban poverty are the lack
  of a proper household address and higher mobility of people. Given the uncoordinated
  growth in certain areas, households are often referred to/ identified by certain characteristics
  or “landmarks” instead of an address. Therefore, program workers and statistical office staff




                                                21
without good knowledge of the area may not be able to find the families. To escape or
mitigate poverty, families are more likely to move (sometimes to areas not covered by the
program) but they don’t have the habit to inform social workers or program administrators
about their plans. When this happens before registration to the program is finalized,
administrators have difficulties in monitoring the families and offering the desired services.

Lack of interaction between community committees and social workers. When defining the
plans for identifying program beneficiaries or potential beneficiaries, program administrators
make active use of community committees. However, in urban areas, if social workers are
not part of the identification/ selection process, the outcomes of such committees could be
biased, excluding potential beneficiaries from the program as the poorest are often
marginalized within the communities. Due to the nature of their work, social workers have
better knowledge of the population that often requires assistance. Therefore, enforcing
participation of social workers in the committees is essential but costs are high. In the three
countries presented in this report, availability of social workers to join the committees was
limited.

Communication is harder in urban areas. In rural areas, catchment areas are smaller and often
communication channels are limited to one radio station or one meeting place (a religious
site like a church or a mosque). In contrast, the number of communication channels available
in urban areas requires a better outreach strategy in order to efficiently spread program
messages like payment dates or information on conditionalities. Three other related issues
are

      (i)    Unawareness of program administrators regarding alternates to receive payments
             in the absence of the main beneficiaries. The weak interaction between
             beneficiaries, who do not inform who the alternates are, and administrators
             prevent the alternates to receive transfers;
      (ii)   Loss of SIM cards and/or program ID cards, without which payments cannot be
             made. Beneficiaries do not inform community committees or social workers about




                                               22
               their lost documents. Therefore, on payment day, if either a social worker or a
               member of community committee member is not present at the payment location
               to provide a replacement card, beneficiaries cannot receive the benefits; and
       (iii)   Grievance mechanism are still under development; therefore, complaints can be
               left unanswered by program administrators. At times, social workers and
               community committees try to solve the issues by themselves, without
               communicating to program administrators.

VII.   Urban Area Challenges

   Strengthen the ID system for security and to increase the program’s credibility. Urban areas
   would benefit from better access to ID systems. Challenges arise from the limited coverage
   of national ID systems already in place. Countries in this study worked around this issue by
   establishing a program ID system (like in Benin) or by making investments prior to the
   implementation of the programs (like in Congo and Mali).

   Falling motivation of local actors for outreach and follow-up. Volunteer work to help program
   implementation in urban areas is unappealing because of the larger catchment areas and
   population dispersion. Therefore, social workers engage in supporting program
   implementation besides their other duties. As the task proved to be very labor-intensive,
   their motivation has decreased. One way to increase the willingness to help could be the
   establishment of TORs, describing specific activities to be carried out in exchange for some
   sort of payment.

   Limited knowledge of the household poverty state. Weaker social cohesion in urban areas
   implies that families known by committees and social workers are those who more frequently
   make demands and they might not be the poorest families. Poverty indicators as poverty
   headcount and poverty gap are not often available in small geographic areas as communities
   and most of poverty indicators used by communities can be very subjective and different
   because of different perceptions of poverty between community committees in urban areas.




                                                23
        When households have similar characteristics, it is difficult for the committees to determine
        if one household is poorer than the other.

        Data collection takes longer. Household intake and registration is an issue stemming from: (i)
        larger catchment areas; (ii) the lack of trust on data collecting agencies/agents, (iii) the bad
        quality of addresses recorded, and (iv) the use of nicknames to identify household members.

        Monitoring is hindered by higher mobility. To escape poverty, violence, lack of services, and
        the high cost of leaving, families in urban areas move around more frequently, sometimes
        before registration process is finished or even to an area without the program coverage.

        Higher operation costs as enumerators perform multiple visits to households in order to
        correctly identify families and to follow-up. In Benin, although GPS data is collected during
        the identification phase, the information is not shared with social workers for further
        household visits. Sharing GPS data with social workers would improve effectiveness of
        registration and M&E activities.

        Manual payments’ accountability takes too long. It can take up to three months for program
        administrators to process payments, leading beneficiaries to frequently visit the centers in
        order to receive their cash.

VIII.      Emerging Issues

        By looking at the experiences in Benin, Republic of Congo, and Mali, this study has identified
        five emerging policy and operational issues.

        1. Household identification (location) can be improved through the use of GPS data. GPS
           location data is available in cell phones, while tablets are often used by urban program
           administrators as well. Recorded coordinates could be used for improving identification
           and targeting accuracy, diminishing the problem of lack of a proper street address often
           observed in urban areas. It can also be used to facilitate M&E activities, including




                                                       24
   improved measures against fraud (as a way to ascertain the enumerator has visited the
   household).

2. A greater number of social workers is needed as well as a work program with solid terms
   of reference and remuneration to motivate neighborhood and community committees.
   It is also important to create/ strengthen partnerships with other agencies so as to train
   social workers and a few community members in order to improve the quality of
   identification and M&E capacity.

3. Creation of communication strategies adapted to urban areas. Improving communication
   between program administrators and beneficiaries is emerging as a core constraint in
   cities. More flexible arrangements could be ironed out, such as allowing alternate
   household members designated by beneficiaries to attend information and
   communication meetings, like in Mexico.

4. Implementation of automated/ electronic systems of payment will reduce time, enhance
   accountability, and possibly provide more regular payments. Given the greater
   development of financial institutions in urban areas, programs should make use of the
   existing sizeable presence of payment points to establish monthly electronic payment and
   open bank accounts to beneficiaries in order to increase financial literacy. When well-
   designed, an automated payment system could help minimize delays, processing time
   and the risk of fraud.

5. Adjustments in accordance with underlying differences and provision of multiple
   programs (bundles) to better protect and serve the population. Programs’ design should
   take in consideration the different costs of living in urban and rural areas and also
   differences regarding household composition. Urban poverty is more severe not only in
   terms of monetary poverty but also other vulnerabilities (such as violence, weak health
   and education services, and limited job offers) that should all be taken into consideration
   in order to better achieve programs’ objectives.




                                             25
IX.   References

  Gentilini, U. 2015. Entering the city: emerging evidence and practices with safety nets in
        urban areas. Social protection discussion paper n.1504. Washington, DC: World
        Bank. http://pubdocs.worldbank.org/en/5841448382581833/Entering-the-City-
        Emerging-Evidence-and-Practices-with-Safety-Nets-in-Urban-Areas.pdf
  World Bank. 2014a. Evaluation de la pauvreté au Benin. Washington, DC ; World Bank
        Group. http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2014/03/23797599/assessment
        -poverty-benin-evaluation-de-la-pauvrete-au-benin
  World Bank. 2014b. Benin - Decentralized Community Driven Services Project: additional
        financing. Washington, DC; World Bank
        Group. http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2014/01/18925310/benin-
        decentralized-community-driven-services-project-additional-financing
  World Bank. 2014c. Benin - Executive summary: poverty assessment. Washington, DC:
        World Bank
        Group. http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2014/04/23791532/benin-
        executive-summary-poverty-assessment
  World Bank. 2013a. Congo, Republic of - LISUNGI Safety Nets Project. Washington, DC;
        World Bank
        Group. http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2013/12/18794003/congo-
        republic-lisungi-safety-nets-project
  World Bank. 2013b. PAD - Mali Emergency Safety Nets project. Washington DC: World
        Bank. http://wbdocs.worldbank.org/wbdocs/viewer/docViewer/indexEx.jsp?objectId
        =090224b081e5883c&respositoryId=WBDocs&standalone=false
  World Bank. 2011. Mali - Filets sociaux. Washington, DC: World
        Bank. http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2011/01/14231097/mali-social-
        safety-nets-mali-filets-sociaux


  Programs’ websites:




                                               26
Benin’s PSDCC: http://www.psdcc.org/
Rep. of Congo’s Lisungi: http://www.masahs-gouv.net/lisungi.php
Mali’s Jigiséméjiri: http://jigisemejiri.org/index.php/en/




                                              27
Annex 1: Benefit Levels

Table A1. 1: Distribution of Benefits in Benin
                              Adults
       Base                                            Amount / household/ month               Amount / household/ year
     transfer                       Amount                       (FCFA)                                 (FCFA)
                    Number
                                     (FCFA)
                       …              3,500                        3,500                                 42,000
      FCFA
                                  9,600, for 4              3,500, for 8 months               28,000
      3,500            1                                                                                     80,400
                                    months                 13,100, for 4 months               52,400


Table A1. 2: Distribution of Benefits in Mali
                                                  Group 1                                    Amount / month / household
                                                                            Group 2
                                                Core villages                                          (FCFA)
                                                              Interventions:
                                               Interventions:
                         Yes                                        CT
                                                     CT                                      10,000
                     62,000 hhs                                    AM
  Cash transfer                                     AM
                                                                    NP
  beneficiaries
                                                              Interventions:
                                         Interventions:
                          No                                       AM                           …
                                               AM
                                                                    NP
Note1: AM, accompanying measures are not targeted; all households in the village are expected to participate
in the sessions covering approximately 283,000 households.
Note2: NP, nutritional package, is expected to cover 140,000 children in total from CT and non-CT beneficiaries

Table A1. 3: Transfer Amount by Household Composition
                       Children and/or
                      pregnant woman                            Elderly               Transfer amount / household
       Base
                                                                                                / month
     transfer                      Amount                             Amount
                   Number                             Number                                     (FCFA)
                                    (FCFA)                             (FCFA)
                       1               5,000                                                    15,000
                       2               10,000                                                   20,000
                     3 or +            15,000                                                   25,000
                                                         1                10,000                20,000
                                                         2                20,000                30,000
                                                       3 or +             30,000                40,000
                       1               5,000             1                10,000                25,000
      FCFA
                       1               5,000             2                20,000                35,000
     10,000
                       1               5,000           3 or +             30,000                45,000
                       2               10,000            1                10,000                30,000
                       2               10,000            2                20,000                40,000
                       2               10,000          3 or +             30,000                45,000
                     3 or +            15,000            1                10,000                35,000
                     3 or +            15,000            2                20,000                45,000
                     3 or +            15,000          3 or +             30,000                45,000




                                                            28
Annex 2: Three Countries Comparison
                                     Benin                                   Congo, Republic                                      Mali

 Program                             PSDCC                                         Lisunji                                   Jegiséméjiri

 Duration                          24 months                                     2014-2018                                     2014-2017

 Poverty           Poor: 36.2% of population                     Poor: 46.5% of population                     Poor: 43.6% of population (2009)
 Assessment        Extreme poor: 15% of population               Extreme poor: 25% of population               25% of population suffers from chronic
                                                                                                               food insecurity
 Objectives        1. Establish an efficient SSN system to       1. Establish an efficient SSN system to       V.I Establish an efficient SSN system to
                   protect the poor and vulnerable while         protect the poor and vulnerable while         protect the poor and vulnerable while
                   reducing poverty and smoothing                reducing poverty and smoothing                reducing poverty and smoothing
                   consumption.                                  consumption                                   consumption
                   2. Improve household’s ability to cope with   2. Promote access of children to education    V.II Protect food insecure households
                   shocks                                        and health and facilitate access of
                                                                 vulnerable population to productive
                                                                 inclusion measures
 Size              1,187 HHs in the main urban area: Cotonou     6,000 HHs in periurbans areas of Pointe-      916 HHs in the urban area of Bamako
                   (13,000 total)                                Noire, Brazzaville and Cuvette)               (62,000 HHs total)
 Nature of Urban   Lack of economic diversification (heavily     Lack of economic diversification (heavily     Occupation on the North by separatists and
 Poverty           dependent on the cotton trade, and            dependent on oil) stimulating                 jihadists causing massive internal
                   agriculture is the main source of income      displacements to urban areas in search of     displacement, mainly to urban areas. More
                   for 70 percent of the country’s).             jobs                                          recently, climate change and population
                                                                                                               growth.
 Program           1. Basic unconditional cash transfer to all   1. Establishment of admin pillars for a       1. Cash transfers to chronically poor and
 Components        targeted HHs                                  national SN program with laying the           vulnerable households
                   2. Labor intensive public works for the       foundations of a unified registry, MIS, and   2. Accompanying measure to improve
                   same HHs to provide extra transfer during     strengthening local capacities;               children’s outcomes in human capital
                   agriculture lean season                       2. Implementation of a cash transfer          (health, nutrition, hygiene and family
                                                                 program to improve access to health and       savings).
                                                                 education services
                                                                 3. Project management and M&E




                                                                      29
                                        Benin                                  Congo, Republic                                        Mali

Key program design features
Eligibility criteria   Households are eligible if deemed extreme   HH are eligible if extreme poor, with at        Households are eligible if deemed extreme
                       poor by the community committee and         least on child 0-14y.o. or an elderly aged 60   poor by the community committee
                       below defined PMT threshold                 or more and below defined PMT threshold
Conditionalities       None                                        Health and education for HHs with children      None, but all households from selected
                                                                   (regular visits to health centers and 80%       villages are expected to participate in the
                                                                   minimum attendance to school)                   accompaniment measures sessions
Institutional          The Ministry of Decentralization, Local     The program has its own Project                 The program has its own Project
arrangements           Government, and Administration and          Management Unit (PMU), the Lisungi team,        Management Unit (PMU), the UTGFS team,
                       Development of the Territory (MDGLAAT)      under the Ministry of Social Affairs of         under the Ministry of Economy and
                       will be responsible for the overall         Humanitarian Action and Solidarity              finance.
                       supervision and coordination of the         (MASAHS).                                       The UTGFS team manages all project
                       Project.                                    The Lisungi team manages all project            activities, being responsible for all
                       A new Secretariat for Decentralized         activities, being responsible for all           disbursements and procurement
                       Community Driven Services (SSDCC)           disbursements and procurement                   procedures supported by the project.
                       created to take responsibility for          procedures supported by the project             The project coordinator oversees all
                       implementing Components Two and Three       The project coordinator oversees all            activities related to the implementation of
                       and for the fiduciary oversight of the      activities related to the implementation of     the project.
                       Project.                                    the project.
Response to             PMT threshold is higher, adapted to        Targeted communities were selected              Targeted community of Bamako was
urban                  purchase power parity for urban areas       according to health and education care          selected according to high density that
specificities                                                      offered (to comply with program                 leads to significant number of poor despite
                                                                   implementation needs) and infrastructure        low poverty rates.
                                                                   level (to implement accompanying                Social workers revise the preliminary lists
                                                                   measures).                                      formulated by community committees.
                                                                   Social workers revise the preliminary lists
                                                                   formulated by community committees
                                                                   Urban poverty line used.




                                                                        30
                                Benin                                     Congo, Republic                                        Mali
Beneficiary   The number of beneficiary households in        Quotas for each social welfare sector,            The share of beneficiaries in each zone is
quotas        each community follow a simple system of       proportionally to poverty estimates at the        defined in quotas given the population and
              fixed quota per community defined by the       department level                                  poverty rates in each zone.
              Project preparation team. The number of
              households in each community that will
              receive the basic cash transfer is estimated
              to be 100.
Outreach &    Sensitization of national and local            Community committees responsible for              Identification of households in the
Intake        authorities is done through the use of         identification of poor and vulnerable             preliminary beneficiaries list was
              training modules explaining the approach       households which will be selected through         performed by the members of the village
              and defining concepts of poverty, extreme      household social survey and data                  committees based on the poverty criteria
              poverty, and household.                        collection.                                       explained during technical workshop
                                                                                                               training organized by the SSN Technical
                                                                                                               Management Unit (UTGFS).
Selection     Household selection is done through the        The NSO has validated a PMT model that            Validation of beneficiaries list is always
              implementation of a proxy means test           allows the PMU to estimate households’            done in neighborhood / village general
              (PMT) which takes in consideration access      per capita consumption for each household         assemblies under the supervision members
              to health, education and other services. To    registered in the Unified Registry. The           of the municipal committee and the M&E
              account for differences between urban and      management information system (MIS)               program officer.
              rural areas, different models are in place     uses this linear combination to generate a
              and the eligibility cut-offs were defined      list of potential beneficiaries per district by
              differently, being higher in urban areas.      comparing the estimated welfare and food
              The index developed is to be updated           poverty line estimated by the proxy.
              every two years.




                                                                  31
                                 Benin                                    Congo, Republic                                       Mali
Targeting /    Electronic data collection in the urban        The processes are identical in both urban       Mali’s National Statistical Office (INSTAT)
Registration   areas increasing data quality and              and rural areas but take more time in           performed additional data collection on
               preventing data entry mistakes Pictures        urban areas as a result of the lack of strong   selected households if needed and
               were taken by the same device used for         connections within families from the same       subsequent program registration.
               data collection and were used to issue         community. Each Community Committee             Household heads and a second adult
               beneficiary ID cards. Program has              in Congo organizes an information               member were photographed for purposes
               developed an alternate ID in coordination      campaign amongst pre-identified                 of identification and for provision of
               with the National Statistics and the           households. Records team, installed at          beneficiaries’ card to conclude the
               National Health Insurance program. Once        registration centers request households to      registration process. In Bamako, the
               the household selections trough the PMT is     register the vouchers which were handed         percentage of households in the final
               finalized, the social worked delivers ID       in during intake phase. Enumerators collect     beneficiaries list that were found to
               cards and compare with documents to            the necessary additional information, take      receive the registration card was slightly
               guarantee delivery to the correct person       photos and collect fingerprints of at least     below than in other regions. Replacement
               for final registration in the program.         two members in the household.                   of households were then done with the
                                                                                                              help of village / neighborhood committees.
                                                                                                              Household heads that were not found or
                                                                                                              absent were replaced by other members of
                                                                                                              household.
Payment /      In Cotonou, cash benefits are transferred      All beneficiaries are paid through the same     In the urban area (Bamako) the Orange
Transactions   through SIM card electronic payment from       bank system. Beneficiary households are         Money mobile operator was selected
               MTN Bénin Telecommunications Service           informed by social workers, community           whereas in all other areas, the tender
               Provider. SIM cards are provided by the        committees to be physically present in the      winner was the National Bank for
               GSM operator while beneficiaries’ ID cards     associated BPC agency. In urban areas           Agricultural Development (BNDA).
               by program administrators. As the              there are more branches available               Given that BNDA has the expertise in
               transaction is electronic, accountability is   therefore facilitating payment. In rural        providing payments, accountability has
               fast, within 7 days program administrators     areas, payment centers by BPC are created       been on time whereas in the urban area,
               do have the accountability ready to be         to reduce the time and distance to              OM is inexperienced in such transactions
               archived. In rural areas, payment is           payment points for beneficiaries. Once          increasing the time needed for
               through branches of the Caisse Locale          more, in rural areas accountability are         accountability to the PMU.
               Credit Mutuel Agricol (CLCAM).                 manual, taking more time than in urban
               Transaction are manual therefore               areas.
               accountability can last up to three months.




                                                                   32
                                 Benin                                      Congo, Republic                                     Mali
M&E            M&E agents visit households regularly in        M&E agents and social workers are in          M&E agents in Mali work closely with the
              both urban and rural areas but the               charge of following M&E activities and        municipal and village (rural areas) or
              dispersion in urbans areas makes the             visiting households. The cooperation of       neighborhood (urban areas) committees,
              process longer. GPS data collected during        health and education agents with social       the social development service and the
              identification phase aides in the process        assistance is difficult due to the limited    payment agency. The M&E agent helps
              since a lot of households do not have            number of agents in each circumscription      committees to understand program
              addresses or are not well documented.            and the high number of people to be           procedures through regular monitoring
                                                               monitored. As a result a partnership with     work, evaluating problems and solving the
                                                               UNICEF is being formulated to support         issues. The M&E agents also help during
                                                               M&E activities. This issue is more relevant   village/neighborhood sensitization sessions
                                                               in urban areas due to the large catchment     to inform beneficiaries about payment
                                                               areas.                                        dates and place and are present during
                                                                                                             payment to monitor payment transactions,
                                                                                                             track problems if and when they appear
                                                                                                             and above all to make sure beneficiaries
                                                                                                             have all documents needed for payment.
Grievance &   CPS have computers that are not                   Done through social worker and M&E           Not a well stablished services. But the fact
Redress       connected to the network but have info of        agents located in each CAS. Information is    that NGOs are more present in urban
              all beneficiaries but social workers are         digitalized in the system and processed       areas, facilitates collection of demands and
              present to receive those who come to the         automatically. There is no difference         complaints and also transmission of
              CPS for demands and/or complaints.               regarding the processes for urban and rural   information to program administrators.
              Following the personalized service               areas.                                        Anyone can communicate with M&E
              provided by social workers, demands and                                                        agents, community committees and
              complaints are delivered to program                                                            community leaders.
              administrators via e-mail or telephone. In
              rural areas, as CPS are not present to
              centralize the collection of complaints, field
              agents collect complaints and demands
              and coordinate with program supervisors.
              Therefore, grievance and redress I less
              pronounced in rural areas.




                                                                    33
               Social Protection & Labor Discussion Paper Series Titles
                                     2014-2016

No.    Title

1614   Urban Social Assistance: Emerging Insights from Three African Countries
       by Vanessa Moreira and Ugo Gentilini, December 2016

1613   Issues for Civil Service Pension Reform in Sub-Saharan Africa
       by Anita M. Schwarz and Miglena Abels, November 2016

1612   How to Target Households in Adaptive Social Protection Systems? Relative Efficiency of Proxy
       Means Test and Household Economy Analysis in Niger
       by Pascale Schnitzer, October 2016

1611   Pensions for Public-Sector Employees: Lessons from OECD Countries’ Experience
       by Edward Whitehouse, October 2016

1610   Pension Systems in Sub-Saharan Africa: Brief Review of Design Parameters and Key Performance
       Indicators
       by Miglena Abels and Melis U. Guven, October 2016

1609   Household Enterprises in Fragile and Conflict-Affected States: Results from a Qualitative Toolkit
       Piloted in Liberia, Volume 2 – Annexes
       by Emily Weedon and Gwendolyn Heaner, August 2016

1608   Household Enterprises in Fragile and Conflict-Affected States: Results from a Qualitative Toolkit
       Piloted in Liberia, Volume 1 – Report
       by Emily Weedon and Gwendolyn Heaner, August 2016

1607   Benefits and Costs of Social Pensions in Sub-Saharan Africa
       by Melis U. Guven and Phillippe G. Leite, June 2016

1606   Assessing Benefit Portability for International Migrant Workers: A Review of the Germany-
       Turkey Bilateral Social Security Agreement
       by Robert Holzmann, Michael Fuchs, Seçil Paçacı Elitok and Pamela Dale, May 2016

1605   Do Bilateral Social Security Agreements Deliver on the Portability of Pensions and Health Care
       Benefits? A Summary Policy Paper on Four Migration Corridors Between EU and Non-EU Member
       States
       by Robert Holzmann, May 2016

1604   Assessing Benefit Portability for International Migrant Workers: A Review of the France-Morocco
       Bilateral Social Security Agreement
       by Robert Holzmann, Florence Legro and Pamela Dale, May 2016
1603   Assessing Benefit Portability for International Migrant Workers: A Review of the Belgium-Morocco
       Bilateral Social Security Agreement
       by Robert Holzmann, Jacques Wels and Pamela Dale, May 2016

1602   Assessing Benefit Portability for International Migrant Workers: A Review of the Austria-Turkey
       Bilateral Social Security Agreement
       by Robert Holzmann, Michael Fuchs, Seçil Paçaci Elitok and Pamela Dale, May 2016

1601   The Greek Pension Reform Strategy 2010-2016
       by Georgios Symeonidis, July 2016

1507   Integrating Disaster Response and Climate Resilience in Social Protection Programs in the Pacific
       Island Countries
       by Cecilia Costella and Oleksiy Ivaschenko, September 2015

1506   Effectiveness of Targeting Mechanisms Utilized in Social Protection Programs in Bolivia
       by Ignacio Apella and Gastón Blanco, September 2015

1505   Kyrgyz Republic: Social Sectors at a Glance
       by João Pedro Azevedo, Paula Calvo, Minh Nguyen and Josefina Posadas, August 2015

1504   Entering the City: Emerging Evidence and Practices with Safety Nets in Urban Areas
       by Ugo Gentilini, July 2015

1503   Pension Patterns in Sub-Saharan Africa
       by Mark Dorfman, July 2015

1502   Social Protection in Fragile and Conflict-Affected Countries: Trends and Challenges
       by Mirey Ovadiya, Adea Kryeziu, Syeda Masood and Eric Zapatero, April 2015

1501   Defining, Measuring, and Benchmarking Administrative Expenditures of Mandatory Social Security
       Programs
       by Oleksiy Sluchynsky, February 2015

1425   Old-Age Financial Protection in Malaysia: Challenges and Options
       by Robert Holzmann, November 2014

1424   Profiling the Unemployed: A Review of OECD Experiences and Implications for Emerging Economies
       by Artan Loxha and Matteo Morgandi, August 2014

1423   Any Guarantees? An Analysis of China’s Rural Minimum Living Standard Guarantee Program
       by Jennifer Golan, Terry Sicular and Nithin Umapathi, August 2014

1422   World Bank Support for Social Safety Nets 2007-2013: A Review of Financing, Knowledge Services
       and Results
       by Colin Andrews, Adea Kryeziu and Dahye Seo, June 2014

1421   STEP Skills Measurement Surveys: Innovative Tools for Assessing Skills
       by Gaëlle Pierre, Maria Laura Sanchez Puerta, Alexandria Valerio and Tania Rajadel, July 2014

1420   Our Daily Bread: What is the Evidence on Comparing Cash versus Food Transfers?
       by Ugo Gentilini, July 2014

1419   Rwanda: Social Safety Net Assessment
       by Alex Kamurase, Emily Wylde, Stephen Hitimana and Anka Kitunzi, July 2012

1418   Niger: Food Security and Safety Nets
       by Jenny C. Aker, Carlo del Ninno, Paul A. Dorosh, Menno Mulder-Sibanda and Setareh Razmara,
       February 2009

1417   Benin: Les Filets Sociaux au Bénin Outil de Réduction de la Pauvreté
       par Andrea Borgarello et Damien Mededji, Mai 2011

1416   Madagascar Three Years into the Crisis: An Assessment of Vulnerability and Social Policies and
       Prospects for the Future
       by Philippe Auffret, May 2012

1415   Sudan Social Safety Net Assessment
       by Annika Kjellgren, Christina Jones-Pauly, Hadyiat El-Tayeb Alyn, Endashaw Tadesse and Andrea
       Vermehren, May 2014

1414   Tanzania Poverty, Growth, and Public Transfers: Options for a National Productive Safety Net
       Program
       by W. James Smith, September 2011

1413   Zambia: Using Social Safety Nets to Accelerate Poverty Reduction and Share Prosperity
       by Cornelia Tesliuc, W. James Smith and Musonda Rosemary Sunkutu, March 2013

1412   Mali Social Safety Nets
       by Cécile Cherrier, Carlo del Ninno and Setareh Razmara, January 2011

1411   Swaziland: Using Public Transfers to Reduce Extreme Poverty
       by Lorraine Blank, Emma Mistiaen and Jeanine Braithwaite, November 2012

1410   Togo: Towards a National Social Protection Policy and Strategy
       by Julie van Domelen, June 2012

1409   Lesotho: A Safety Net to End Extreme Poverty
       by W. James Smith, Emma Mistiaen, Melis Guven and Morabo Morojele, June 2013

1408   Mozambique Social Protection Assessment: Review of Social Assistance Programs and Social
       Protection Expenditures
       by Jose Silveiro Marques, October 2012

1407   Liberia: A Diagnostic of Social Protection
       by Andrea Borgarello, Laura Figazzolo and Emily Weedon, December 2011
1406        Sierra Leone Social Protection Assessment
            by José Silvério Marques, John Van Dyck, Suleiman Namara, Rita Costa and Sybil Bailor, June 2013

1405        Botswana Social Protection
            by Cornelia Tesliuc, José Silvério Marques, Lillian Mookodi, Jeanine Braithwaite, Siddarth Sharma
            and Dolly Ntseane, December 2013

1404        Cameroon Social Safety Nets
            by Carlo del Ninno and Kaleb Tamiru, June 2012

1403        Burkina Faso Social Safety Nets
            by Cécile Cherrier, Carlo del Ninno and Setareh Razmara, January 2011

1402        Social Insurance Reform in Jordan: Awareness and Perceptions of Employment Opportunities for
            Women
            by Stefanie Brodmann, Irene Jillson and Nahla Hassan, June 2014

1401        Social Assistance and Labor Market Programs in Latin America: Methodology and Key Findings from
            the Social Protection Database
            by Paula Cerutti, Anna Fruttero, Margaret Grosh, Silvana Kostenbaum, Maria Laura Oliveri, Claudia
            Rodriguez-Alas, Victoria Strokova, June 2014


To view Social Protection & Labor Discussion papers published prior to 2013, please visit www.worldbank.org/spl.
Abstract

As countries implement social assistance (or safety net) programs, a range of technical hurdles can
affect their implementation differently in rural and urban areas. In urban areas, the focus of this
study, cost of living can be higher and more prone to economic slowdowns. Poverty can be more
severe than in rural areas and accompanied by high malnutrition rates. Implementation challenges
in most urban areas relate to the lack of proper identification, outreach, intake, and registration of
potential beneficiaries. These are in part due to the lack of social cohesion and different channels
of communication. Therefore, social workers are likely to play an even more fundamental role in
program implementation and M&E processes.




About this series

Social Protection & Labor Discussion Papers are published to communicate the results of The World Bank’s
work to the development community with the least possible delay. This paper therefore has not been
prepared in accordance with the procedures appropriate for formally edited texts.
The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed herein are those of the author(s), and do not
necessarily reflect the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/The World Bank
and its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of The World Bank or the governments
they represent. The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The
boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any
judgement on the part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or
acceptance of such boundaries.
For more information, please contact the Social Protection Advisory Service, The World Bank, 1818 H Street,
N.W., Room G7-803, Washington, DC 20433 USA. Telephone: (202) 458-5267, Fax: (202) 614-0471, E-mail:
socialprotection@worldbank.org or visit us on-line at www.worldbank.org/spl.

                                  © 2016 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank
