 THE PAKISTAN EXPANDED PROGRAM
ON IMMUNIZATION AND THE NATIONAL
 IMMUNIZATION SUPPORT PROJECT:
      AN ECONOMIC ANALYSIS

 DISCUSSION PAPER      NOVEMBER 2016




 Minhaj ul Haque
 Muhammad Waheed
 Tayyeb Masud
 Wasim Shahid Malick
 Hammad Yunus
 Rahul Rekhi
 Robert Oelrichs
 Oleg Kucheryavenko
THE PAKISTAN EXPANDED PROGRAM ON IMMUNIZATION AND
     THE NATIONAL IMMUNIZATION SUPPORT PROJECT




                   An Economic Analysis




  Minhaj ul Haque, Muhammad Waheed, Tayyeb Masud, Wasim
Shahid Malick, Hammad Yunus, Rahul Rekhi, Robert Oelrichs, and
                     Oleg Kucheryavenko




                       November 2016



                              1
        Health, Nutrition and Population (HNP) Discussion Paper
This series is produced by the Health, Nutrition, and Population Global Practice. The
papers in this series aim to provide a vehicle for publishing preliminary results on HNP
topics to encourage discussion and debate. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions
expressed in this paper are entirely those of the author(s) and should not be attributed in
any manner to the World Bank, to its affiliated organizations or to members of its Board of
Executive Directors or the countries they represent. Citation and the use of material
presented in this series should take into account this provisional character.

The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The
boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work
do not imply any judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of
any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

For information regarding the HNP Discussion Paper Series, please contact the Editor,
Martin Lutalo at mlutalo@worldbank.org or Erika Yanick at eyanick@worldbank.org.

                                Rights and Permissions

The material in this work is subject to copyright. Because The World Bank encourages
dissemination of its knowledge, this work may be reproduced, in whole or in part, for
noncommercial purposes as long as full attribution to this work is given.

Any queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to
World Bank Publications, The World Bank Group, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC
20433, USA; fax: 202-522-2625; e-mail: pubrights@worldbank.org.




© 2016 The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW Washington, DC 20433
All rights reserved.



                                            ii
      Health, Nutrition and Population (HNP) Discussion Paper

      The Pakistan Expanded Program on Immunization and the National
                       Immunization Support Project

                                  An Economic Analysis

    Minhaj ul Haque,a Muhammad Waheed,b Tayyeb Masud,c Wasim Shahid Malick,d
      Hammad Yunus,e Rahul Rekhi,f Robert Oelrichsg, and Oleg Kucheryavenkoh

a
  Health Specialist, Independent Consultant
b
  Senior Economist, World Bank, Islamabad, Pakistan
c
  Senior Health Specialist, World Bank, Islamabad, Pakistan
d
  Health Specialist, Independent Consultant
e
  Health Specialist, Independent Consultant
f
  Health Specialist, Independent Consultant
g
  Senior Health Specialist, World Bank, Washington DC, USA
h
  Health Specialist, Consultant, World Bank, Washington DC, USA


    This paper was prepared by the World Bank as part of preparation for the Pakistan
    National Immunization Support Project (P132308) and financed in part by Gavi, the
                Vaccine Alliance and the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation

Abstract: Pakistan faces a formidable challenge in eliminating the polio virus from the
country. With transmission of the polio virus substantially slowing in the Africa region, the
only two countries worldwide with ongoing endemic polio transmission may soon be
Pakistan and Afghanistan. A substantial number of the polio cases or infant paralysis
occurring in Afghanistan is linked to cross-border transmission from Pakistan. The ongoing
cycle of polio infection is not just a tragedy for the children of Pakistan, it is a global public
health emergency constituting one of the final barriers to permanently eradicating polio.

The outbreaks of vaccine-preventable diseases in Pakistan result in significant costs to
individuals and to society. These include costs associated with visits to health care
providers, hospitalizations, disability, and premature deaths. Despite a slow decline over
the past 10 years, the under-five mortality rate in Pakistan remains high, with more than
400,000 deaths annually in this demographic over the past twenty years. Pakistan is
lagging behind other South Asian countries in improving this indicator.

This paper demonstrates clear economic benefits and efficacy of the National
Immunization Support Project (NISP), which is financing interventions in terms of DALYs
saved, and establishes that this approach is affordable and economically effective with a
high rate of return. In addition to increased investment, the effectiveness of the Expanded
Program on Immunization can be enhanced by improving the capacity building of health
professionals, as well as by improving logistics of program interventions to reach
marginalized populations, remote areas, and pockets of resistance. An increased financial
investment alone will be insufficient to address the root causes of persistent under-
coverage of immunization in Pakistan. It is imperative that ample attention and resources




                                               iii
be diverted to strengthen the procurement systems, local and provincial management
capacity, and reporting mechanisms, among other capacity improvements.

Keywords: EPI, financing, immunization, Pakistan

Disclaimer: The findings, interpretations and conclusions expressed in the paper are
entirely those of the authors, and do not represent the views of the World Bank, its
Executive Directors, or the countries they represent.

Correspondence Details: Robert Oelrichs, World Bank, 1818 H St NW, Washington DC,
USA, email roelrichs@worldbank.org




                                         iv
                                                Table of Contents

LIST OF ACRONYMS .................................................................................................. VI
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS ........................................................................................... VIII
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY ............................................................................................ IX
INTRODUCTION........................................................................................................... 13
BACKGROUND ............................................................................................................. 15
   PERFORMANCE OF THE EPI ............................................................................................ 16
   CAUSES OF LOW IMMUNIZATION .................................................................................... 18
   EXPENDITURES ON IMMUNIZATION ................................................................................ 19
   PROPOSED MITIGATION THROUGH CMYP AND NISP .................................................... 21
INVESTIGATION INTO UNIT COST ANALYSIS .................................................. 23
   METHODOLOGY AND APPROACH TO ESTIMATE UNIT COSTS ......................................... 23
   UNIT COST OF VACCINE DELIVERY PER IMMUNIZATION ................................................ 26
PROGRAM COST AND ECONOMIC RETURNS ANALYSIS............................... 27
   METHODOLOGY AND DATA USED .................................................................................. 27
   COST OF FULLY IMMUNIZED CHILDREN FOR DIFFERENT COVERAGE SCENARIOS .......... 29
   EFFICIENCY GAINS THROUGH COVERAGE IMPROVEMENTS ............................................ 32
   ECONOMIC BENEFITS OF INTERVENTION ........................................................................ 35
   RETURNS ON INVESTMENT UNDER NISP ........................................................................ 35
   COST-SAVING AND EFFICIENCY GAINS .......................................................................... 38
CONCLUSIONS ............................................................................................................. 40
REFERENCES ................................................................................................................ 42
ANNEX ............................................................................................................................ 45
   UNIT COST OF FULLY IMMUNIZED CHILD ...................................................................... 45
   PROJECTION OF ANNUAL BIRTHS IN PAKISTAN .............................................................. 45
   COVERAGE RATIO AND THE TARGET POPULATION ........................................................ 47
   COST OF IMMUNIZING CHILDREN ................................................................................... 49
   BENEFITS OF IMMUNIZATION.......................................................................................... 50
ANNEX II ........................................................................................................................ 55
   UNIT COST ESTIMATION ......................................................................................... 55




                                                                 v
         LIST OF ACRONYMS

ADP     Annual Development Program
AEFI    Adverse Effects Following Immunization
AGPR    Accountant General Pakistan Revenues
AHP     Accelerated Health Program
ASFR    Age-Specific Fertility Rates
BCG     Bacillus Calmette–Guérin
BMGF    Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation
CEA     Cost-effectiveness Analyses
CER     Cost-effectiveness Ratio
CMR     Child Mortality Rate
CMYP    Comprehensive Multi-Year Plan
DALY    Disability-Adjusted Life Year
DDO     Drawing and Disbursement Officer
        Department for International Development, United
DfID
        Kingdom
DHO     District Health Officer
DLI     Disbursement Linked Indicators
DTP     Diphtheria–Tetanus–Pertussis
EDO     Executive District Officer
EPI     Expanded Program on Immunization
FIC     Fully Immunized Children
FY      Fiscal Year
GAVI    Global Alliance for Vaccine and Immunization
GBD     Global Burden of Disease
GDP     Gross Domestic Product
GIVS    Global Immunization Vision and Strategy
GVAP    Global Vaccine Action Plan
HMIS    Health Management Information System
HNP     Health, Nutrition and Population
ICER    Incremental Cost-effectiveness Ratio
IMHE    Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation
IMR     Infant Mortality Rate
JICA    Japan International Cooperation Agency
KP      Khyber Pakhtunkhwa
LHW     Lady Health Worker
MICS    Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey
NAM     New Accounting Mode
NISP    National Immunization Support Program
NeoMR   Neonatal Mortality Rate
PBS     Pakistan Bureau of Statistics
PCO     Pakistan Census Organization



                      vi
PDHS     Pakistan Demographic and Health Survey
PIFRA    Project to Improve Financial Reporting and Auditing
PIHS     Pakistan Integrated Household Survey
PKR      Pakistan Rupee
PDHS     Pakistan Demographic and Health Survey
         Pakistan Social and Living Standards Measurement
PSLM
         Survey
RI       Routine Immunization
S1       Scenario 1
S2       Scenario 2
SAGE     Strategic Advisory Group of Experts
SAR      South Asia Region
SBP      State Bank of Pakistan
U5MR     Under-Five Mortality Rate
UN       United Nations
UNICEF   United Nations Children’s Fund
USAID    United States Agency for International Development
USD      United States Dollar
VPD      Vaccine-Preventable Disease
WB       World Bank
WHA      World Health Assembly
WHO      World Health Organization




                       vii
                             ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

This paper was prepared as part of preparation for the Pakistan National Immunization
Support Project and financed in part by Gavi, the Vaccine Alliance, and the Bill & Melinda
Gates Foundation. The team is grateful to Tasleem Kachra at Bill & Melinda Gates
Foundation and Anne Cronin at Gavi, the Vaccine Alliance for their guidance and support
during the project.

The team would like to thank the officials of the Government of Pakistan at federal and
provincial level and wish to acknowledge the collective effort of health care providers in
Pakistan working to make a different in the lives of children.

Finally, the team would like to extend its gratitude to Inaam ul Haq, Naoko Ohno, Aliya
Kashif, Syed Waseem Abbas Kazmi and Rehan Hyder for guidance and constructive
criticism and the dissemination of the final paper.

Finally, the authors are grateful to the World Bank for publishing this report as an HNP
Discussion Paper.




                                           viii
                                 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

Immunization is one of the most important advances in public health. Over the last century,
more lives have been saved by the global expansion of immunization coverage than any
other health intervention. Ample evidence attests to the success of immunization
programs. Vaccination is a cost-effective method to improve aggregate health status and
it improves the fairness of resource distribution. Public investment in vaccination helps
change the distribution of health in favor of deprived segments of the society. Because
the greatest gains from vaccination may accrue to sections of the population that are
disadvantaged in terms of their existing health or socioeconomic status, expanding access
to immunization interventions reduces health inequalities and strongly supports the twin
goals of the World Bank Group for poverty reduction and inclusive development.

Despite the clear array of benefits that stem from nationwide vaccination, Pakistan
continues to experience outbreaks of vaccine-preventable diseases due to problems in
the immunization program that lead to low coverage. The outbreaks result in significant
costs to individuals and to society. These include costs associated with visits to health
care providers, hospitalizations, disability, and premature deaths. Despite a slow decline
over the past 10 years, the under-five mortality rate in Pakistan remains high, with more
than 400,000 deaths annually in this demographic over the past twenty years. Pakistan is
lagging behind other South Asian countries in improving this indicator.

To achieve the Millennium Development Goal 4 of reducing child mortality, Pakistan
needed to sustain a reduction in child mortality rates (CMRs) of 4.2 per annum between
2000 and 2015. However, Pakistan only achieved a rate of 1.13 per annum as of 2012. 1
In large part, this gap in CMRs is a function of low immunization coverage in Pakistan.
Approximately 43 to 62 percent of children are estimated to be fully vaccinated. And this
estimate varies considerably across geographic, social, and cultural boundaries.

Historical data highlight three issues of concern with the national immunization coverage.
First, progress in expanding coverage of childhood vaccination countrywide continues to
be slow. The latest Pakistan Demographic and Health Survey (PDHS 2012-13) indicates
that less than half of all children are fully immunized in Pakistan. 2 The proportion of fully
immunized children aged 12 to 23 months in Pakistan increased by only 19 percent in the
20 years preceding 2012-13.

Second, the follow up for second and third waves of vaccination for children remains
inadequate. For example, the BCG vaccine, which is administered at birth, constitutes 85
percent of all vaccines administered in the country. Although more than 75 percent of
children in Pakistan received the first dose of DPT, only 65 percent subsequently were




1 The authors’ calculations are based on estimates from the following studies: “Neonatal, Post-neonatal,
Childhood, and Under-5 Mortality for 187 Countries, 1970-2010: A Systematic Analysis of Progress Towards
Millennium Development Goal 4.” 2010. The Lancet and Building Momentum: Global Progress towards
Reducing Maternal and Child Mortality. 2010. IMHE, University of Washington.
2 Children were considered “fully immunized” when they had received one dose of BCG, three doses of DPT,

three doses of polio, and one dose of measles vaccine.


                                                  ix
inoculated with DPT3. Immunity against measles is especially low in Pakistan. Only about
two-thirds (61 percent) of children have received the first vaccine dose.

Third, there are marked and alarming variations in immunization coverage across
provinces, districts, and genders. For example, the 2012-13 PDHS shows that the
proportion of fully immunized children in Sindh and Balochistan has dropped from 35
percent to 16 percent and from 37 percent to 29 percent since 2006-07, respectively.
Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (KP) and Punjab have shown slow but steady progress on the same
metrics. Gender variations are also evident in the data. Gender variations also exist:
immunization rates among boys is 56 percent – five percentage points higher than for
girls, at 51 percent. This trend prevails in provinces.

Pakistan faces a formidable challenge in eliminating the polio virus from the country. With
transmission of the polio virus substantially slowing in the Africa region, the only two
countries worldwide with ongoing endemic polio transmission may soon be Pakistan and
Afghanistan. A substantial number of the polio cases or infant paralysis occurring in
Afghanistan is linked to cross-border transmission from Pakistan. The ongoing cycle of
polio infection is not just a tragedy for the children of Pakistan, it is a global public health
emergency constituting one of the final barriers to permanently eradicating polio. The
Government of Pakistan has urgently prioritized improving the performance of the
Expanded Program on Immunization (EPI) to interrupt polio virus transmission and to
deliver routine immunization services as a fundamental public health service.

Why is progress in improving immunization in Pakistan slow and fragmented? Several
demand and supply side challenges are among the causes. On the supply side, for
instance, the prioritization placed on EPI has been inconsistent, particularly funding and
technical assistance relative to other public health campaigns. A lack of capacity of
available human resources, or local-level planning, management, logistics, and
monitoring, evaluation, and surveillance has resulted in poor EPI performance. Moreover,
the recent devolution of health service management to the districts and provinces has
impeded national coordination and planning. Specifically, the EPI has not been able to
sustain its human resources for several reasons, including poor worker motivation due to
low remuneration, political interference, underutilization of vaccinators and Lady Health
Workers, and reduced opportunities for in-service staff capacity building in logistics,
monitoring, evaluation, and surveillance.

On the demand side, various social and political factors diminish EPI effectiveness.
According to the Ministry of Health (2003), about 10 percent of Pakistani families are
unwilling to vaccinate their children. Some communities expect door-to-door service by
female staff, while others categorically reject immunization on cultural grounds. The gap
in f immunization knowledge among the community impedes them from actively seeking
immunization services. Recent targeting of polio workers and staunch opposition to
immunization campaigns in selected areas of Pakistan emerges as a new barrier,
threatening coverage in areas that have been particularly affected by the polio virus. As a
consequence of these supply and demand side constraints, Pakistan continues to battle
endemic circulation of polio, alongside outbreaks of diseases such as measles and
diphtheria, which have been largely suppressed in other countries.




                                               x
The current political context of Pakistan presents additional challenges and opportunities
to improve EPI performance and overcome constraints. Overcoming the challenges will
require strong leadership, good governance, and effective management—particularly at
the district and provincial levels. Although the management of health services, including
immunization, has devolved to the provinces, the federal level stewardship function for
EPI is maintained within the Ministry of National Health Services, Regulation and
Coordination (MONHSRC). However, the extent to which federal roles like policymaking,
oversight, and monitoring and evaluation will be managed by the MONHSRC remains
unclear. Despite the existence of serious concerns about the capacity of provincial
programs, the devolution nevertheless has created clear opportunities for increased
access, accountability, ownership, and equity in national immunization programs.

The EPI programs in Pakistan also suffer from financial fragmentation, with multiple
sources of financing from federal and provincial development budgets and from the
considerable international support that flows off-budget. This fragmentation causes
inefficiencies due to the delayed flow of funds and unpredictable resource projections. In
addition, it limits accountability due to failures of accounting and reporting. The financial
sustainability of the EPI is threatened by the continued reliance on the development
budget and off-budget international support. Program governance and accountability
mechanisms are weak and fragmented among federal, provincial, and district levels.
World Bank analysis indicates an average annual loss to Pakistan of PKRs 4 billion due
to inefficiencies in vaccine procurement and program management.

Given the highlighted challenges and internationally demonstrated cost-effectiveness of
immunizations, Pakistan is embarking on enhancing the scope and coverage of its
immunization program as articulated and endorsed by the Government of Pakistan in a
new Comprehensive Multi-Year Plan (CMYP). The National Immunization Support Project
(NISP) is under preparation as a financing mechanism for the CMYP. The NISP will
coordinate results-based financial support from Gavi, the Vaccine Alliance (Gavi), the
World Bank, and the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation (BMGF). When the cost of vaccine
purchase is subsidized, some members of the population may be able and willing to pay
out-of-pocket to be vaccinated, which would reduce the financial burden on the health care
system. The generation of private demand could improve the affordability and financial
sustainability of immunization programs. Critical to the success of the program, however,
will be ensuring that vaccines are available to members of the population who are unable
to pay user charges.

This report answers the following questions: How much financing would be required if
Pakistan wants to achieve its target of full immunization against preventable diseases for
children between 0 and 23 months? And, what would be the subsequent economic
benefits of intervention? Although it is established both globally and nationally that
immunization has been the most cost-effective public health intervention, it is nonetheless
imperative to measure the affordability of immunizations. Pakistan spends less than 1
percent of its GDP on health and it seems crucial to increase fiscal space for health. As
the government aims to move to UHC, and needs to prioritize investments in the health
sector, it is important to have information about the costs and impacts of investments in
order to inform allocation of limited resources.




                                             xi
By estimating the unit cost of immunization and combining this with coverage data from
various rounds of the PDHS and the Pakistan Social and Living Standards Measurement
Survey (PSLMS), two immunization coverage scenarios are constructed to calculate cost-
effectiveness ratios for Pakistan and its provinces. The unit cost estimates of vaccination
are built for future years and cover all aspects of program functions. Based on these unit
cost estimates, the authors built scenarios with and without interventions for the overall
cost and benefit analysis. Ultimately, the findings demonstrate clear economic benefits in
terms of DALYs saved due to expanded immunization in Pakistan. The proposed
intervention is affordable and economically effective with a high rate of return. In addition
to increased investment, the effectiveness of national EPI programs could be enhanced
by increasing the capacity building of health professionals, and managing the logistics of
the interventions to reach marginalized populations, remote areas, and pockets of uptake
resistance.




                                             xii
                                          INTRODUCTION

Immunization is one of the most important advances in public health. Immunization saves
more lives worldwide than any other health intervention. Immunization programs are
responsible for the eradication, elimination, containment, and control of infectious
diseases that were once common globally. Although people can benefit from immunization
at any stage of the life cycle, due to their immature immune systems, infants and young
children particularly benefit from the protection offered by immunization against vaccine-
preventable diseases (VPDs). Immunization offers dual benefits: vaccinated individuals
are directly protected and if a sufficient proportion of the population is vaccinated against
the disease, “herd immunity” results. 3 According to the World Health Organization (WHO),
immunization annually averts two to three million deaths, in addition to preventing illness
and disability.

Immunization is one of the most cost-effective public health interventions that exist. For
every dollar, invested in childhood immunization, $16 can be saved in health care costs,
wages and productivity due to illness and death. If the full value of people living longer,
healthier lives is taken into account, the return on investment rises to $44. In total,
immunization will yield more than $586 billion in economic benefits from 2011-2020
worldwide (Ozawa et al. 2016).

The cost of implementing an immunization program is typically much less than that of
treating the disease that would otherwise occur (WB 2010). Mounting evidence indicates
that immunization against disease is the most potent tool to reduce the burden of disease
and the single most cost-effective public health intervention. Yet despite the proven public
health benefits of vaccines, inefficient and under-resourced public immunization
interventions in many parts of the world, including Pakistan, result in VPDs that continue
to pose significant and unnecessary costs to individuals and society. Such costs include
those associated with visits to health care providers, hospitalizations, and premature
deaths. To build on the success of the smallpox eradication program, the WHO initiated
the Expanded Program on Immunization (EPI) in 1974 to expand childhood vaccination
worldwide based on global guidelines and standardized vaccination schedules. The EPI
was launched to ensure that all children, in all countries, benefit from life-saving
vaccinations. Pakistan launched the EPI in 1978.

In accord with international standards and through its EPI, Pakistan aims to immunize all
children between 0 and 23 months against eight VPDs, including tuberculosis,
poliomyelitis, diphtheria, pertussis, tetanus, hepatitis B, haemophilus influenza type b
(Hib), and measles. Newer vaccines that will further extend the EPI are either in the
process of rollout, for example, pneumococcal vaccine and inactivated polio vaccine, or
they are under consideration, for example, rotavirus vaccine, inactivated polio vaccine,
with support from Gavi.

3 Herd immunity or herd effect, also called community immunity, describes a form of immunity that occurs

when the vaccination of a significant portion of a population (or herd) provides a measure of protection for
individuals who have not developed immunity. See T.J. John and R. Samuel. 2000. “Herd immunity and herd
effect: new insights and definitions.” Eur. J. Epidemiol. 16 (7): 601–6. Herd immunity theory proposes that in
contagious diseases that are transmitted from individual to individual, chains of infection are likely to be
disrupted when large numbers of a population are immune or less susceptible to the disease. The greater the
proportion of individuals who are resistant, the smaller the probability that a susceptible individual will come
into contact with an infectious individual.

                                                      13
Immunization coverage in Pakistan remains low and consistently lags behind the regional
median, for reasons explained below. To narrow the gap in coverage, the proposed
Comprehensive Multi-Year Program (CMYP) seeks to increase access to routine
childhood immunization in Pakistan by building upon the EPI framework, and particularly
by focusing on coverage, equity, and quality.

This report presents an economic analysis of EPI. The primary aim of this study was to
assemble evidence for the National Immunization Support Program (NISP) as a financing
tool for the CMYP and to gauge the necessary level of investment to enhance national
immunization coverage under the proposed plan. The authors also provide estimates of
unit cost per child to attain full inoculation against VPDs. The unit cost analysis also
presents aggregated program costs and an economic analysis based on divergent
immunization coverage scenarios. The analysis presented here is disaggregated by
province to inform policymaking at the provincial levels.

The results of this analysis are supported by a global and local literature review of the
economic analysis of immunization. Secondary data from the Pakistan Demographic and
Health Survey (PDHS) 2012-13 and various rounds of Pakistan Social and Living
Standards Measurement Survey (PSLM) are used to build future immunization coverage
scenarios for each province and for Pakistan at the aggregate level. Primary data collected
on the unit cost of immunization is also presented. The WHO methodology for cost
estimation is used and all aspects of program functions are considered as part of the unit
cost of a fully immunized child (WHO 2002). The analysis was enriched by a review of
global immunization commitments and collating local evidence of EPI achievements to
identify neglected areas in the context of financing for immunization. The finding of
incremental cost-effective analysis indicates the economic benefits of increasing the
immunization coverage.




                                            14
                                       BACKGROUND
Pakistan is the world’s sixth most populous country with a population of 180 million and a
gross national income (GNI) per capita of USD $1,440 in 2015. 4 The under-five mortality
rate remains high, despite a slow decline over the past 10 years. In the last two decades,
more than 400,000 child deaths have occurred annually in this age group. Pakistan’s
decrease in infant and under-five mortality rates lags behind other South Asian countries.

To achieve the Millennium Development Goal (MDG) 4 of reducing child mortality,
Pakistan needed to sustain a reduction in child mortality rates (CMR) of 4.2 per annum
between 2000 and 2015. However, Pakistan only achieved a rate of 1.13 per annum as
of 2012. 5 Because Pakistan has missed immunization targets for VDPs, it consequently
missed CMR rate reduction targets. Immunization coverage in Pakistan remains low. The
proportion of children who are fully immunized is between 43 and 62 percent. The
percentage of immunized children varies considerably across geographic, social, and
cultural boundaries. 6 As a consequence, Pakistan continues to face endemic circulation
of polio and outbreaks of diseases such as measles and diphtheria, diseases which are
almost unheard of in many other countries.

A principal reason for Pakistan’s low immunization coverage rates is inefficiencies in the
health system and inadequate spending on health and education. The combined public
expenditure on these two important sectors was less than 2.5 percent of gross domestic
product (GDP) in FY 2012-13—one of the lowest in the region. The entire public
expenditure on health in Pakistan constitutes less than one percent of national spending.
Notably, while Pakistan’s population continues to grow at 2 percent per annum, it has
undergone a major demographic transition over the last 40 years. Its dependency ratio
has declined from 90 percent in the early 1960s to 68 percent today. The immediate
implication of this falling dependency ratio is the increased proportion of the working-age
population. But even the increase in working-age individuals will not translate into a driver
of economic growth if only limited resources continue to be devoted to education and
health, thereby lowering the quality of available human capital in terms of health and
productive skills.

Pakistan’s current political context presents challenges and opportunities to improve
immunization coverage and expand investments in health. Meeting these health
challenges will require strong leadership, good governance, and effective management,
particularly at the provincial and district levels. In the context of the 18th Amendment to
the Constitution, which was passed by Parliament in April 2010, a particular set of issues
remains to implement fundamental reforms, restructure institutions, and strengthen
systems. While the 18th Amendment enhanced provincial autonomy and fiscal space by
devolving federal legislative powers and responsibilities to the provinces, it did not clarify
the federal government’s role in national health planning and coordination. In addition, the
EPI campaign faces the emerging concerns of attacks on immunization workers and the



4 See http://data.worldbank.org/country/pakistan (accessed November 2016).
5 The authors’ calculations are based on estimates from the following studies: Neonatal, Post neonatal,
Childhood, and Under-5 Mortality for 187 Countries, 1970-2010: A Systematic Analysis of Progress towards
Millennium Development Goal 4. 2010. The Lancet and Building Momentum: Global Progress towards
Reducing Maternal and Child Mortality. 2010. IMHE, University of Washington.
6 PDHSs and PSLMs, program data, and published research.



                                                  15
internal displacement of the population in two provinces of Pakistan (Planning
Commission and UNDP 2013).

Health service management, including immunization, is now the responsibility of the
provinces. The EPI stewardship function at the federal level is now with the Ministry of
National Health Services, Regulation and Coordination (MONHSRC). Yet, the extent to
which federal roles like policymaking, oversight, and monitoring and evaluation will be
managed by the MONHSRC remains unclear. Despite the existence of serious concerns
about the capacity of provincial governments’ EPI programs, the devolution has presented
clear opportunities for increased access, accountability, ownership, and equity in
immunization programs.

PERFORMANCE OF THE EPI

Infant and under-five mortality rates in Pakistan are alarmingly high. The most recent data
indicate that of 1,000 live births, 74 infants and 89 children under five die before their first
and fifth birthdays, respectively. 7 A significant proportion of these deaths are preventable
by immunizing pregnant mothers and children. Since 1978, the EPI has been responsible
for the nationwide immunization of children in Pakistan (Hasan et al 2010). 8 In the early
phase of the program, less than 2 percent of Pakistani children were fully immunized in
1982. This figure quickly rose to 59 percent in 1984 (Ministry of Health 2003). In 1985, the
program was re-launched as the Accelerated Health Program (AHP).

Immunization coverage decreased to 47 percent in the mid-1990s due to donors
withdrawing their financing in early to mid-1990s without commensurate increase in
domestic resources. Coverage, however, improved in 1996 (Ministry of Health 2003).
Another milestone was achieved with the introduction of Gavi support of two new vaccines
in the late 1990s and in 2001, the Hep-B and Hib vaccines. In 2008, the program
introduced the Pentavalent vaccine, which simplifies the schedule for full vaccination to
five visits during the child’s first year of life (WHO). 9, 10




Table 1. Percentage of Children 12-23 Months of Age Receiving Vaccines in Pakistan

                       DPT                          Polio            Measles All vaccinations
                   BCG 1   2                3       1   2      3
    PDHS (1990-91) 70  64 60                43      65 61      43    50           35
    PIHS (1995-96) 73  73 64                58      71 65      58    47           45
    PIHS (1996-97) 76  76 70                63      80 76      67    49           49
    PIHS (1998-99) 65  67 63                58      77 76      70    55           49
    PIHS (2001-02) 67  71 67                63      68 91      89    57           53
    PSLM (2004-05) 82  82 81                80      82 81      81    78           77
7 Pakistan Demographic and Health Survey 2012-13.
8 In the earlier phase of the program, six diseases were included. The program was expanded to eight
preventable diseases in the 2000s. The diseases are poliomyelitis, neonatal tetanus, measles, diphtheria,
pertussis (whooping cough), hepatitis-b, hib pneumonia and meningitis, and childhood tuberculosis.
9 WHO Pakistan EPI Programme Sheet: http://www.emro.who.int/pak/programmes/expanded-programme-on-

immunization.html.
10 A child is vaccinated at birth, at the 6th, 10th and 14th weeks, and then at nine months of age.



                                                   16
                                 DPT                 Polio            Measles All vaccinations
                    BCG          1   2      3        1   2      3
     EPI (2006)     78           75 69      65       74 69      64    63           57
     PDHS (2006-07) 80           75 67      59       93 91      83    60           47
     PSLM (2007-08) 82           83 81      79       95 94      93    76           73
     PSLM (2010-11) 88           88 87      85       81 81      79    82           81
     PSLM (2011-12) 85           85 84      83       98 98      96    81           80
     PDHS (2012-13) 83           77 71      63       90 86      82    50           54

In Pakistan, different data sources show distinct coverage figures for available vaccines—
particularly the PSLMS and the PDHS (see Table 1). Even as the PSLMS results indicate
that polio vaccination rose from 58 percent in 1995-96 to 83 percent in 2006-07, PDHS
data show higher figures for polio coverage in Pakistan (see Table 1).11 Though the
program is still far from attaining adequate immunization coverage,12 it is encouraging
that only 5 percent of children did not receive any vaccination in 2012-13, a significant
drop from 28 percent in 1990-91 (PDHS). Undoubtedly, the program can reach the
desirable targets with proper implementation.


Table 2. Reported burden of VPDs in 2013 compared to 2008

                          Indicators                          2008      2013
                          Polio                               117       303
                          Measles (lab confirmed)             1,129     8,749
                          Tetanus Neonatal                    320       898
                          Diphtheria                          32        183
                          Rota                                          2,148
                          Rubella                                       1,113
                          Pertussis                           169       250
                          Pneumonia                                     1,290


Three notable concerns with national immunization coverage can be identified from this
data. First, the results show slow improvement in the proportion of children receiving all
the recommended vaccinations. The latest PDHS 2012-13 demonstrates that just over
half of all children are fully immunized in Pakistan (see Table 1). 13 According to the PDHS,
the proportion of immunized children in Pakistan has increased from 35 percent in 1990-
91 to 54 percent in 2012-13.

Second, the follow up on children for the second and third waves of vaccination is
inadequate. The BCG vaccine administered at the time of birth, for example, constitutes
85 percent of all vaccines administered in the country. While more than three-fourths of
children received the first dose of DPT, only 65 percent were inoculated with all three
doses. Moreover, although 90 percent of children received the first polio vaccine, only 80

11 In PDHS, the respondent is a mother while it is the head of household in PSLM. See Khan and Khan
2012.
12 The objective of the EPI was to achieve 90 percent full immunization coverage and to eradicate measles

by 2010 and interrupt polio virus transmission by 2005.
13 Children are considered to be “fully immunized” when they have received one dose of BCG, three doses of

DPT, three doses of polio, and one dose of measles vaccine.

                                                   17
percent received the third dose. Immunity against measles remains most fraught. Only
about two-thirds (61 percent of children from all over the country received the first dose of
the vaccine. These shortcomings are reflected in the recent outbreaks of measles and the
emergence of polio cases in multiple areas of Pakistan. In 2012, officials reported 14,984
confirmed cases of measles to the WHO Strategic Advisory Group of Experts (SAGE). To
mitigate these outbreaks, more systematic and sustained immunization efforts are
required.

Third, marked variations in immunization coverage exist across provinces and districts—
as well as by gender (see Table A.8 in Annex I). For instance, the PDHS 2012-13 shows
that the proportion of fully immunized children in Sindh and Balochistan provinces fell from
35 to 16 percent and 37 to 29 percent since 2006-07, respectively (see Table A.10 in
Annex I for full details). As much as one-fifth of infants and children in rural Balochistan
have received any vaccinations (PDHS 2012-13). In contrast, Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (KP)
and Punjab provinces have shown steady progress in child immunization rates. The
findings in the PDHS are corroborated by trends shown in PLSMSs, which also reveal
declines in immunization coverage within Balochistan and Sindh in recent years. As
recorded by both PDHS 2012-13 and PSLMS 2011-12, most of the decreased coverage
in Balochistan is attributed to significant drops in coverage for all vaccines except for polio.

The PDHS 2012-13 displays a five percentage point difference in national vaccination
coverage by gender: 56 percent versus 51 for boys and girls. Gender differences within
many provinces are even more significant. A study conducted in four districts of Pakistan
shows that male children in Khairpur were 1.4 times more likely to be vaccinated than
female children, after controlling for all background characteristics (Cockcroft et al 2011).
Urban and rural differentials are just as notable. At the national level, 66 percent of children
in urban areas are vaccinated compared to just 48 percent in rural areas. The figures are
particularly alarming for Sindh and Balochistan. In Sindh province, 51 percent of children
receive vaccines in urban areas, compared to just 14 percent in rural areas. In Balochistan,
these figures are 36 percent and 12 percent, respectively.

CAUSES OF LOW IMMUNIZATION

There are myriad reasons for the persistence of low immunization coverage in Pakistan,
on both the demand and supply side. On the demand side, limited access to immunization
services—due mostly to an inadequate number of vaccinators—and lack of information
on the part of parents were found to be the most important reasons for low vaccination
coverage in Pakistan (Hasan et al 2010). According to the Ministry of Health (2003), about
10 percent of families were unwilling to vaccinate their children. Some communities expect
door-to-door service by female health workers, known as Lady Health Workers, while
others categorically reject immunization. The dearth of immunization knowledge among
communities impedes them from actively seeking immunization services.

On the supply side, the poor performance of EPI in Pakistan has been well documented,
particularly in the realm of program governance, performance management, and
accountability. Two studies that reviewed program performance attest that reduced
attention to capacity building of available human resources, local-level planning,
management, logistics, monitoring, evaluation and surveillance has resulted in poor EPI




                                              18
performance (Pildat 2010 and Masud 2012). 14 Additionally, the EPI has not been able to
sustain its human resource development for several reasons, including poor worker
motivation due to low remuneration, political interference, and underutilization of available
human resources, for example, vaccinators and Lady Health Workers, as well as reduced
opportunities for in-service staff capacity building in logistics and monitoring, evaluation,
and surveillance. Moreover, worker fatigue due to regularly conducted campaigns against
polio and other diseases have reduced the worker hours available for EPI. These factors
have resulted in overall underperformance of the program. Furthermore, anecdotal
evidence suggests that program management has also deteriorated over the last decade
due to increased political interference. The recent violent targeting of polio workers and
the staunch opposition against immunization campaigns in selected areas of Pakistan has
emerged as a new barrier, threatening coverage in areas that are particularly affected by
the polio virus.

Lower capacity is also reflected in procurement problems, also contributing to poor EPI
performance (Masud 2012). Procurement of vaccines and other required items, cold chain
monitoring, and maintenance of equipment for the EPI has been poorly managed. With
limited available resources, the procedures and mechanisms needed to manage the
logistic system have been lacking. With the implementation of the 18th Amendment in July
2011—and given the possibility of limited capacity of the provinces for procurement—this
problem is likely to be aggravated and result in stock-outs, poor quality vaccines, and
overall negative effects on coverage outcomes. World Bank analysis indicates that
Pakistan incurs an average annual loss of PKRs 4 billion due to such inefficiencies in
vaccine procurement and program management, in addition to declines in the quality and
equity of immunization services.

The resource shortage is yet another problem contributing to poor EPI performance.
Additional resources are needed for recurrent expenses, human resource expansion,
capacity building, training, and social mobilization. Even beyond increasing gross
investment, streamlining and consolidating existing financing schemes is necessary to
fundamentally improve EPI performance. The current fragmented financing, which
encompasses multiple funding sources and delayed funding flows reduces program
accountability and threatens financial sustainability.

EXPENDITURES ON IMMUNIZATION

Like many developing countries, out-of-pocket payment is a dominant mode of healthcare
financing in Pakistan. The government expenditure on health does not exceed 0.9 percent
of GDP (Figure 1), while the share of out-of-pocket payment is 1.7 percent of GDP and
86.8 percent of private expenditure on health (World Bank 2014). Experts believe as much
as 0.12 percent of GDP is required to achieve a herd immunity threshold (Ministry of
Health 2003). Health expenditures in Pakistan are low compared to other South Asian
countries. Only Bangladesh and Nepal spend less on health than Pakistan does (see
Table 3). The gap between expenditures in Pakistan and the average expenditures in
South Asia is quite large. Maldives is an outlier among these countries, spending $408.8
per capita on health. Compared to Pakistan, India spends almost double, and Bhutan and
Sri Lanka almost triple. The difference in expenditures is reflected in health indicators such

14 Tayyeb Masud and Kumari Vinodhani Navaratne. 2012. The Expanded Programme on Immunization in Pakistan:

Recommendations For Improving Performance. Health, Nutrition and Population (HNP) Discussion Paper. World Bank.
Washington, DC.

                                                     19
as mortality rates. Sri Lanka and Maldives have the lowest mortality rates, followed by
Nepal, Bangladesh, and Bhutan. Among South Asian countries, only Afghanistan has
worse indicators than Pakistan.

Figure 1. Public expenditure on health and education in Pakistan (as % of GDP)




Source: World Bank Open Data, 2016

After devolution in 2010, responsibility for the EPI shifted to the provincial governments.
The federal EPI cell now has limited responsibilities for procurement, coordination, and
technical guidance (Government of Pakistan 2012-13). The EPI is implemented through
2,649 fixed health centers, 4,564 outreach health teams, 98 mobile teams, vaccination
camps, and trained Lady Health Workers (LHWs) from the provincial departments of
health. The program is financed by the government budget with support from WHO,
UNICEF, Rotary International, and the Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA)
along with Gavi.

The EPI immunizes approximately five million children every year. The 2008 cost of
immunization was USD $104,313,977, roughly USD $24.51 to fully immunize a child
(Hasan et al 2010). 15 The cost of immunization can be reduced considerably by achieving
universal immunization coverage due to the external benefits of herd immunity and scale
economies. The 2014 cost of the EPI was estimated at USD $137.5 million (Federal EPI
Cell 2009), using the 2001-15 Comprehensive Multi-Year Plan (CMYP) to estimate the
total costs of the national program. This study adopted a different approach to collecting
primary data by aggregating data for each of the program components from all provinces,
using the PIFRA and other secondary documents.




15The study assumed 77 percent coverage rate as per PSLM 2004-05 and a target of immunizing 5.8 million
children.

                                                  20
 Table 3. Comparison of Child and Maternal Health for South Asia Region 2010

                                         Mortality     Rate,
                  Health Expenditure per                     Maternal Mortality Ratio
Country                                  under-5 (per 1,000)
                  Capita (Current USD)                       (per 100,000 live births)
                                         live births)
Afghanistan       44.2                           103.7                  460
Bangladesh        24.8                           47.2                   240
Bhutan            89.1                           48.1                   180
India             51.4                           61.2                   200
Maldives          408.8                          13.0                   60
Nepal             27.6                           45.5                   170
Pakistan          28.0                           90.0                   260
Sri Lanka         82.0                           10.3                   35
 Source: Global Lessons on Cost of Delivery of Immunization Services.



 PROPOSED MITIGATION THROUGH CMYP AND NISP

 The Government of Pakistan has endorsed a national comprehensive multi-year plan for
 immunization (CMYP) to align coverage with global best practices and to mitigate the
 difficulties discussed above. The National Immunization Support Project (NISP) is being
 prepared as a financing mechanism for the CMYP, and it is coordinating results-based
 financial support from Gavi, the World Bank and the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation
 (BMGF). NISP seeks to bolster the existing EPI initiative through financial investment,
 programmatic reform, and efficiency correction. Each of these mitigation measures is
 addressed in turn.

 First, the NISP includes an infusion of financing through a single platform to coordinate
 international support to expand immunization coverage. Increased investment is coupled
 with the use of standard government budgetary and accounting mechanisms to track and
 record expenditures over time, thereby promoting transparency in fund flows. The majority
 of funds will be administered directly by the Provincial Departments of Finance to reduce
 financing delays and improve disbursement efficiency. Administering financing through
 standardized pipelines will streamline national access to donor funds and improve
 accountability and sustainability.

 Second, the NISP focuses on bolstering programmatic governance, performance, and
 accountability. Its performance-based financing structure—including the use of
 disbursement linked indicators (DLI)—aligns incentives for success in health and finance
 throughout the district, provincial, and federal levels by linking fund flows to an array of
 results indicators. A portion of the program’s concomitant investment is allotted to building
 management and reporting systems provincially. These systems are to be paired with the
 provision of finance at the federal level to build coordination, standards, and reporting
 capacity nationwide.

 Third, a core goal of the NISP is to correct inefficiencies in the present immunization
 program and increase public expenditures on immunization. The focus will be primarily on
 strengthening procurement systems for current and new vaccines. Procurement

                                                   21
improvements will be paired with accurate tracking systems of vaccine stocks, which will
ensure an uninterrupted feedback loop for inventory and cold chain management. NISP
also will build management capacity at the federal and provincial levels. These
improvements will allow the program to reap economies of scale and reduce wastage,
thereby decreasing the overall unit cost of immunization relative to the baseline.

The CMYP proposes a substantial expansion of coverage and a programmatic overhaul
of immunization services in Pakistan. To quantitatively model this proposed expansion,
we offer below an economic analysis of the EPI, both at baseline extrapolation and with
predictions, including the investments proposed under NISP, and the total amount of
investment needed to meet NISP goals for enhancing national immunization coverage.
The analysis provides unit cost measures per child to achieve full vaccination against
VPDs. The unit costs enable top-level deduction of aggregated program costs, alongside
a country-level fiscal analysis of divergent immunization coverage scenarios. The analysis
is further disaggregated at the provincial level to inform policymaking under the newly
devolved framework.

The cost and financing measures produced by this analysis are critical to the sustainability
and impact of the CMYP. Not only can these assessments facilitate federal and provincial
preparation for coverage expansion, but they can also facilitate programmatic planning on
a range of dimensions, including fund flows, resource mobilization, and system design. To
illustrate, provincial variations in unit costs of vaccination—which, as demonstrated below,
can be significant—can inform disbursement levels throughout the country. Understanding
also can improve the precision of the budgeting process for immunization, thereby
enabling finances to be directed towards issues of highest need. Furthermore, cost
estimates will provide benchmarks for intermediate and end-program evaluations, thereby
ensuring that funds are being accountably and sustainably spent. Perhaps most crucially,
these estimates can guide the overall level of investment made by the NISP by identifying
the precise level of funds required to meet the coverage enhancement targets.




                                            22
              INVESTIGATION INTO UNIT COST ANALYSIS

We approximated the unit cost of immunization for coverage across regions in Pakistan.
The estimates were used to build scenarios regarding equitable coverage for
immunization against preventable diseases for children between 0 and 23 months and
subsequently to estimate the economic benefits of intervention. Given that Pakistan
spends less than 1 percent of its GDP on health, an increase in EPI coverage will increase
public expenditures, even with a highly favorable cost-effectiveness ratio of intervention.
Keeping in view the meager resource available to the health sector, it is essential for
program managers and policy makers alike to estimate the total and incremental cost of
coverage expansion in Pakistan. It bears noting that the focus of the NISP finance—and
accordingly, the analysis here—is on routine immunization (RI), as opposed to
supplemental or acute immunization campaigns. RI involves regular, programmatic
outreach on a year-around basis, in contrast to the sudden, short-term initiatives often
conducted in response to epidemics or disease outbreaks.

METHODOLOGY AND APPROACH TO ESTIMATE UNIT COSTS
This section describes the methodology adopted to estimate the unit cost of delivering
child immunization services in Pakistan and its provinces. The unit costs are estimated as
per the WHO methodology (see Appendix A for details). In brief, this standardized method
involves isolating programmatic inputs, quantifying them, and weighting them by unit
prices and the utilization rates to derive an aggregate cost measure. The PIFRA database
at the Accountant General Pakistan Revenues (AGPR) office—which consolidates health
expenditures data at the federal, provincial and district levels—is the main source of unit
costs. Unit cost data include personnel, vaccine, supply, medical equipment, delivery
system, salaries and wages obtained from DDO level data. In addition, the analysis is
conducted keeping in view the post 18th Amendment scenario in which provincial
governments are responsible for preparing and implementing their own coverage plans.
Therefore, the authors made several visits to provinces to collate cost data on
immunization from respective EPI officials.
The data on cost was collected using a top-down approach (see Figure 2). The existing
immunization program mechanism in Pakistan takes the shape of a pyramid. The federal
government is responsible for developing national policy, hosting technical advisory group
meetings, procuring vaccines, and managing central control storage. Provincial and
district governments are responsible for immunization program execution and all operating
costs. The data collection exercise began with the Federal EPI cell to obtain all information
pertaining to existing implementation arrangements. Relevant financial information was
obtained from the PIFRA system available at the AGPR office. The immunization program
expenditures are also available from NAM Chart of Accounts, which are classified on the
basis of input costs identified in the terms of reference.




                                             23
Figure 2. Information Collection Approach




                                          Federal:
                                 EPI Cell & PIFRA System
                                   at AGPR Islamabad



                            Provincial: EPI Directorate/ DGHS


                             District: EPI - EDO - Health & DHO




The representation of the information collection approach in Figure 2 helps to define the
boundaries of the program, to explain the distribution of roles among provinces, and to
indicate the immunization process flow in the country. A function-input cost approach (see
Figure 3) is adopted by linking cost components to specific functions within the
immunization process, thereby ensuring that each step of the immunization process has
been accounted for and all input costs have been incorporated into the final unit cost (see
Annex II, Table A.1).




                                              24
Figure 3.




            25
UNIT COST OF VACCINE DELIVERY PER IMMUNIZATION
Based on provincial primary data for 2011-12, the
cost of fully immunizing a child in Pakistan is          Table 4. Unit Cost (USD/ FIC)
estimated at USD $64. Estimates for different
provinces are produced in Table 4. The aggregate          Unit Cost     Base 2011-12
cost figure for Pakistan is derived from a weighted
average of provincial costs by population size, which     Pakistan           64.2
varies substantially across provinces. Punjab has the
                                                           Punjab            60.8
lowest unit costs for fully immunized child (FIC) at
USD $61, while Balochistan has the highest at USD          Sindh             65.4
$81. The principal reason for this difference is
population density. The more densely populated               KP              69.7
urban areas require lower per capita resources to Balochistan                80.9
provide health facilities and incur lower travel costs
while reaching a higher proportion of the local population with immunization services.
Rural facilities also have greater cold chain and vaccine management challenges, which
increase wastage rates. Balochistan is the least dense, most rural, and largest province
in Pakistan. Therefore, it is unsurprising that it has the lowest and most stagnant
vaccination coverage with the highest immunization unit cost of any province.
The unit costs are also linearly projected for future periods as well (see Table 4.1). For
instance, in FY 2019-20, the cost of a FIC in Pakistan is projected to be USD $99. In the
terminal year of the analysis (FY 2029-30), the cost of FIC is projected to reach USD $169
in Pakistan and USD $212 for Balochistan). The cost increase projection incorporates
expected depreciation of local currency, expected inflation, and population-demographic
trends.




Table 4.1 Unit Cost per FIC in Pakistan and Provinces (in USD*)

                2013-      2014-      2015-       2016-      2017-         2018-   2024-       2029-
                14         15         16          17         18            19      25          30
Pakistan          72         75         80          84         89            93     129         169
Punjab            68         71         75          79         84            88     122         159
Sindh             73         77         81          85         90            95     131         171
KP                78         82         86          91         96           101     140         183
Balochist
                90         95         100         106        112        118         162          212
an
* USD $1 = PKR 89.24 (FY 2011-12) is used as the base. For consecutive years, the unit cost varies by 5.5
annual inflation. Statistics and DWH Department, State Bank of Pakistan.




                                                  26
      PROGRAM COST AND ECONOMIC RETURNS ANALYSIS
METHODOLOGY AND DATA USED
The methods applied and the assumptions used to create two scenarios at the national
and sub-national levels in our economic analysis are described here. Both service and
survey statistics are obtained through sources that are identified under each table and in
the figures presented below. The unit cost estimates and the projections presented in the
previous section are used here as inputs (see Tables 4 and 4.1).
The following steps were undertaken in preparation of the analysis:
   1. Birth cohort projections based on demographic data were prepared.
   2. Vaccination actual coverage was estimated based on representative national
      surveys.
   3. Burden of disease information was incorporated in terms of DALYs.
   4. Vaccine efficacy was incorporated based on expert opinion and past studies.
   5. Provincial data were assembled on the unit cost of vaccine and the delivery
      required for full immunization.
   6. Cost in terms of USD $and coverage data for each province was combined.
   7. Gap in coverage in terms of numbers of births and its cost was estimated.
   8. The incremental cost-effectiveness ratio (ICER) of the vaccination program was
      estimated using alternative scenarios.
   9. Return on investment was estimated.
Population and birth cohorts were based on One Health software that takes into account
a host of variables from the latest PDHS. Provincial population shares were made using
data from the Population Council (see Provincial Profiles 2013, Annex Table-A.2). The
One Health software projections are based on age-specific fertility rates (ASFR),
population age structures, and annual population growth rates from Pakistan’s 1998
population census. Demographic data used in this study includes successive annual birth
cohorts and are not adjusted for death rates. WHO methodology is adopted in the analysis,
which suggests that for the purpose of forecasting vaccine supply, the total number of
births is recommended as the denominated benchmark for population scaling. This
generates the safest estimate and thus ensures that sufficient vaccine is procured (WHO
guidelines 2002).
The noteworthy implication of falling fertility rates on population projection is that future
birth cohorts in Pakistan will start to fall gradually after FY 2016-17 (Kugelman and
Hathaway 2009). This will affect our analysis in two ways: (1) proportional coverage will
improve as the target population will be reduced by 20,000 to 40,000 annually until 2020;
(2) the real impact of declining fertility will be felt after the completion of the current CMYP
financed through NISP, when Pakistan will reach replacement level fertility.
To determine the future cost of immunization for Pakistan and its provinces, two coverage
scenarios were built starting from FY 2014-15 to 2029-30. The first scenario (S1) is based
on past provincial trends as noted in the PSLM and PDHS. It assumes that no significant
additional efforts are made to improve coverage rates and that provinces will maintain the
status quo after devolution. In this scenario, coverage rates are accordingly assumed to
increase by 0.05 percentage points annually for each province. The second scenario (S2)
assumes implementation of the CMYP for immunization, including NISP financing, where
additional funding and capacity building efforts are designed to improve immunization
rates through 2030. The provinces of Balochistan and Sindh are assumed to adopt a faster


                                              27
pace of immunization adoption, an additional 8 and 6 percentage points, respectively.
These scenarios are based on expert opinion and past observed trends and behavior of
provinces. The base year values for both scenarios remain the same as in S1 (see FY
2011-12, Table 7). Finally, the cost effectiveness ratios are calculated for each FY using
following formula:




The ICER is suitable where decisions are to be made on alterative scenarios. It is
calculated in USD $per DALYs saved—a measure of effectiveness. The WHO has set
thresholds for different regions to grade interventions as “very cost-effective,” “cost-
effective” or “not economically viable.” In accordance with these guidelines, if the ICER is
less than per capita GDP, then it is “very cost-effective,” and if it exceeds three times per
capita GDP, then it is deemed “not economically viable.” Incremental cost-effectiveness
analysis requires two or more options to construct net cost and net benefits of alternate
scenarios.
Table 5 provides specific details on different parameters used to obtain economic
analyses for this report, including a per capita GDP threshold for Pakistan. 16 Provincial
GDP figures are referenced in the base year 2005-06, and a 6 percent growth rate is
assumed after 2017. 17


Table 5. Assumptions Used in the Analysis


                                                Range
 Parameter             Domain                                          Reference
                                                Start      End
 Time span of                                   2011-      2029-
                       Fiscal year                                     Report objective
 analyses                                       12         30
                       Pakistan                 2.06       1.38
 Demography:           Punjab                   2.02       1.29
                                                                       Population Council
 Population
                       Sindh                    2.17       1.40        provincial profiles
 growth rates (in
                                                                       (forthcoming)
 percent)              KP                       2.36       1.61
                       Balochistan              2.10       1.60

 GDP growth                                     3% initially,
                       Percent                                         Authors’ estimates
 rates                                          6% after 2017-18
                                                                       National income
 Per capita GDP        US dollars               1,323      2,265
                                                                       accounts
                                                                       Data from SBP.
 Exchange rate         1 USD = PKR              89         234         Depreciation assumed
                                                                       5.5% per annum

16The WHO threshold values for this region are between the range of USD 2,769 and 8,306.
17Provincial GDP estimates are taken from Punjab: Social Sector Public Expenditure Review, World Bank
2013.

                                                 28
                                                    Range
 Parameter              Domain                                              Reference
                                                    Start      End
 Time span of                                       2011-      2029-
                        Fiscal year                                         Report objective
 analyses                                           12         30
 Total Fertility                                                            Based on various PDHS
                        Births per women            3.94       2.40
 Rate                                                                       and past trends
                                                    Lo 39,156
 DALYS 18 from
                                                                            IHME GBD 1990-2010
 VPD age 0-5            Rate / 100,000              Mid 56,984
                                                                            Published 29-Aug-2013
 years*
                                                    Hi 85,229
                        Percent of DALYs                                    Expert opinion, Masud
 Vaccine efficacy                                   17 percent
                        saved by vaccine                                    (2010)
 Vaccination            Percent of FIC
 Coverage               among 12-23                 See table below         PDHS, PIHS, PSLM
 scenarios              months
 Unit Cost of FIC
                                                                            Data collected from
 Including              In US Dollars               See table below
                                                                            provinces
 pneumococcal
 Inflation Rate         Annual Percent              5.5                     Assumed
* No herd effect is assumed.



 Table 6. Vaccine Coverage Base Value (% FIC)
                Region                                                 FY 2011-12
                    Pakistan                                                 49
                     Punjab                                                  60
                     Sindh                                                   28
                       KP                                                    52
                   Balochistan                                               15
 Source: PDHS 2012-13.


Table 6 reports the baseline figures used to build two coverage scenarios for economic
analysis. These are based on PDHS 2012-13.

COST OF FULLY IMMUNIZED CHILDREN FOR DIFFERENT COVERAGE SCENARIOS
This section estimates the cost of interventions at various coverage scenarios. Table 7
shows the percent of children who will be fully immunized given assumed scenarios. If

18 Disability-adjusted life year (DALY). One DALY means one lost year of healthy life. DALYs were first used
in The Global Burden of Disease and Injury (GBD) study, a joint study of the World Bank, the World Health
Organization (WHO) and Harvard School of Public Health. DALY is a standard measure used in quantifying
societal burden of disease. Data source for DALY is taken from Pakistan Global Burden of Disease Study
Results 1990-2010. 2013. Seattle: United States: Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation (IHME).

                                                    29
past trends are followed—and no additional intervention is undertaken—then Pakistan will
fully immunize 52 percent of children in 2014-15. In the case of intervention through the
CMYP supported by NISP, an estimated 60 percent of children will be immunized in the
same year. It is assumed that the 80 percent coverage targets for all provinces in FY19-
20 will be achieved.


Table 7. Percent of FIC by Different Levels of Coverage Scenario

                               2014-    2015-     2016-     2017-     2018-     2024-         2029-
   Region           Scenario    15       16        17        18        19        25            30
   Pakistan               S1       52       53        54        55        56        62            67
                          S2       60       64        68        72        76        85            90
    Punjab                S1       63       64        65        66        67        73            78
                          S2       68       70        73        75        78        85            90
     Sindh                S1       31       32        33        34        35        41            46
                          S2       48       54        61        67        74        85            90
       KP                 S1       55       56        57        58        59        65            70
                          S2       62       66        69        73        76        85            90
  Balochistan             S1       18       19        20        21        22        28            33
                          S2      39        48        56        64         72        85          90
S1= Follow past trends.
S2 = NISP intervention.


Table 8 shows total coverage costs under the two scenarios, as well as additional costs
incurred as a result of improved coverage, with respect to the coverage differences in S2
and S1 scenarios. Pakistan will require expenditures of USD $257 million to USD $412
annually until 2025 if it follows scenario S2. In contrast, to reach 90 percent coverage
targets, Pakistan would need an investment of USD $731 million in the terminal year of
this analysis (see Table 8). If the past trend (S1) continues and minimal increases in
coverage rate are achieved, then Pakistan will require USD $218-288 million for the next
five years until FY 2018-19. This in effect constitutes baseline spending on vaccination.
Therefore, an additional USD $38 to 111 million per annum are necessary to increase EPI
coverage of the country from 57 percent in 2014-15 to 76 percent in FY 2018-19 to achieve
S2 targets. This increased investment estimate reflects declining FIC unit costs due to
wastage reductions, which is explained further below.
These estimated unit costs vary by province. For example, because Punjab is the most
populated province, it would require a comparatively larger investment. According to the
projected financial outlays, Punjab would require USD $155-216 million to increase
coverage under S2. Notably, if NISP intervention (S2) is adopted to achieve higher targets,
then the gap between costs under S1 and S2 widens in future periods. However, to sustain
S2 targets in the last year of the project, Balochistan would have to spend three times
more than its S1 expenditure. For Sindh, doubling S1 expenditures would be necessary.




                                            30
Table 8. Cost of FIC by Different Levels of Coverage Scenario (in million USD)

                Scenari       2014-       2015-       2016-      2017-          2018-   2024-   2029-
  Region           o           15          16          17         18             19      25      30
                   S1          218.4       234.8       252.0      269.8         288.2   411.9   534.0
  Pakistan         S2          257.1       289.4       323.9      360.4         399.1   575.7   730.8
                   DIF          38.7        54.6        71.9       90.6         110.9   163.8   196.8
                   S1          144.3       153.9       164.6      175.6         186.9   261.1   332.7
   Punjab          S2          154.6       168.3       183.6      199.5         216.2   304.1   383.9
                   DIF          10.3        14.4        19.0       23.9          29.3    42.9    51.2
                   S1           32.4        35.3        38.4       41.5          44.8    67.8    91.3
    Sindh          S2           49.6        59.6        70.3       81.9          94.2   140.6   178.6
                   DIF          17.2        24.3        32.0       40.3          49.3    72.8    87.3
                   S1           36.6        39.9        42.7       45.7          48.7    70.1    91.6
     KP            S2           41.6        47.1        52.3       57.7          63.5    92.1   118.3
                   DIF           5.1         7.2         9.5       12.0          14.7    22.0    26.6
                   S1            5.1         5.8         6.4        7.0           7.7    12.8    18.3
 Balochist
    an              S2           11.2        14.4         17.7      21.4         25.3    38.9    50.0
                   DIF            6.1         8.6         11.4      14.3         17.5    26.1    31.7
Source: Authors’ calculation.
S1 = Follow past trends.
S2 = NISP intervention.
Dif = Difference in cost due to increased coverage (net cost in million USD).



Figure 4 shows EPI expenditure as a percentage of GDP under different scenarios for
Pakistan and its provinces. Notably, the expenditures remain below 0.2 percent
throughout the period of analysis for Pakistan and for all provinces under both scenarios.
Over time, the EPI outlays increase due to rising annual birth cohorts in initial years, and
then gradually fall as total fertility rates decrease and the size of birth cohorts consequently
falls as well. Though the impact of decreases in fertility rates is more prominent in Punjab,
where outlays fall as a percentage of GDP, these have significant impact at the national
level as well. Because of this decrease, even after doubling the cost of immunization, EPI
expenditures as percent of GDP would remain less than 0.40 percent.




                                                     31
  Figure 4. Expenditure on EPI as a Percentage of Provincial GDP by Coverage Scenario




  Table 9 presents resources needed to achieve different coverage targets for FY 2014-15.
  The cost of fully immunizing 60 percent, 65 percent, and 70 percent of children nationwide
  is estimated, and then differences in coverage scenarios are tabulated. Pakistan needs
  an additional USD $44 million to immunize 60 percent of its children, USD $65 million for
  65 percent of the children, and USD $85 million to immunize 70 percent of its children. If
  the target of 60 percent is achieved, then about 3.41 million children will be immunized.
  These figures are 3.69 million and 3.98 million for the 65 percent and 70 percent targets.


  Table 9. Resources Required to Achieve Different Coverage Targets in FY 2014-15


                                                               Coverage Target
                                                     60%            65%                 70%
EPI cost without support (million USD)               205              205                205
Additional funding required to reach
targets (million USD)                                44                65                85
Total EPI cost of FIC to meet the target
(million USD)                                        249              270                290
Total number of children fully vaccinated
in Pakistan                                      3,409,951         3,694,113         3,978,276
Source: Authors’ Calculations.



  EFFICIENCY GAINS THROUGH COVERAGE IMPROVEMENTS
  The WHO and UNICEF guidelines indicate that national immunization programs must
  cover all districts. Reaching national-level targets is meaningless if even a few districts lag
  behind. In Pakistan, even though national level coverage is improving at a very slow rate

                                                32
   in a number of districts, the situation is deteriorating. Although 10 districts have shown
   improvements in coverage, 22 districts have immunization rates below 20 percent (see
   Table 10). Substantial variation in coverage exists across individual districts but the reality
   is hidden beneath provincial and national figures. Pakistan’s first priority should be to
   eliminate the differentials in coverage across districts. An essential first step will be to
   improve the mechanisms for tracking and verifying data on coverage and program
   performance. The efficiency of the program will increase if the provincial EPI offices
   convert the current high-level EPI plans into digitized micro-level plans that contain much
   greater detail. The aim must be to produce revised, computerized micro-plans for at least
   80 percent of union councils at the district and provincial levels, and then to ensure that
   all districts report on progress via integrated management information and evaluation
   systems to ensure completeness in coverage.


   Table 10. Number of Districts in Pakistan by Percentage of FIC


                                                          2008-09                  2010-11
Immunization Coverage (Percent FIC)             Districts            %     Districts          %
                Below 20                            22              20.4      21             19.1
                  20-39                             28              25.9      25             22.7
                  40-59                             30              27.8      24             21.8
                  60-79                             22              20.4      34             30.9
              80 or above                            6               5.6      6               5.5
       Total number of districts                   108             100.0     110             100.0
   Source: Authors’ calculations based on PSLM district-level surveys.



   The expansion program can improve its effectiveness with online surveillance, including
   zero-cost reporting for VPDs, and an adverse effects following immunization (AEFI)
   system for 80 percent of all district health facilities. Micro plans that have area maps,
   estimations of the target population in each community, vaccine logistics, and HR
   requirements are essential to equitable planning. Calculations for target coverage,
   identification of high-risk areas, and procurement of vaccines and syringes should be
   facilitated by effective planning and management, which would also reduce waste. Timely
   aggregation at the union council level will improve management function. Thus, data will
   be readily available for monitoring and analysis of union-council coverage and can be
   aggregated upstream to observe tehsil and district level coverage. Integration of
   computerized micro plans into existing health management information system (HMIS) will
   improve management function and evidence-based decision making, thus bringing
   positive returns in terms of improved coverage at lower costs.
   The success of immunization programs depends heavily upon vaccine inventory
   management, including proper storage and handling of vaccines. As per specifications, all
   health facilities require at least 95 percent of functional cold chain equipment at all levels.
   This will increase the benefits of vaccination. The failure to adhere to cold chain
   requirements may reduce vaccines’ efficacy, resulting in lack of protection against VPDs
   despite inoculation. The loss of vaccine effectiveness due to nonfunctional cold chain is
   cumulative, permanent, and irreversible. The proposed intervention will prove to be a cost

                                                         33
saving strategy since vaccines may be wasted if they are exposed to extremely low or
high temperature, resulting in increased costs to replace the wasted vaccines, human
services, and specialized transportation. Indirectly, this intervention is also expected to
bring net positive economic returns through improvement in system efficiency.
Efficiency gains are possible through awareness campaigns on electronic media,
disaggregated by provinces. The low coverage ratio in Pakistan pertains not only to supply
side problems, but also serious demand side issues as well. For instance, a significant
number of parents, especially in rural and tribal areas, are non-literate or uneducated
about health issues, particularly the importance of vaccination. Data reveals that among
non-immunized children, 45 percent were not immunized due to misconceptions about the
efficacy of immunization, fear of side effects, and lack of knowledge about immunization
(see Table 11). Parents ignore the importance of vaccination against VPDs and are
generally unaware of the consequences of not immunizing their children. As such, many
children are vaccinated only if the facility is provided at their doorstep, as parents do not
assume responsibility to immunize their children. Some parents reject the immunization
of their children, even if the government provides the service.


Table 11. Reasons for Not Immunizing a Child by Province


       Reasons for never                                     Province
                                                                                         Total
       immunizing a child              Punjab         Sindh        KP      Balochistan
  Cannot afford it                         .5            3.5        2.0         4.1        1.8
  No team has visited                    32.3          21.6        14.9        15.2       24.8
  Facility too far away                   9.3            6.0        4.4        11.6        8.7
  Do not know about                       8.7            8.1          .5       14.5        8.6
  i          ti sick
          i get
  Child will                             18.1          15.8        39.0        18.8       21.5
  No female staff                          .5            0.0        0.0          .1         .3
  No answer                               2.6            3.0        9.8         8.0        5.0
  Unnecessary                            10.8          36.2        13.2        24.6       16.3
  Other                                  17.3            5.9       16.2         3.1       13.1
  Total                                 100.0         100.0       100.0       100.0      100.0
Source: PSLM/ HIES 2011-12, authors’ calculations.



Moreover, due to security threats for vaccinators in Pakistan, workers are unable to
provide services in higher-risk regions unless protected by local communities. Only when
reluctant parents are willing to vaccinate their children can efforts to improve coverage be
increased. Addressing these issues through behavioral change communication
campaigns—particularly addressing misconceptions and myths—will facilitate
immunization coverage. This component, in alignment with supply-side intervention, is
expected to bring positive economic returns through improved coverage and greater
DALYs saved.




                                                     34
ECONOMIC BENEFITS OF INTERVENTION
For the economic evaluation of intervention, two criteria were used. First, the cost of one
DALY saved was compared with per capita GDP. And second, if relevant, the cost of one
DALY saved is compared with a higher threshold set at three times the per capita GDP.
As described above, incremental cost-effective ratios are calculated using net costs as the
numerator (S2 – S1 cost) and net benefit as denominator (S2 DALYS saved – S1 DALYs
saved). It can be seen from Table 12 that the cost of one DALY saved is significantly less
than the per capita GDP of Pakistan, and this holds true for all provinces. The cost per
DALY saved is highest in Balochistan followed by KP, Sindh and then Punjab. Even in
Balochistan, however, the incremental cost of coverage is less than half of per capita GDP.
Results thereby remain below both threshold values and, most importantly, effectiveness
increases with increases in coverage during the project life cycle.


Table 12. Incremental Cost-effective Ratios (USD per DALY saved) and WHO threshold.


                             2014-    2015-        2016-   2017-   2018-   2024-   2029-
                             15       16           17      18      19      25      30
 Pakistan ICER               1,175    1,240        1,308   1,380   1,456   2,008   2,626
 Punjab ICER                 1,073    1,132        1,194   1,260   1,329   1,833   2,395
 Sindh ICER                  1,153    1,216        1,283   1,354   1,428   1,969   2,574
 KP ICER                     1,230    1,298        1,369   1,444   1,524   2,101   2,746
 Balochistan ICER            1,427    1,505        1,588   1,675   1,767   2,437   3,185
 Per Capita GNP* (USD)       1,298    1,321        1,357   1,407   1,459   1,839   2,265
 Three times per capita
                             3,893    3,962        4,070   4,220   4,378   5,516   6,796
 GNP* (USD)
* WHO regional threshold



RETURNS ON INVESTMENT UNDER NISP
The net present value of the proposed interventions, though difficult to estimate, is
positive. Within the CMYP, the proposed NISP program will improve immunization
coverage in a number of ways: (1) by strengthening management, governance, and
stewardship functions (2) by addressing the fundamental systemic weaknesses that
underlie poor performance and accountability of EPI in Pakistan; by improving service
delivery performance through increasing equitable access to EPI services at the union-
council (UC) level by improved planning, management of human resources and
strengthened supply chain management at the point of service delivery; (3) by demand
generation through exploring and expanding innovative strategies to empower
communities to access immunization services and promote positive behaviors for
acceptance and seeking of immunization services; and (4) by improving capacity in
technical areas for increased immunization coverage through strengthening of the federal
EPI cell in national coordination, project management, and analytic capacities as well as
health system strengthening elements.



                                              35
The NISP financing model is designed to address current weaknesses in immunization
financing by:
     a)   Providing a single financing platform to coordinate multiple sources of
          international support for Routine Immunization e.g., World Bank, Gavi, the Gates
          Foundation, and USAID,
     b)   Using standard government budgetary and accounting mechanisms to deliver the
          majority of funds directly to the federal Ministry of Finance and provincial
          Departments of Finance.
     c)   Introducing a performance-based financing structure to incentivize outcomes
          which are aligned with the endorsed national comprehensive multi-year plan for
          immunization.
     d)   Addressing serious program inefficiencies by building management capacity,
          accurate tracking of vaccine stocks, and immunization coverage.
The current proposed financing package comprises: (1) USD $50M World bank IDA credit,
(2) USD $25M buy-down from the Gates Foundation: conditional on results, which would
convert the USD $50 million IDA loan into a USD $31.3 million loan free of interest and
service charges, (3) A multi-donor trust fund held at the World Bank and disbursed
together with the IDA credit, with initial contributions of a USD $80M grant from Gavi and
a USD $10M grant from USAID (to be confirmed) and (4) a USD $20M grant from the
World Bank Health Results Innovation Trust Fund (HRITF) supported by the Department
for International Development, United Kingdom (DfID) and the Government of Norway in
year two.
Excluding the ultimate increase in coverage ratio, the benefits of the project—especially
in terms of demand generation, enhanced capacity of the concerned staff, and improved
governance—cannot be easily translated into monetary terms. Therefore, this economic
analysis makes use of quantitative data along with qualitative analysis. The overall
benefits of the project include better use of public and donors’ funds for immunization,
improved service delivery, result-based management, better micro-plans based planning,
and enhanced demand for immunization. The project aims at improving capacity in
technical areas and improving human resource management, both of which will improve
internal capacity, resulting in a more qualified workforce available to run the federal EPI
cell. Furthermore, more informed decisions in planning at the UC level would be taken.
The strengthened supply chain management, along with positive behaviors of
communities for acceptance and seeking of immunization services, will increase the
overall coverage ratio.
NISP intends to increase the coverage ratio from 54 percent in 2012-13 (PDHS) to 80
percent in 2019-2020, as the success of immunization programs more generally depends
heavily upon high immunization coverage ratios of the target group. To this end, the
project sets coverage targets for the next five years, and the following economic analysis
is based on three scenarios of burden of disease from VPD for the under-five population.
This analysis assumes three scenarios with different DALYs: (i) a low scenario of 39,156
DALYs per 100,000; (ii) a mean scenario of 56,984 DALYs; and (iii) a high scenario of
85,229 DALYs per 100,000. 19


19Based on analysis by Institute for Health Matrix and Evaluation (IHME) “Global Burden of Diseases, Injuries,
and Risk Factors Study 1990-2010” wherein results for Pakistan were published in August 2013;
http://ghdx.healthdata.org/global-burden-disease-study-2010-gbd-2010-data-downloads.

                                                     36
Table 13. Return on Investment


                Scenario 1 (Low)            Scenario 2 (Mean)              Scenario 3 (High)
     Fiscal   DALYs        Annual         DALYs          Annual          DALYs         Annual
      year    saved       Economic       saved by       Economic        saved by      Economic
                by          Value          NISP           Value           NISP          Value
               NISP        (USD)                          (USD)                        (USD)
 2013-14      21,908      30,364,59         31,883      44,189,810        55,900     77,477,682
 2014-15      32,944      46,547,12         47,944      67,740,360        84,059     118,768,69
 2015-16      44,035      63,425,768        64,084      92,303,956       241,119              5
                                                                                     347,295,26
 2016-17      54,941      80,671,134        79,956      117,401,26       260,358              0
                                                                                     382,288,19
 2017-18      65,659      98,279,897        95,554               8
                                                        143,027,41       278,897              0
                                                                                     417,460,21
 2018-19      76,144      116,188,24       110,814               5
                                                        169,089,52       296,722              9
                                                                                     452,764,94
 2019-20      86,374              16
                          134,356,1        125,700               1
                                                        195,529,37       154,761              5
                                                                                     240,734,35
 2020-21      85,804              02
                          136,060,9        124,871               2
                                                        198,010,42       164,972              8
                                                                                     261,600,43
 2021-22      84,897              33
                          137,236,5        123,550               5
                                                        199,721,24       174,647              4
                                                                                     282,318,94
 2022-23      83,864              03
                          138,199,3        122,047               0
                                                        201,122,50       183,802              9
                                                                                     302,887,51
 2023-24      82,735              66
                          138,986,4        120,405               1
                                                        202,267,90       192,455              0
                                                                                     323,306,11
 2024-25      81,547              19
                          139,650,1        118,675               5
                                                        203,233,84       200,659              5
                                                                                     343,632,98
 2025-26      80,485              52
                          140,509,3        117,131               0
                                                        204,484,16       208,576              8
                                                                                     364,126,24
 2026-27      79,187              02
                          140,926,4        115,241               7
                                                        205,091,28       215,857              4
                                                                                     384,155,12
 2027-28      77,831              76
                          141,203,7        113,268               4
                                                        205,494,76       222,627              8
                                                                                     403,895,94
 2028-29      76,415              22
                          141,326,6        111,208               2
                                                        205,673,66       228,850              3
                                                                                     423,249,15
 2029-30      74,941              51
                          141,291,4        109,062               1
                                                        205,622,43       234,511              8
                                                                                     442,140,60
                                  53                             8                            5

According to the high scenario the project will save about 1.16 million DALYs 20 over five
years (see Table 13). The minimum discounted 21 economic value of this achievement is
USD $1,719 million, 22 and total present value of the benefits would be many times higher
than the above figure since benefits will increase beyond the allotted five-year period,
even as costs decline. For instance, total DALYs saved over the next 16 years until 2030
are estimated 3.34 million, which would contribute in present value terms USD $5,491
million. The estimated DALYs averted, according to the mean scenario, are 0.4 million
over the next five years and about 1.7 million by the end of 2030. The corresponding
figures of economic gains are USD $590 million and USD $2,816 million. Finally, under
the low scenario, the project is expected to save 0.27 million DALYs over the life of the
project and 1.17 million by the end of 2030. The corresponding monetary gains are USD




20 Calculations of DALYs are based on the project’s target of 80 percent coverage.
21 Economic analysis assumes 3 percent discount rate.
22 DALYs saved are multiplied by the discounted value of per capita GDP. The maximum gain can be found

by multiplying DALYs saved by three times per capita GDP.

                                                  37
$405 million and USD $1,935 million, respectively. In all scenarios, the project is
economically feasible. 23

COST-SAVING AND EFFICIENCY GAINS
In addition to the return on investment cited in Table 14, additional savings can be
generated from improvements in EPI coverage and resultant declines in unit costs. For
example, the needs assessment for vaccine procurement under the present arrangements
is based on an estimation of total annual births. This assumption incorporates intrinsic
wastage in vaccine procurement and administration by procuring greater levels of supplies
than required in practice. Since not all children actually become immunized, wastage of
procured vaccines results due to overestimating the required procurement levels. And
since vaccine supplies in excess of demand simply turn to waste, the resultant overhead
costs can be reduced substantially by increasing coverage through planning, diligent
monitoring, and governance. These adjustments will directly result in unit cost declines
from improving vaccine utilization.
The total extent of savings can be tabulated through differences in coverage between the
S1 and S2 scenarios. The S2 scenario incorporates waste reductions. Wastage rates are

Figure 5. Additional savings (USD million) through reduction in wastage



                50
     Millions




                45

                40
                                                                                                     Pakistan
                35

                30                                                                                   Punjab

                25
                                                                                                     Sindh
                20

                15                                                                                   KP
                10
                                                                                                     Balochistan
                5

                -




assumed to be a constant 5 percent for vaccines per annum. Nonetheless, the estimates
likely understate potential savings. Wastage rates are typically higher for monovalent
vaccines due to the increased storage required per FIC among other reasons. Additional
potential savings from reducing waste in the NISP intervention amount to nearly USD $90

23The analysis in main text assumed 17 percent vaccine efficacy. Nonetheless, if we assume higher vaccine
efficacy then economic benefits would increase. For instance, at 30 percent vaccine efficacy, above discussed
high, mean, and low scenarios would yield $7432 million, $4969 million and $3414 million respectively.

                                                    38
million during the project period, assuming that all waste is eliminated (see Figure 5).
Among the provinces, savings are higher for Sindh and Balochistan, primarily because
coverage rates are low in these regions relative to the population size, meaning that
wastage rates are comparatively high. Overall, as can be seen in the following graph, the
rate of saving increases with each year of the project and continues beyond the formal
length of the intervention, given that systems put in place by NISP will be sustained beyond
the life of the project.
Even beyond direct wastage reductions, there is reason to expect declines in unit costs of
FIC over time. Improvements in vaccine and cold chain technology will continue to reduce
spoiling of vaccines and create lower-cost supply chains. As vaccine multivalence
increases, FIC unit costs will also decline, as noted above. Innovations in delivery could
reduce transport costs of renewed supplies. These trends are not explicitly modeled here
to ensure a conservative savings estimate, but nonetheless the cost-efficacy of the
proposed intervention over the ensuing years is even more favorable than estimated.




                                            39
                                   CONCLUSIONS

Based on available data on public finance and health outcomes, the authors sought to
understand the financial cost of the CMYP and NISP intervention that aims to fully
immunize children between 0 and 23 months against preventable diseases. Efficiencies
delivered under the NISP financing mechanism were particularly considered. The analysis
demonstrated clear economic benefits and efficacy of this intervention in terms of DALYs
saved. The analysis also established that the proposed intervention is affordable and
economically effective with a high rate of return. The minimum discounted value for this
project is USD $435 million and the maximum is USD $1,719 million, based on low to high
DALYs saved by the end of the project in 2019-20. Such benefits would climb even higher
by 2029-30, at an estimated USD $1,796 million to USD $5,491 million—figures that far
exceed the costs of the intervention. All cost-effective ratios remain well within the WHO
thresholds set for this region.
Based on these results, increased investment in immunization is affordable and would
generate substantial economic returns for Pakistan. It is worth noting that this intervention
is economically feasible even with conservative assumptions of benefits—namely, where
the estimate of DALYs saved is low and vaccine efficacy is assumed at only 17 percent.
Thus, the program can yield higher returns if vaccine storage can be improved, which can
be achieved by establishing and reinforcing online surveillance, improving monitoring of
vaccine logistics, and building staff capacity. Finally, reductions in vaccine wastage can
save nearly UD$86 million over the life of the project. These projections rest on
conservative assumptions that set aside expected unit cost declines of FIC by way of
technological development.
Nevertheless, the report highlighted that in addition to increased investment, the
effectiveness of the EPI could be enhanced by improving the capacity building of health
professionals, as well as by improving logistics of program interventions to reach
marginalized populations, remote areas, and pockets of resistance. As the estimated
affordability of enhanced coverage suggests, increased financial investment alone will be
insufficient to address the root causes of persistent under-coverage in Pakistan. It is
imperative that ample attention and resources be diverted to strengthen the procurement
systems, local and provincial management capacity, and reporting mechanisms, among
other capacity improvements. Such improvements would increase the value for each
dollar spent and augment the intervention along dimensions of quality and equity.
The economics analysis also suggests the need to weigh a broader array of
considerations to effectively target the intervention. For example, the higher FIC unit costs
in rural regions suggest the need for a particular allocation of funds and focus within the
program on these areas of Pakistan. Balochistan, for instance, showed a FIC that is
roughly 30 percent higher than the countrywide median—a figure larger than per capita
GNP—for reasons that rest in part on cultural variations in the local perception of
immunization services. The reasons for higher wastage in such areas are not entirely
economic. Understanding the phenomenon will be crucial for a project that seeks
fundamentally to increase demand for vaccination services, lest wastage costs climb too
high. Already, FIC unit costs exceed previous literature averages of approximately $24-28
(Brenzel and Politi 2012 and Hasan 2010). These differences stem from a variety of
factors, spanning political economy constraints, as increased devolution has hampered
coordination and scale economies; cultural reductions in willingness-to-vaccinate,
resulting in increased wastage; and even currency fluctuations that alter supply costs, to


                                             40
name just a few. Integrating this interplay of sociological, political, financial, and cultural
drivers with economic factors will strengthen the reach and efficacy of national efforts to
enhance EPI.
Finally, regional and gender disparities will have to be challenged. Data reveals that while
10 districts have increased immunization coverage, there are 22 districts that still possess
immunization rates below 20 percent. The priority should be to address differentials in
coverage across districts and regions to ensure equitability. Most importantly, different
provinces have cited distinctions in cultural motivations for declining to vaccinate children.
The program must reach these marginalized segments of society and devise plans to
overcome societal resistance. This is a matter as much of efficiency as equity.




                                              41
                                   REFERENCES
Alderman, H., J. Hoddinott, et al. 2006. “Long Term Consequences of Early Childhood
Malnutrition.” Oxford Economic Papers 58 (3): 450–474.
Barham, T., L. Calimeris. 2008. Long-term Effects of Family Planning and Child Health
Interventions on Adolescent Cognition: Evidence from Matlab in Bangladesh. Working
paper, University of Colorado: Health and Society Program.
Bawah, A. A., J. K. Phillips, M. Adjuik, M. Vaughan-Smith, B. Macleod, F.N. Binka. 2010.
“The Impact of Immunization on the Association Between Poverty and Child Survival:
Evidence from Kassena-Nankana District of Northern Ghana.” SC and J Public Health 38:
95–103.
Bishai, D., M. Koenig, M.A. Khan. 2003. “Measles Vaccination Improves the Equity of
Health Outcomes: Evidence from Bangladesh.” Health Econ 12: 415–419.
Bloom, D. E., D. Canning, M. Weston. 2005. “The Value of Vaccination.” World Economics
6: 15–39.
Bloom, D. E., D. Canning, E. Seiguer. 2011. “The Effect of Vaccination on Children’s
Physical and Cognitive Development in the Philippines.” Working paper, Harvard School
of Public Health.
Boulier, B. L., T. S. Datta, R.S. Goldfarb. 2007. “Vaccination Externalities.” B.E. Journal
of Economic Analysis & Policy 7. Article 23.
Brenzel, L. and C. Politi. 2012. Historical Analysis of the Comprehensive Multi-Year Plans
in Gavi-Eligible Countries (2004–2015). Mimeograph. World Health Organization.
http://www.who.int/immunization_financing/analysis/Historical_cMYP_Analysis_2012.pdf
.
Cockcroft, Anne, Neil Andersson, Khalid Omer, Noor M. Ansari, Amir Khan, Ubaid Ullah
Chaudhry, and Umaira Ansari. 2011. “One Size Does Not Fit All: Local Determinants of
Measles Vaccination in Four Districts of Pakistan.” BioMed Central, London.
Connolly, M., D. Constenla. 2009. Assessing Economic Benefits for Government and
Society Attributed to Malaria Investment Strategies: An Exploratory Analysis Based on
Malaria Vaccination. Proceedings of the Multilateral Initiative on Malaria.
Cook, J., M. Jeuland, B. Maskery, D. Lauria et al. 2009. “Using Private Demand Studies
to Calculate Socially Optimal Vaccine Subsidies in Developing Countries.” J Policy Anal
Manage 28: 6–28.
Federal EPI Cell. 2007. Comprehensive Multi-Year National Immunization Strategic Plan
2011–2015.
Government of Pakistan 2013. Economic Survey of Pakistan 2012–13. Finance Division,
Islamabad.
Gavi Value of Vaccines Meeting, 14-15 January 2013, France.
Hasan, Q., Bosan, A. H., and Bile, K. M. 2010. “A Review of EPI Progress in Pakistan
Towards Achieving Coverage Targets: Present Situation and the Way Forward.” Eastern
Mediterranean Health Journal 16: 31–8.
Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation. 2010. Building Momentum: Global Progress
Toward Reducing Maternal and Child Mortality. Seattle, WA: IHME.

                                            42
Jeuland, M., J. Cook, C. Poulos, J. Clemens, D. Whittington. 2009. “Cost-effectiveness of
New-generation Oral Cholera Vaccines: A Multisite Analysis.” Value Health 12: 899–908
Jeuland, M., D. Whittington. 2009. “Cost-benefit Comparisons of Investments in Improved
Water Supply and Cholera Vaccination Programs.” Vaccine 27: 3109–3120.
John, T. J. and R. Samuel. 2000. “Herd Immunity and Herd Effect: New Insights and
Definitions.” Eur. J. Epidemiol. 16 (7): 601–6.
Khan, Ayesha and Adnan Khan. 2012. Validating Measures of Immunization Coverage:
Lessons from International Experience. Policy Briefs Series No. 10. Research and
Development Solutions, Islamabad.
Kugelman, M., Hathaway R. 2009. Reaping the Dividend: Overcoming Pakistan’s
Demographic Challenges. Woodrow Wilson International Center for Scholars.
Washington, DC.
Kumar, S. 2009. Childhood Immunization, Mortality and Human Capital Accumulation:
Micro-evidence from India. Working paper, University of Houston: Harvard Centre for
Population and Development Studies.
Lopez, E, R. Debbag, L. Coudeville, F. Baron-Papillon, J. Armoni. 2007. “The Cost-
Effectiveness of Universal Vaccination of Children Against Hepatitis A in Argentina:
Results of a Dynamic Health-economic Analysis.” J Gastroenterology 42: 152–160.
Masud, T., K.V. Navaratne. 2012. The Expanded Program on Immunization in Pakistan:
Recommendations for Improving Performance. Health, Nutrition, and Population
Discussion Paper. World Bank, Washington, DC.
Ministry of Health. 2003. Expanded Program on Immunization: Financial Sustainability
Plan 2003-2012, Government of Pakistan, Ministry of Health, Islamabad.
National Institute of Population Studies and ICF International. 2013. Pakistan
Demographic and Health Survey 2012-13. Islamabad.
Niessen, L., A. Ten Hove, H. Hilderink, M. Weber, K. Mulholland, M. Ezzati. 2009.
“Comparative Impact Assessment of Child Pneumonia Interventions.” Bull World Health
Organ 87: 472–480.
Ozawa, S., M. L. Stack, D. M. Bishai, A. Mirelman, I. K. Friberg, L. Niessen, D.G. Walker,
O.S. Levine “During the ‘Decade of Vaccines’ the Lives of 6.4 million Children Valued at
$231 billion Could be Saved.” Health Aff 30: 1010–1020.
Ozawa, S., S. Clark, A. Portnoy, S. Grewal, L. Brenzel and D. G. Walker. 2016. "Return
On Investment From Childhood Immunization In Low- And Middle-Income Countries,
2011–20." Health Aff 35(2): 199-207.
Pakistan Bureau of Statistics. Various Issues. Pakistan Social and Living Standards
Measurement Survey. Government of Pakistan. Islamabad, 2000 to 2012.
PILDAT Briefing Paper. 2010. Immunization in Pakistan.
Planning Commission and UNDP. 2013. Pakistan Millennium Development Goal Report.
Planning Commission. Islamabad.
Rajaratnam, J. K., J. R. Marcus, A. D. Flaxman, H. Wang, A. Levin-Rector, L. Dwyer, M.
Costa, A.D. Lopez, C.J. Murray. 2010. “Neonatal, Post-neonatal, Childhood, and Under-5
Mortality for 187 Countries, 1970-2010 1970-2010: A Systematic Analysis of Progress
Towards Millennium Development Goal 4.” Lancet Jun 5 375 (9730): 1988-2008.

                                           43
Sauerborn, R., A. Gbanjou, H. Dong, J. M. Przyborski, M. Lancer. 2005. “Willingness to
Pay for Hypothetical Malaria Vaccines in Rural Burkina Faso.” Sc and J Public Health 33:
146–150.
Shepard, Donald S., Mark S. Thompson. 1979. First Principles of Cost Effectiveness
Analysis in Health. Public Health Reports. November-December 1979, Vol. 94, No. 6: 686.
Tebbens, R. J. D., M. A. Pallansch, S. L. Cochi, S. G. F. Wassilak, J. Linkins, R. W. Sutter,
R. B. Aylward, K. M. Thompson. 2011. “Economic Analysis of the Global Polio Eradication
Initiative.” Vaccine 29: 334–343.
WHO. 2002. Guidelines for Estimating Costs of Introducing New Vaccines into the
National Immunization System. Department of Vaccines and Biologicals. Geneva.
WHO-UNICEF. 2005. Global Immunization Vision and Strategy, 2006-2015. Department
of Immunization, Vaccines and Biologicals. Switzerland.
World Bank. 1993. World Development Report 1993: Investing in Health. New York:
Oxford University Press.
_____.       2014.      World       Bank    Open      Data.     Available     online:
http://data.worldbank.org/indicator/SH.XPD.TOTL.ZS (accessed on Nov 4, 2016).




                                             44
ANNEX
UNIT COST OF FULLY IMMUNIZED CHILD
Table A.1 presents the unit cost in USD dollars for a FIC for Pakistan as a whole and for each
province from 2013 until 2030, assuming a 5.5 percent annual inflation rate. The methodology
used to derive unit cost is explained in Annex II. The unit cost is lowest in the more densely
populated province of Punjab and highest in Balochistan. The unit cost in 2030 is approximately
two and half times more than the current cost.
 Table A.1. Unit Cost per Fully Immunized Child in USD

  Fiscal
                Pakistan           Punjab             Sindh              KP           Balochistan
   Year
   2012           64.2              60.8              65.4              69.7              80.9
   2013           67.8              64.2              69.0              73.6              85.3
   2014           71.5              67.7              72.7              77.6              90.0
   2015           75.4              71.4              76.7              81.9              95.0
   2016           79.6              75.4              81.0              86.4              100.2
   2017           84.0              79.5              85.4              91.1              105.7
   2018           88.6              83.9              90.1              96.1              111.5
   2019           93.5              88.5              95.1              101.4             117.7
   2020           98.6              93.3              100.3             107.0             124.1
   2021           104.1             98.5              105.8             112.9             131.0
   2022           109.8             103.9             111.6             119.1             138.2
   2023           115.9             109.6             117.8             125.7             145.8
   2024           122.3             115.6             124.3             132.6             153.8
   2025           129.0             122.0             131.1             139.9             162.2
   2026           136.1             128.7             138.3             147.5             171.1
   2027           143.6             135.8             145.9             155.7             180.6
   2028           151.5             143.3             153.9             164.2             190.5
   2029           159.9             151.1             162.4             173.3             201.0
   2030           168.7             159.4             171.3             182.8             212.0


PROJECTION OF ANNUAL BIRTHS IN PAKISTAN
Table A.2 presents successive birth cohorts, that is, the annual number of births for Pakistan and
its provinces. The current year figures are from the most recent nationally representative surveys.
Population projection software is used for future birth cohort projections. The data in Table A.2
estimate the size of interventions needed to achieve the target coverage ratio. About 5.6 million
children born each year in Pakistan need to be vaccinated. More than half of these expected
births will occur in Punjab. Data in Table A.2 also show that the birth cohort is expected to decline
after 2016 due to lower fertility rates, which will also lower the burden of immunization. In the
province of Punjab, where fertility regulation is high, the fertility rate is lower, despite its dense
population. Declining provincial annual birth rates will be reflected in a decreased birth cohort in
Pakistan overall.


                                                 45
Table A.2. Annual Birth Cohort (in numbers)

Fiscal
            Pakistan          Punjab               Sindh     KP      Balochistan
 Year
 2012       5,603,908       3,162,021          1,341,724   804,573     295,589
 2013       5,643,204       3,184,194          1,351,133   810,215     297,661
 2014       5,669,109       3,198,811          1,357,335   813,935     299,028
 2015       5,683,251       3,206,791          1,360,721   815,965     299,774
 2016       5,684,927       3,190,883          1,363,727   828,027     302,289
 2017       5,674,339       3,184,941          1,361,188   826,485     301,726
 2018       5,651,041       3,171,864          1,355,599   823,092     300,487
 2019       5,617,292       3,152,921          1,347,503   818,176     298,693
 2020       5,575,429       3,129,423          1,337,461   812,078     296,467
 2021       5,525,167       3,085,238          1,327,836   814,936     297,157
 2022       5,466,754       3,052,621          1,313,798   806,320     294,015
 2023       5,400,250       3,015,485          1,297,816   796,511     290,438
 2024       5,327,557       2,974,894          1,280,346   785,789     286,529
 2025       5,251,037       2,932,165          1,261,956   774,503     282,413
 2026       5,171,069       2,873,412          1,244,162   772,084     281,410
 2027       5,087,633       2,827,049          1,224,088   759,627     276,870
 2028       5,000,544       2,778,656          1,203,134   746,624     272,130
 2029       4,909,566       2,728,102          1,181,245   733,040     267,179
 2030       4,814,851       2,675,472          1,158,456   718,898     262,025




                                              46
Figure A.1. Annual Birth Cohorts (in numbers): Punjab and Pakistan decline due to uptake in
fertility regulation




COVERAGE RATIO AND THE TARGET POPULATION
Two scenarios are assumed with regards to immunization coverage. The first scenario (S1)
assumes that the past trend of increase in coverage will continue in the future. The second
scenario (S2) is built under the NISP intervention, which is expected to significantly increase
immunization coverage. The past trend is estimated on the basis of various rounds of Pakistan
Demographic and Health Survey (PDHS 1991, 2007, 2012) and Pakistan Social Living Standards
Measurement Survey (PSLM 2000 to 2012). The past trend shows that immunization rates
increase by 1 percentage point annually. However, under NISP intervention, an annual increase
of 3-8 percentage points is assumed. Combining the target population from Table A.2 (above)
with the following Table A.3 will help to build various coverage scenarios and the estimated
expenditure to immunize children in Pakistan. The scenario of coverage data on immunization
will determine the level of effort that is required to eliminate vaccine preventable disease in
Pakistan.




                                              47
Table A.3. Percent of FIC under Different Scenarios



   Fiscal        Pakistan             Punjab               Sindh              KP          Balochistan
    Year
                 S1        S2        S1       S2        S1         S2    S1        S2      S1      S2
  2011-12         48.8    48.8        60.0    60.0         28.0   28.0   51.7      51.7     15.0   15.0
  2012-13         49.8    52.7        61.0    62.5         29.0   34.5   52.7      55.3     16.0   23.1
  2013-14         50.8    56.6        62.0    65.0         30.0   41.0   53.7      58.8     17.0   31.3
  2014-15         51.8    60.5        63.0    67.5         31.0   47.5   54.7      62.3     18.0   39.4
  2015-16         52.7    64.4        64.0    70.0         32.0   54.0   55.7      65.9     19.0   47.5
  2016-17         53.7    68.3        65.0    72.5         33.0   60.5   56.7      69.4     20.0   55.6
  2017-18         54.7    72.2        66.0    75.0         34.0   67.0   57.7      72.9     21.0   63.8
  2018-19         55.7    76.1        67.0    77.5         35.0   73.5   58.7      76.5     22.0   71.9
  2019-20         56.7    80.0        68.0    80.0         36.0   80.0   59.7      80.0     23.0   80.0
  2020-21         57.7    81.0        69.0    81.0         37.0   81.0   60.7      81.0     24.0   81.0
  2021-22         58.7    82.0        70.0    82.0         38.0   82.0   61.7      82.0     25.0   82.0
  2022-23         59.7    83.0        71.0    83.0         39.0   83.0   62.7      83.0     26.0   83.0
  2023-24         60.7    84.0        72.0    84.0         40.0   84.0   63.7      84.0     27.0   84.0
  2024-25         61.7    85.0        73.0    85.0         41.0   85.0   64.7      85.0     28.0   85.0
  2025-26         62.6    86.0        74.0    86.0         42.0   86.0   65.7      86.0     29.0   86.0
  2026-27         63.6    87.0        75.0    87.0         43.0   87.0   66.7      87.0     30.0   87.0
  2027-28         64.6    88.0        76.0    88.0         44.0   88.0   67.7      88.0     31.0   88.0
  2028-29         65.6    89.0        77.0    89.0         45.0   89.0   68.7      89.0     32.0   89.0
  2029-30         66.6    90.0        78.0    90.0         46.0   90.0   69.7      90.0     33.0   90.0
 S1: Baseline Scenario, S2: Improved coverage with NISP intervention



Results in Table A.2 and A.3 are further combined to find the target population in numbers under
the two scenarios. The data in Table A.4 reflect incremental effort required to increase
immunization each year. By the end of year 2030, nearly 130,000 additional children in Pakistan
will be immunized compared to the previous year.




                                                      48
Table A.4 Number of FIC under Different Scenarios


  Fiscal           Pakistan                 Punjab                    Sindh                KP               Balochistan
   Year
              S1              S2       S1            S2          S1           S2      S1          S2       S1        S2
 2011-12   2,733,466    2,733,466   1,897,213   1,897,213   375,683       375,683   416,232     416,232   44,338    44,338
 2012-13   2,809,066    2,972,875   1,942,358   1,990,121   391,829       466,141   427,253     447,779   47,626    68,834
 2013-14   2,878,652    3,207,774   1,983,263   2,079,227   407,201       556,507   437,354     478,593   50,835    93,446
 2014-15   2,942,666    3,437,580   2,020,278   2,164,584   421,824       646,343   446,605     508,618   53,959   118,036
 2015-16   2,997,480    3,659,012   2,042,165   2,233,618   436,393       736,413   461,487     545,394   57,435   143,587
 2016-17   3,048,641    3,874,016   2,070,211   2,309,082   449,192       823,518   468,892     573,580   60,345   167,835
 2017-18   3,092,634    4,079,018   2,093,430   2,378,898   460,904       908,251   475,198     600,308   63,102   191,561
 2018-19   3,130,337    4,274,245   2,112,457   2,443,514   471,626       990,415   480,542     625,632   65,712   214,685
 2019-20   3,162,762    4,460,343   2,128,008   2,503,539   481,486     1,069,968   485,081     649,663   68,187   237,173
 2020-21   3,186,369    4,475,385   2,128,814   2,499,043   491,299     1,075,547   494,937     660,098   71,318   240,697
 2021-22   3,207,350    4,482,738   2,136,835   2,503,149   499,243     1,077,315   497,768     661,182   73,504   241,092
 2022-23   3,222,334    4,482,208   2,140,994   2,502,853   506,148     1,077,187   499,678     661,104   75,514   241,064
 2023-24   3,232,234    4,475,148   2,141,923   2,498,911   512,138     1,075,490   500,809     660,063   77,363   240,684
 2024-25   3,238,319    4,463,382   2,140,480   2,492,340   517,402     1,072,663   501,361     658,327   79,076   240,051
 2025-26   3,237,999    4,447,119   2,126,325   2,471,134   522,548     1,069,980   507,517     663,993   81,609   242,013
 2026-27   3,236,629    4,426,241   2,120,287   2,459,533   526,358     1,064,956   506,924     660,875   83,061   240,877
 2027-28   3,231,231    4,400,479   2,111,779   2,445,217   529,379     1,058,758   505,713     657,029   84,360   239,475
 2028-29   3,221,539    4,369,514   2,100,639   2,428,011   531,560     1,051,308   503,842     652,405   85,497   237,790
 2029-30   3,207,537    4,333,366   2,086,868   2,407,925   532,890     1,042,611   501,311     647,008   86,468   235,823

S1: Baseline Scenario, S2: Improved coverage with NISP intervention.


COST OF IMMUNIZING CHILDREN
The above tables show that the number of children increases with the increase in immunization
coverage ratio, which will require additional resources to immunize the increased number of
children. Table A.5 shows the expenditures required to immunize the number of children
presented in Table A.4. In the base year 2012, these expenditures were 173 million USD.
Assuming an increase in the price of vaccines and an increase in the immunization coverage
ratio, this amount is expected to increase to USD 534 million under S1, during which 67 percent
children will be immunized. In S2, however, about 90 percent of the children targeted to be
immunized will require expenditures estimated at USD 731 million.




                                                            49
Table A.5. Cost of Fully Immunized Children by Coverage Scenario (million USD)


     Fiscal           Pakistan             Punjab             Sindh                KP         Balochistan
      Year          S1        S2        S1        S2        S1      S2        S1        S2    S1     S2
    2011-12          173       173       115       115       25          25   29         29      4      4
    2012-13          187       199       125       128       27          32   31         33      4      6
    2013-14          202       227       134       141       30          40   34         37      5      8
    2014-15          218       257       144       155       32          50   37         42      5     11
    2015-16          235       289       154       168       35          60   40         47      6     14
    2016-17          252       324       165       184       38          70   43         52      6     18
    2017-18          270       360       176       200       42          82   46         58      7     21
    2018-19          288       399       187       216       45          94   49         63      8     25
    2019-20          307       440       199       234       48         107   52         70      8     29
    2020-21          327       466       210       246       52         114   56         75      9     32
    2021-22          347       492       222       260       56         120   59         79     10     33
    2022-23          368       519       235       274       60         127   63         83     11     35
    2023-24          390       547       248       289       64         134   66         87     12     37
    2024-25          412       576       261       304       68         141   70         92     13     39
    2025-26          435       605       274       318       72         148   75         98     14     41
    2026-27          459       636       288       334       77         155   79        103     15     43
    2027-28          483       667       303       350       81         163   83        108     16     46
    2028-29          508       699       317       367       86         171   87        113     17     48
    2029-30          534       731       333       384       91         179   92        118     18     50
 S1: Baseline Scenario, S2: Improved coverage with NISP intervention.


BENEFITS OF IMMUNIZATION
The benefit of immunization can be measured by the number of DALYs saved by effective
immunization. One DALY equals one lost year of healthy life. The DALYs per birth from VPD are
taken from the burden of VPDs data for Pakistan, published by Institute for Health Metrics and
Evaluation (IHME 2013) in the Global Burden of Disease (GBD) 1990-2010. Three scenarios with
respect to DALYS are built: Low (39,156/ 100,000 births), Medium (56,984/ 100,000 births) and
High (85,229/ 100,000 births). The IHME GBD data is available for all child deaths. It was further
assumed that only 17 percent of child deaths are preventable through vaccines, that is, vaccine
preventable deaths (VPD). Therefore, DALYs were deflated to 17 percent to arrive at the
conservative figure used in the analysis (see Table A6).




                                                       50
Table A.6. Total DALYs Saved by Fully Immunizing Children


 Fiscal        Pakistan               Punjab              Sindh               KP             Balochistan
  Year
             S1        S2        S1            S2    S1           S2     S1         S2       S1      S2

 2011-12   181,954   181,954   126,288    126,288   25,007     25,007   27,707     27,707   2,951    2,951

 2012-13   186,986   197,890   129,293    132,473   26,082     31,029   28,440     29,806   3,170    4,582

 2013-14   191,618   213,526   132,016    138,404   27,105     37,044   29,113     31,858   3,384    6,220

 2014-15   195,879   228,823   134,480    144,086   28,079     43,024   29,728     33,856   3,592    7,857

 2015-16   199,528   243,563   135,937    148,681   29,049     49,019   30,719     36,304   3,823    9,558

 2016-17   202,933   257,875   137,804    153,704   29,901     54,818   31,212     38,180   4,017   11,172

 2017-18   205,862   271,521   139,350    158,352   30,680     60,458   31,632     39,960   4,200   12,751

 2018-19   208,372   284,516   140,616    162,653   31,394     65,927   31,987     41,645   4,374   14,291

 2019-20   210,530   296,904   141,651    166,649   32,050     71,223   32,290     43,245   4,539   15,787

 2020-21   212,101   297,905   141,705    166,349   32,703     71,594   32,946     43,940   4,747   16,022

 2021-22   213,498   298,394   142,239    166,623   33,232     71,712   33,134     44,012   4,893   16,048

 2022-23   214,495   298,359   142,516    166,603   33,692     71,703   33,261     44,007   5,027   16,046

 2023-24   215,154   297,889   142,578    166,340   34,091     71,590   33,336     43,937   5,150   16,021

 2024-25   215,559   297,106   142,482    165,903   34,441     71,402   33,373     43,822   5,264   15,979

 2025-26   215,538   296,023   141,539    164,492   34,784     71,223   33,783     44,199   5,432   16,110

 2026-27   215,447   294,634   141,137    163,719   35,037     70,889   33,743     43,991   5,529   16,034

 2027-28   215,088   292,919   140,571    162,766   35,238     70,476   33,663     43,735   5,615   15,941

 2028-29   214,442   290,858   139,829    161,621   35,383     69,981   33,538     43,427   5,691   15,829

 2029-30   213,510   288,451   138,913    160,284   35,472     69,402   33,370     43,068   5,756   15,698




The economic benefit of immunization can be approximated by multiplying the country’s per capita
GDP by the DALYs saved by immunization. Table A.7 presents the current and future projected
GDP per capita of Pakistan. Table A.7 shows that the ICER of immunization for the terminal year
of this analysis will remain below the WHO threshold for Pakistan.




                                                          51
Table A.7. WHO Threshold and Incremental Cost Effective Ratio

 Fiscal   Per Capita   3 times per      Pakistan     Punjab ICER -   Sindh ICER -      KP ICER -      Balochistan
  year       GDP       capita GNP    ICER - NISP          NISP            NISP            NISP       ICER - NISP
            WHO            WHO        intervention    intervention    intervention    intervention    intervention
          threshold     threshold    (USD/ DALY)     (USD/ DALY)     (USD/ DALY)     (USD/ DALY)     (USD/ DALY)
            (USD)         (USD)

 2012       1,212        3,637
 2013       1,257        3,772           -472             -443           -476            -508            -589
 2014       1,278        3,833           -498             -467           -502            -536            -621
 2015       1,298        3,894           -525             -493           -530            -565            -655
 2016       1,322        3,962           -554             -520           -559            -596            -692
 2017       1,357        4,070           -585             -549           -590            -629            -730
 2018       1,407        4,220           -617             -579           -622            -664            -770
 2019       1,459        4,377           -651             -611           -656            -700            -812
 2020       1,515        4,543           -687             -644           -692            -739            -857
 2021       1,573        4,718           -725             -680           -730            -779            -904
 2022       1,634        4,901           -766             -717           -771            -822            -954
 2023       1,698        5,095           -808             -757           -813            -867           -1,006
 2024       1,767        5,300           -853             -798           -858            -915           -1,061
 2025       1,839        5,516           -901             -842           -905            -965           -1,120
 2026       1,915        5,744           -951             -888           -955           -1,018          -1,181
 2027       1,995        5,985          -1,004            -937          -1,007          -1,074          -1,246
 2028       2,080        6,241          -1,060            -989          -1,062          -1,133          -1,315
 2029       2,170        6,511          -1,118            -1,043        -1,121          -1,196          -1,387
 2030       2,265        6,796          -1,180            -1,100        -1,183          -1,262          -1,463




                                                     52
Table A.8. Child Immunization by Antigen and Province
Pakistan Demographic and Health Survey (various years)

                                                                                                             No
   Survey and                                    Polio                               Measle     Fully                 With vacc.
                     BCG    DPT1   DPT2   DPT3           Polio1   Polio2    Polio3                        vaccinati                 N
      Year                                        0                                    s      immunized                  card
                                                                                                             on
     Punjab
     1990-91         75.8   69.6   66.6   46.7   10.2     70.7     67.3      46.9     54.4      38.6        22.2         31.2      763
     2006-07         85.5   80.9   72.3   64.5   58.6     95.5     93.4      84.6     65.1      52.6         3.8         23.8      865
     2012-13         91.6   87.2   81.0   76.3   72.0     97.4     95.2      92.4     70.0      65.6         1.5         40.7      1,215
     Sindh
     1990-91         60.2   54.5   50.3   33.0   20.4     54.0     50.3      33.0     41.2      25.3        38.5         25.7      244
     2006-07         76.7   67.3   56.4   47.6   51.2     92.2     89.9      84.1     50.7      37.0         6.3         19.7      373
     2012-13         78.5   65.1   56.8   38.6   68.9     87.2     82.2      77.5     44.6      29.1         8.5         25.9      437
      KPK
     1990-91         63.8   60.0   51.9   44.0   10.1     60.0     52.3      44.5     48.2      37.6        33.5         31.3      165
     2006-07         71.1   67.5   62.4   56.4   62.6     91.3     87.9      81.0     56.6      46.9         7.5         33.9      222
     2012-13         79.7   77.1   73.9   69.6   70.8     83.6     79.5      75.7     57.8      52.7        12.0         39.7      309
   Balochistan
     1990-91         37.1   36.5   28.5   22.9    2.7     39.3     29.1      23.4     34.1      17.8        57.2         18.6       43
     2006-07         63.0   60.8   60.0   46.7   32.5     69.2     66.3      62.9     54.0      35.2        28.9         10.6       61
     2012-13         48.9   37.7   33.7   27.1   34.8     78.1     74.9      60.6     37.3      16.4        20.8         8.0        88
    Pakistan
     1990-91         69.7   64.1    60    42.7    na      64.8     60.5      42.9     50.2      35.1        28.3         29.6      1,215
     2006-07         80.3   74.8   66.5   58.5   56.3     93       90.6      83.1     59.9      47.3         6           23.7      1,522
     2012-13         85.2   78.8   72.7   65.2   69.4     92.3     89.2      85.3     61.4      53.8         5.4         36.0      2,074
       na: not available




                                                                           53
Table A.9. Effectiveness Parameter Used in Analysis
(The figures are relatively close to Pakistan’s IMR)

                                                        per 100,000
                      VPD
                                           DALY        Death    YLD            YLL
           Acute hepatitis A                  787          9        38            767
           Acute hepatitis B                  290          3        24            281
           Acute hepatitis C                    1          0         1              0
           Acute hepatitis E                  382          4        18            376
           Cirrhosis hepatitis B               64          1         0             64
           Cirrhosis hepatitis C               41          0         0             41
           Diarrheal diseases              28,101        323       975         27,563
           Diphtheria                         274          3         0            274
           Hepatitis                        1,094         12        60          1,064
           HiB meningitis                   1,817         21         8          1,812
           Lower respiratory
                                           32,573        379       151         32,447
           infections
           Measles                             491          6        2            490
           Meningitis                        5,593         65       23          5,577
           Meningococcal                       435          5        2            434
           Pneumococcal meningitis           1,264         15        8          1,259
           Pneumoconiosis                       15          0        0             15
           Pruritus                             10          0       10              0
           Rabies                              336          4        0            336
           Upper respiratory
                                                  61        0       34            32
           infections
           Varicella                          575          7         2            575
           Vitamin A deficiency                17          0        17              0
           Whooping cough                  11,010        128        48         10,982
           Total                           85,229        989     1,423         84,389
              Source: IHME GBD Results 1990-2010. Published August 29, 2013.




                                             54
                                        ANNEX II

UNIT COST ESTIMATION
            Data Collection Method and Approach to Estimate Unit Cost
The data on cost is collected using a top down approach. Pakistan’s existing immunization
mechanism is pyramid shaped. The federal government is responsible for developing
national policy, hosting technical advisory group meetings, procuring vaccines, and
controlling central storage. The provincial and district governments are responsible for
executing vaccinations and all operating cost. The data collection exercise started by
obtaining all information pertaining to the existing implementation arrangement from the
federal EPI cell. The financial information was obtained where available from the PIFRA
system, which is maintained at the Accountant General Pakistan Revenues (AGPR) office.
The immunization program expenditures are also available from the NAM Chart of
Accounts, which are classified on the basis of input cost identified in the terms of
reference. The following approach was used for information gathering.


Figure B.1. Information Collection Approach




                                           Federal:
                                 EPI Cell & PIFRA System at
                                      AGPR Islamabad




                             Provincial: EPI Directorate/ DGHS


                              District: EPI - EDO - Health & DHO




The structure depicted in Figure B.1 helps to define the program boundaries, clarify the
distribution of roles among provinces, and document the flow of the immunization process
in the country. The associated cost components for each activity within the process flow
include, e.g., procurement of vaccines and the associated cost components, including the
price of vaccines, freight, insurance, etc. The function-input cost approach links the cost
components to activities/ functions within the immunization process and ensures that
every activity/ function of the immunization process is accounted for and all input costs
are incorporated into the final unit cost (see Table B.1).




                                              55
Figure B.2. Function-Input Cost Approach




                                           56
Table B.1. Function-Input Cost Table

                                                                    Object Code as
      Function/Activity               Cost Components                                              Input Cost
                                                                      per NAM 24
         Procurement

       Cold Storage and
          Distribution
     Immunization Delivery
       Personnel Cost
         Monitoring &
         Supervision

        Media & Social
         Mobilization



 Unit Cost Estimation
 Unit costs are defined as the cost of immunizing a child once with a single antigen. The unit cost is
 calculated on a full cost basis, taking into account all resources being employed for immunization. For the
 purpose of costing, we employ the financial cost method, which measures resources in terms of
 expenditures incurred or money paid for the actual resources consumed. Therefore, opportunity cost will
 not figure in this unit cost of immunization. The annual average unit cost is calculated as follows:
      Average unit cost per annum = Total cost incurred for delivery of vaccine injection to child
                                               Number of contacts* during the year
      Total cost incurred for delivery of vaccine to child = Direct cost + Apportioned indirect cost
      Direct cost = Cost for which benefit is directly traceable to the final output. (e.g., price of vaccine, salaries
                         of vaccinators, etc.)
      Indirect cost = All overhead costs, including utilities, management costs, etc.
 *A contact is defined as vaccine injection delivery to the child through a fixed center, outreach, and mobile
 teams. It is the basic unit of output for which cost is to be ascertained. In our analysis, immunization is a
 function of the number of contacts. Thus, if there are six contacts per child as per the national immunization
 schedule, the total immunization cost per child will be worked out as six times the unit cost per contact.



Cost Classification
In the analysis, the immunization cost is classified on the basis of input, which is the
simplest, most manageable, and widely understood method. The basic input
classifications relevant to the unit cost analysis include: (i) Personnel; (ii) Vaccine and
Supplies; (iii) Medical Equipment and Transport, and (iv) Other Costs. The cost is further
divided into capital and recurrent. It is important that all costs are presented on an annual
basis, which requires spreading capital costs over the useful life of the assets. The
annualizing of capital cost is done using the straight line method. The third dimension is
to categorize cost into direct and indirect costs with respect to the cost objective, i.e., the
cost of a fully immunized child. The direct cost would be directly attributable to the



24
     New Accounting Model (NAM)

                                                          57
immunization, while indirect cost will be apportioned based on the nature of the cost item.
The following classification scheme is used.


Table B.2. Cost Classification Scheme

                    Level -1                 Level-2              Level-3
                                            Recurrent              Direct
                Personnel Cost               Capital               Direct
                                            Recurrent              Direct
              Vaccines & Supplies
                                            Recurrent              Direct
                                             Capital               Direct
             Medical Equipment &
                                             Capital               Direct
               Delivery System
                                             Capital              Indirect
                                            Recurrent              Direct
                                            Recurrent             Indirect
                                            Recurrent             Indirect
                   Other Cost
                                            Recurrent             Indirect
                                            Recurrent             Indirect
                                            Recurrent              Direct


Data Collection
Under the existing arrangement, the role of the federal government is restricted to
procuring vaccines and disposables. The expenditure is reflected in its budget. The
procured vaccines are dispatched to each province through a cold chain delivery system
that extends to the district level. The provinces are financing EPI through their
development budget and have opened a separate DDO (cost center) for the EPI Program
in their respective Annual Development Program (ADP). At the district level, the EPI has
been integrated into the existing preventive program, which is financed from the current
budget.
The preliminary review of EPI implementation in Pakistan suggests that it varies across
provinces. Since the devolution of health, each province has developed its own formula to
distribute the responsibilities between provincial and district governments. The financing
responsibilities for each cost component also vary by province and district. The data
sources are separately identified within each province depending upon the prevailing
practice.
In addition to providing budget support for the EPI, donors have also provided in-kind aid
such as purchasing equipment and providing training, etc. These in-kind contributions are
not captured in the government budget and information relating to them is directly obtained
from the donor agencies or from the EPI cell. The following templates were used to collect
information from country financial management system Project to Improve Financial
Reporting and Auditing (PIFRA).




                                            58
Table B.3. Federal EFI Development Expenditure with Function and Object Codes

Federal Government
Ministry              Health¹
Program Name          Expended program on immunization (CDD) NIH Islamabad
Source                Development Expenditure on Revenue Account
Grant no.
Detail Function       0741                          Public health services
Sub Detailed Function 074120                        Other Health Facilities and Preventive Measures
DDO Code              ID1298

                                                                  2010-11              2011-12                  2012-13
Object Codes           Description                           Budget Actual        Budget Actual            Budget Actual

         A011          Pay
         A012          Allowances
         A032          Communication
         A033          Utilities
         A034          Occupancy cost
         A038          Travel and Transportation
         A039          General²
         A041          Pension
         A063          Emntertainment & Gifts
         A096          Plant & machinery
         A097          Furniture
         A124          Building and structure
        A130-3         Repair and Maintenance

Total
¹ In year FY 2012-13, the budget for EPI prgram was shifted to 'Inter Provinical Coordination Division'.
² This object head pertain to cost of Medicine purchased




                                                        59
Table B.4. Provincial Development Expenditure Function and Object Codes

Punjab
Total Financing       ?
Total Coverage        ?
Department            Health
Program Name          Preventice Health Care Program
Project Name          Strengthening Expanded Program for Immunization
Project Code          LO9100189
Source                Development Expenditure on Revenue Account
Grant no.             PC22036
Detail Function       073                            Hospital Services
Sub Detailed Function 073101                         General Hospital Services
DDO Code              LE4206



                                                              2010-11         2011-12         2012-13
Object Codes         Description                         Budget Actual   Budget Actual   Budget Actual

        A3201        Postage & telegraph
        A3202        Telephone & trunk call
        A3204        Electronic communication
        A3801        Training-domestic
        A3805        Travelling Allowance
                     POL charges helicopter, Airplanes
        A3807        and Staff cars
        A3901        Stationary
        A3902        Printing and publication
                     Conference, seminar and
        A3903        Workshop
        A3907        Advertising and publicity
        A3927        Purchase of drug and medicine
        A3942        Cost of other stores
        A3970        Others

Total

Districts            ------------------
Total Financing      ?
Total Coverage       ?
Source               Current Budget
                                                              2010-11         2011-12         2012-13
Object Codes         Description                         Budget Actual   Budget Actual   Budget Actual
        A011         Salaries
        A3805        Travelling Allowances
       A130-3        R&M
        A3807        POL
        A033         Utilities
        A3901        Stationary

Total




                                                     60
Table B.5. Hospital Services Development Expenditure Function and Object Codes

Sindh
Total Financing      ?
Total Coverage       ?
Department           Health
Program Name         Preventive Program
Project Name         Operational Support for EPI Sindh
ADP No.              11321
Project Code         Under each EDO Health there is a seprate project code for EPI operational cost
Source               Development Expenditure on Revenue Account
Grant no.            SC22051
Detail Function      073                                               Hospital Services
Sub Detailed Function073101                                            General Hospital Services
DDO Code             Each EDO Health is a seprate DDO in provincial budget for EPI project



                                                                              2010-11            2011-12         2012-13
Object Codes          Description                                        Budget Actual      Budget Actual   Budget Actual

        A03805        Travelling Allowance
        A03807        POL charges helicopter, Airplanes and Staff cars
        A03826        Transportation of Goods
        A13001        Transportation
        A13101        Machinery & equipment

Total



Districts             ------------------
Total Financing
Total Coverage
Source                Current Budget
                                                                              2010-11            2011-12         2012-13
Object Codes          Description                                        Budget Actual      Budget Actual   Budget Actual
        A011          Salaries
       A3805          Travelling Allowances
       A130-3         R&M
       A3807          POL
        A033          Utilities
       A3901          Stationary

Total




                                                            61
Non-Financial Information
In each province, the following non-financial information is also gathered to facilitate the
calculation of the unit cost of a fully immunized child.
   a.   Targeted population (number and percentage).
   b.   Immunization coverage (number and percentage).
   c.   Number of annual vaccines procured.
   d.   Number of annual contacts.
   e.   Percentage of wastage.
   f.   Number of vaccinators.
   g.   Asset record for cold chain equipment.
   h.   Number of vehicles.
Limitations on Unit Cost Estimation
   a. No information on EPI expenditure from district health budget.
   b. In Punjab, 95 percent of expenditure relates to salaries.
   c. There is no reporting on number of contacts. Coverage by the antigen can be a
      basis for determining the number of annual contacts.
   d. There is no annual vaccine consumption report by districts at the provincial level.
      Coverage by the antigen can be a basis for determining number of annual
      contacts.
   e. It is difficult to isolate EPI expenditure at district level. Salaries of vaccinators are
      combined under salaries and wages head.
   f. The cost of facility used by EPI staff is difficult to ascertain; however, the cost is
      negligible.
   g. The donor in-kind aid needs to be quantified.
   h. Syringes and disposable costs are procured by the Federal EPI cell, MONHSRC.




                                             62
Pakistan faces a formidable challenge in eliminating the polio virus from the country. With transmission of the
polio virus substantially slowing in the Africa region, the only two countries worldwide with ongoing endemic polio
transmission may soon be Pakistan and Afghanistan. And a substantial number of the polio cases or infant
paralysis occurring in Afghanistan is linked to cross-border transmission from Pakistan. The ongoing cycle of
polio infection is not just a tragedy for the children of Pakistan, it is a global public health emergency constituting
one of the final barriers to permanently eradicating polio.

The outbreaks of vaccine-preventable diseases in Pakistan result in significant costs to individuals and to society.
These include costs associated with visits to health care providers, hospitalizations, disability, and premature
deaths. Despite a slow decline over the past 10 years, the under-five mortality rate in Pakistan remains high, with
more than 400,000 deaths annually in this demographic over the past twenty years. Pakistan is lagging behind
other South Asian countries in improving this indicator.

This paper demonstrates clear economic benefits and efficacy of the National Immunization Support Project
(NISP) financing intervention in terms of DALYs saved and establishes that this intervention is affordable and
economically effective with a high rate of return. In addition to increased investment, the effectiveness of the EPI
can be enhanced by improving the capacity building of health professionals, as well as by improving logistics of
program interventions to reach marginalized populations, remote areas, and pockets of resistance. An increased
financial investment alone will be insufficient to address the root causes of persistent under-coverage in Pakistan.
It is imperative that ample attention and resources be diverted to strengthen the procurement systems, local and
provincial management capacity, and reporting mechanisms, among other capacity improvements.




ABOUT THIS SERIES:
This series is produced by the Health, Nutrition, and Population Global Practice of the World Bank. The papers
in this series aim to provide a vehicle for publishing preliminary results on HNP topics to encourage discussion
and debate. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those of the
author(s) and should not be attributed in any manner to the World Bank, to its affiliated organizations or to
members of its Board of Executive Directors or the countries they represent. Citation and the use of material
presented in this series should take into account this provisional character. For free copies of papers in this
series please contact the individual author/s whose name appears on the paper. Enquiries about the series and
submissions should be made directly to the Editor Martin Lutalo (mlutalo@ worldbank.org) or HNP Advisory
Service (healthpop@worldbank.org, tel 202 473-2256).

For more information, see also www.worldbank.org/hnppublications.




                                                                            1818 H Street, NW
                                                                            Washington, DC USA 20433

                                                                            Telephone: 202 473 1000
                                                                            Facsimile: 202 477 6391
                                                                            Internet: www.worldbank.org
                                                                            E-mail: feedback@worldbank.org
