                 THE WORLD BANK GROUP




             Kazakhstan
Public Expenditure and Institutional Review for
            the Agricultural Sector
Table of Contents

       Executive Summary ............................................................................................................... i

I.       Introduction ....................................................................................................................... 1
II.      Sector Overview ................................................................................................................. 2
III.      Strategy ............................................................................................................................ 7
IV.       The Spending Program .................................................................................................... 10
         A.        Budget Analysis ............................................................................................................... 10
         B.        Socio Economic Analysis of the Spending Program ........................................................ 18
         C.        Execution and Performance Monitoring ......................................................................... 29
V.        Policy Options................................................................................................................. 31
         A.        Budget Management ...................................................................................................... 31
         B.        Strategy and Programs .................................................................................................... 32

Tables

Table 1 Disparity between agriculture and other sectors ...................................................................... 3
Table 2 Farm structure (2004) ................................................................................................................ 5
Table 3 Share of farms which were unprofitable in Kazakhstan in 2007................................................ 6
Table 4 Kazagro funds from the MOA agricultural budget by subsidiary ............................................ 12
Table 5 MOA agricultural budget by functional groups (sub-sectors) .................................................. 12
Table 6 Agricultural gross output (millions of KZT) ............................................................................... 13
Table 7 MOA budget by sectoral category ........................................................................................... 13
Table 8 Breakdown of MOA agricultural budget subsidies................................................................... 14
Table 9 Area subsidies 2009.................................................................................................................. 15
Table 10 Product subsidies for livestock ............................................................................................... 23
Table 11 Estimated rates of nominal rates of assistance for major agricultural products .................. 38

Figures

Figure 1 Agricultural GDP and its share in total GDP .............................................................................. 2
Figure 2 Agricultural employment .......................................................................................................... 3
Figure 3 Agricultural labor productivity .................................................................................................. 3
Figure 4 Share of agriculture and income per capita.............................................................................. 4
Figure 5 Agriculture GDP in total GDP in%.............................................................................................. 4
Figure 6 Agricultural land and land use by farm categories ................................................................... 6
Figure 7 MOA Agricultural Budget in Nominal and Real Terms ............................................................ 10
Figure 8 MOA budget as a percentage of agricultural GDP .................................................................. 11
Figure 9 MOA agricultural budget by organization in 2008 ................................................................. 12
Figure 10 MOA agricultural budget by functional category in 2001..................................................... 16
Figure 11 MOA agricultural budget by functional category in 2008..................................................... 17
Figure 12 MOA agricultural budget by selected functional categories 2001-2011 ............................. 17
Figure 13 CAP expenditure and CAP reform path                                                                                            41
Figure 14 Estimated rates of nominal rates of assistance for major agricultural products.................. 39
Text Boxes

Text Box 1 Farm Structure                                                         5
Text Box 2 Comparison of Support Total Support to the Agricultural Sector         24
Text Box 3 Innovative Approaches to Providing Credit to the Agricultural Sector   27


Annexes

Annex 1 Key GDP, Employment and Spending Data                                     35
Annex 2 Reform of the CAP: Decoupling Agricultural Support                        36
Annex 3 Comparison of Nominal Rates of Assistance in Selected Countries           38
Abbreviations

AE              Agricultural Enterprises
ACC             Agricultural Credit Corporation
CAP             Common Agricultural Policy
CFCP            Ministry of Finance of the Republic of Kazakhstan Financial Control and State
                Procurement Committee
CIS             Commonwealth of Independent States
EU              European Union
FCC             Food Contract Corporation
FFSA            Fund for Financial Support of Agriculture
GDP             Gross Domestic Product
GOV             Gross Output Value
JSC             Joint Stock Company
KAF             KazAgroFinance
KZT             Kazakh Tenge
MCO             Microcredit organisation
MEBP            Ministry of Economy and Budget Planning
MOA             Ministry of Agriculture
MOF             Ministry of Finance
NRA             Nominal Rate of Assistance
FI              Financial Institutions
SOE             State Owned Enterprise
WB              World Bank
WTO             World Trade Organization
Executive Summary
I       Introduction

1. Agriculture occupies a key position in the Kazakhstan economy. Although accounting for only 5
percent of GDP, agriculture continues to employ almost one third of the population. Studies of
agriculture in Kazakhstan confirm significant un-tapped productive and export potential for the
sector. Accordingly, agriculture and the related industries have become a major priority in the
Government’s initiatives for promoting economic development and diversification, including the 30
Corporate Leaders program and the Industrial Map of Kazakhstan. Improving the impact of
budgetary policies in agriculture represents a key objective for the successful transformation of the
sector. This includes both increasing the efficiency of existing expenditures and restructuring those
expenditures with the goal of enhancing productivity and competiveness. This is therefore, an
opportune time for critical review of budgetary expenditures and policies in agriculture.

II      Sector Overview
Performance
2. The performance of the agricultural sector has generally been strong in recent years, but has
nevertheless lagged behind the rest of the economy as a whole. Annual growth in agriculture
accelerated to an average of 7.3 percent from 2005-2008. Between 2001 and 2008, labor
productivity in agriculture increased by 24%. Nevertheless, productivity growth in agriculture has
not kept pace with real wage growth. In this context, the share of agriculture in Kazakhstan’s GDP
has declined. The share of employment in agriculture has declined somewhat in recent years, from
36 percent of the population in 2005 to 30 percent in 2008, but remains quite significant.
Farm Structure and Productivity
3. The sector is highly heterogeneous in terms of farm structure and farm productivity. The
northern region of the country consists primarily of larger farms concentrated in crop production for
export and domestic markets. In the South, smaller and household mixed farms predominate, which
typically include livestock and dairy production for the domestic market. There have been modest
changes in farm structure. The share of agricultural land area farmed by agricultural enterprises has
declined from 59% to 50%, while land farmed by individual farms has increased from 41% to 49%
between 2003 and 2007. Individual farmers are expanding, primarily in livestock production, while
agricultural enterprises are producing more crops. The productivity of agricultural enterprises
appears to be increasing faster than that of individual farms. Household plots, who may also have
access to pastures and in some cases, fodder from larger farms, produced a consistently high
percentage of total output (50%) between 2003 and 2007, mainly in the form of meat and milk, of
which they produce 80-90% of output.
Key Challenges
4. The government faces a number of challenges in designing budgetary and other policies for
agriculture, which includes: a) facilitating structural change in terms of land ownership and
management so that the land is managed by the most efficient operators; b) ensuring the provision
of credit for agricultural inputs and machinery to a range of farm types with differing needs; c)
rehabilitation of the irrigation and drainage infrastructure and establishment of financially
sustainable arrangements for management of the systems; d) provision of essential public services
including advisory services, research and extension, provision of market information, sanitary and
phytosanitary inspection and veterinary services and; e) increasing value added in the agricultural
sector and facilitating investment in agricultural processing.



                                                                                                    i
III      Sector Strategy
5. The Ministry of Agriculture (MOA) recently prepared a “Strategic Plan for the Agricultural Sector
for the period 2009-2011”. Measures to be implemented under the strategy are elaborated in the,
“Set of Measures for Sustainable Development of the Agro-Industrial Complex of the Republic of
Kazakhstan for the Period 2009-11”. Under the Strategic Plan, Strategic Direction One, which relates
to agricultural development, identifies three main strategic sub-directions: a) competitiveness; b)
food security; and c) accession to WTO. Strategic Direction Two deal with forestry and cross-
sectoral water issues and Strategic Direction Three with rural development. Almost all agricultural
programs are aligned under strategic direction one. Accordingly the socio economic analysis of
programs in this report examines the performance of agricultural programs in achieving Strategic
Direction One, whilst recognizing their possible contribution to other social objectives set out under
Strategic Directions Two and Three.
6. While the Strategic Plan represents an important accomplishment, it could be strengthened.
Firstly, the situation analysis, which focuses exclusively on production to the neglect of socio-
economic and environmental concerns, could be broader, and secondly, the Strategic Plan could
more clearly identify the key challenges for the development of the sector, as described in para. 4.
so that a strategic approach to addressing these can be developed.
7. The strategic sub-directions of increased competitiveness and accession to WTO are sensible and
complementary. Food security is also a sensible goal, but it would be better to measure food
security in terms of ability to pay for food at household level rather than in terms of the level of
import dependence, which is currently the case, since the physical availability of food is not a
constraint to food security in Kazakhstan. There is a disconnect in the logic of the Strategic Plan in
some areas - having presented WTO access as being part of the overall Strategic Direction, there is
no further mention of WTO access, neither at the Goal nor at the Task level.

IV       Spending Program
Budget Analysis of the Spending Program
8. Large increases in the MOA’s budget1 have taken place since 2001, reflecting the Government’s
increased prioritization of agriculture during the last eight years. Using the broad definition of the
MOA budget (inclusive of agriculture, forestry, hunting, fishing and the provision of potable water),
budget allocations rose from 26.3 bn. KZT in 2001, to 81 bn. KZT in 2005, to 139 bn. KZT in 2008. The
average annual increase in the MOA budget in real terms between 2002 and 2008 was 17%,
although this annual growth steadily declined from 20% in 2002 to 6% in 2008, and is projected to
decline to 2% by 2011. However, in 2008 MOA expenditures considerably exceeded budgeted
spending as they were supplemented by an additional 31 bn. KZT from the reserve budget which
was allocated to Kazagro. In 2009, Kazagro also received an additional off-budget allocation of 120
bn. KZT from the National Fund under the Crisis Program.
9. For the purposes of budget analysis, the 79 programs under agriculture have been categorised
under eight functional categories: a) Subsidy Programs (sub-divided into 6 types of subsidies); b)
Credit Programs; c) Market Intervention Programs; d) Crop and Livestock Services; e) Infrastructure;
f) Research and Extension; g) Administration and; h) Cross Functional. A variety of subsidy programs
can be categorized as follows: i) Area subsidies; ii) Production subsidies; iii) Interest rate subsidies;
iv) Irrigation water subsidies; v) Standards subsidies; vi) Insurance subsidies.
10. The share of subsidies in the MOA agricultural budget has increased consistently from 6% in
2001 to 24% in 2008 and is scheduled to increase further to 39% by 2009. The largest share of the
subsidy budget goes to the area subsidies which represented 59% of subsidies in 2008. The share of

1
 The MOA budget includes agriculture, forestry and hunting, fisheries and potable water. Where the report refers to the
MOA agricultural budget this means the MOA budget for agriculture excluding forestry, fisheries and potable water.
                                                                                                                          ii
credit programs in the budget declined from 25% in 2001 to 9% in 2005, before gradually increasing
again to 27% in 2008. The share of spending on output market intervention has consistently
decreased from 26% in 2001 to 13% in 2008. Spending on infrastructure, mainly irrigation and
drainage, decreased from 16% to 5% over the same period.
Economic Assessment of the Spending Program
Spending Program Formulation
11. Partly as a result of weak situation analysis, there is little alignment between the budget and the
Strategic Plan. There is also a lack of economic analysis indicating how core programs such as credit
and subsidy programs contribute to the strategic directions. The MOA Strategic (Budget) Plan 2009-
11, has too many programs, 79 in total and their structure is somewhat unstable from year to year.
Programs are also extremely varied in size, ranging in value (in 2009) from 19 bn. KZT to 165,000
KZT, making budget analysis and planning cumbersome.
Rationale for the Programs
12. In examining the rationale for a program, is important to: a) identify how the program will
contribute to the stated goal; b) examine whether the program is economically efficient - if it is not
the social or other rationale should be indicated; c) examine whether the program will bring about
permanent structural or technological change to permanently increase productivity; d) identify the
market failure which the program is intended to address, which justifies the need for public
intervention; e) examine whether the program reduces or at least does not exacerbate income
disparity; f) examine adherence to WTO rules; g) examine the costs of administering the program; h)
examine whether it is more or less economically efficient than alternative measures in achieving the
same goal. Before discussing the specific programs it is useful to further discuss some of the
government’s rationales for the spending programs2 - these include: improved competitiveness,
food security, rural employment, promotion of new technology and promotion of processing.
13. Financial and economic efficiency rationale: There is often a misunderstanding of the meaning of
financial efficiency and economic efficiency. Financial efficiency refers to the profitability of a
business entity (e.g. a farmer), while economic efficiency refers to the profitability of the economy
as a whole (i.e. the whole of society). Subsidies involve a transfer from one part of society
(taxpayers) to another (e.g. farmers). While a subsidy may yield benefits for farmers, they do not
necessarily yield benefits for society as a whole.
14. Food security rationale: Government’s key concern should be the ability of low income
households to pay for food rather than the physical availability of food. The physical availability of
domestically produced and imported food is not a constraint in Kazakhstan. Kazakhstan is a major
international exporter of wheat. It has good access to and established trading relationships with
international markets, numerous borders and an adequate storage and transport network, to access
and distribute imported food.
15. The appropriate policy response is therefore to establish an adequate social safety net for the
very poor so that they can afford to buy food. The less poor may also be temporarily vulnerable to
food insecurity as a result of food price fluctuations. In this case the appropriate policy response may
be a temporary expansion of social safety net payments. An additional approach, practised in some
countries, is to establish national stocks to intervene in the market and influence prices. In a
relatively small economy, with an open trade regime, where prices are largely determined by
international prices, this may not be effective. A more permanent, long term solution, is to promote
programs which are targeted at raising the incomes of the rural poor, including small farmer, so that
they can afford to buy more food.



2
    Described in government’s comments on earlier drafts of this report.
                                                                                                      iii
16. Furthermore, programs which aim to increase domestic production in an economy with a free
trade regime like Kazakhstan, will anyway, not affect the total supply on the domestic market (only
the proportion which is domestically produced) or the market price. Consequently, such programs
will not affect food security unless a significant proportion of the additional production is generated
from rural households which are vulnerable to food insecurity and can increase their household
incomes as a result of the programs.
17. Other non efficiency rationale: Agricultural subsidy programs used in many countries as a means
of temporary income support to address increasing income disparities between urban and rural
populations, until such times as other opportunities emerge in the non-farm sector. They are also
used to address other non efficiency objectives such as maintaining employment in rural areas to
preserve rural communities or ensuring the stewardship of natural habitats and landscapes. These
all provide a valid rationale for agricultural support programs. For strategic planning purposes, it is
important, firstly, that the non-efficiency rationale for such programs are clearly stated in the sector
strategy and program designs, so that the program can be properly evaluated; and secondly that a
thorough assessment is made of whether the program is the least costly and most effective way of
reaching that non-efficiency objective.
Area Subsidies and Production Subsidies
18. Area subsidies will be paid for 11 crops in 2009 covering 82% of arable land. Production
subsidies, mainly for livestock production, are to increase significantly under the 2009-2011 budgets.
While these programs provide short term financial support to farmers, they do not greatly
contribute to either, food security (as discussed), improved economic efficiency or improved income
distribution. The economic efficiency of production is not improved because the subsidies do not
bring about any permanent structural or technological changes. The subsidies do not reduce the
costs of production to the society as whole (indeed, they increase costs to some extent because of
the costs of administering such programs) – they simply represent a transfer from taxpayers to
farmers.
19. The most damaging aspects of these programs are that they delay the structural adjustment of
the sector. They do this by masking the inefficiency of some producers, who in the absence of
subsidies, would naturally leave the sector and lease their land to more efficient producers. Since a
large proportion of these subsidies go to large producers, small producers who are most food
insecure, benefit the least. These subsidies are also incompatible with WTO rules.
20. The increase in subsidies and the decline in spending on agricultural public services and
infrastructure as a proportion of spending between 2001 and 2008 is striking. Given the usually high
economic returns to investment in public infrastructure and services and low economic returns to
subsidies, this may represent a decline in the overall efficiency of public spending.
Credit Programs
21. Credit programs, including short and medium term credit and machinery lease finance,
amounted to 27% of MOA expenditure in 2008. There is much potential to increase lending from
private financial institutions to agriculture but the dominance of subsidized state credit programs
may be crowding out private sector lenders. The capture of the least risky borrowers by Kazagro
subsidiaries operating state credit programs means that private sector lenders are left to serve the
least creditworthy (high risk) borrowers. The restrictions on Kazagro subsidiaries in setting different
interest rates for different investments, creates a disincentive to lend for high risk – high profit
investments and to give small loans, that are more costly to administer.
Grain Market Intervention
22. The FCC grain reserve is intended to provide some measure of protection against low grain
stocks which the government perceives to be a potential threat to food security. Kazakhstan is a
major producer and exporter of grain and so is not at risk of domestic grain stocks dropping to

                                                                                                      iv
dangerously low levels, although in 2008, Kazakhstan did temporarily face what Government
considered to be dangerously low grain stocks3.
23. In addressing its concerns about the availability of grain, the government should examine a
wider range of factors which influence grain production and marketing. For example, administrative
barriers to grain trading which reduce Kazakhstan’s competitiveness in the grain market.
Infrastructure Programs
24. Public investment in drainage and irrigation infrastructure is low but is an important resource in
Kazakhstan. While the government has supported a policy of transferring farm systems to water user
associations in the South, these systems need substantial public investment before they can be
sustainably managed by users. Off-farm systems also require major investments.
Crop and Livestock Services - Essential Public Services
25. The government has invested in essential public services, including research, extension, market
information and sanitary and phytosanitary (SPS) control but there is a need for greater investment,
and the economic returns to such investments would be high. Public expenditure on research and
extension is very low. Further public investment in SPS control will be critical to the development of
the processing sector. Feasibility studies in neighboring countries, reveal high returns to investments
in disease control in terms of animal productivity and human health.
Execution and Monitoring of the Spending Program
26. Execution: The results framework in the MOA Strategic Budget Plan is too complicated. There
are around 150 at the strategic level alone. There are a further 320 indicators associated with the 79
programs. These numbers of indicators are extremely difficult to monitor and manage effectively.
Large agricultural spending programs require more detailed evaluation to ascertain their usefulness
and value for money than the use of simple indicators.
27. Monitoring and Results Framework: The Kazakhstan budget system is strong on compliance and
on the framework of controls which ensure compliance, but the system of checks and controls also
leads to implementation delays and a lack of flexibility in reacting to changing needs.

V        Policy Options
28. A number of key adjustments to the government’s existing program of budget management
reform and agricultural sector reform could rapidly improve the effectiveness and efficiency of the
public spending program. These include: a) adjustments to strategy formulation, budget execution
and performance monitoring systems, which can be implemented soon and; b) adjustments to the
spending program, including a number of options for reforming the subsidy program, some involving
rapid reform and others a more gradual approach. Specific recommendations and policy options
from the key sections of this study are described below.
Budget Management

Spending Program Formulation
29. Recommendation: Restructure the large number of agricultural programs (currently 79) into 8-
10 functional categories which might include: administration, planning and management; crop and
livestock services; infrastructure; research and extension; market support; input and production
subsidies and; agricultural credit and microcredit. This has the potential to greatly increase the
efficiency and results-orientation of budget program formulation, execution, and monitoring.



3
   Bread grain stocks stood at 4.7 million tons as of April 10th 2008. Between 1.1 and 1.4 million tons were being exported
at this time on a monthly basis. Source: Kazakh Government web site.
                                                                                                                          v
30. Recommendation: Conduct more ex-ante and ex-post socio-economic and environmental
analysis of program results as a foundation for budget formulation: Establish capacity within the
MOA and additionally contract an independent organisation to undertake budget analysis and high
quality ex-ante and ex-post socio-economic and environmental analysis. Link this new function to
the introduction of the central evaluation system under consideration for the Ministry of Economy
and Budget Planning (MEBP).

Execution Performance Monitoring and Results Framework
31. Recommendation : Review the costs and benefits of the current system of controls to strike an
effective balance between compliance and flexibility in relation to the implementation of
development programs.
32. Recommendation: Review the results framework at both the strategic and program levels with a
view to dramatically reducing the number of indicators at both the program and sector level.
Strategy and Programs
Strategy

33. Recommendation: Situation Analysis: The situation analysis needs to be more holistic
encompassing technical, economic, social and environmental analyses and identifying the key
challenges in the sector. Assistance should be requested from a reputable economic research
institution in Kazakhstan to help put a stronger situation analysis in place, encompassing technical,
economic and environmental analyses.
34. Recommendation: Strategic Directions: Re-examine the strategic sub-direction - food security - in
the Strategic Plan and redefine the performance indicators for this to reflect the ability of
households to pay for food at household level - rather than the current definition - a low level of
import dependence.
35. Recommendation: Strategic Goals: Ensure linkage between strategic directions, goals and tasks.

Effectiveness and Economic Efficiency of Programs

    Assess the economic effectiveness and efficiency of the spending programs; reform the subsidy
    programs; reallocate funding to essential public infrastructure and; implement further
    complementary reform in the land and credit markets.
36. Recommendation: Re-examine the rationale for each of the programs by considering:
    i)   Does the program contribute to the government’s strategic objective and if so how?
    ii) Does the economic analysis demonstrate that economic benefits will be greater than
        economic costs? If not, is there a strong social or environmental justification for the
        program?
    iii) Does the program promote the overall goal of increasing the competitiveness of agriculture,
         including permanent structural changes and technological improvements within the sector?
    iv) Does the program provide an essential public good which will not be provided by the private
        sector, or does the program help to overcome a market failure and promote provision of
        services by the private sector in the long term?
    v) Does the program reduce income disparity, or at least not exacerbate it?
    vi) Does the program conform to WTO accession requirements?
    vii) How easy will it be to collect accurate information to administer the program, and what will
         this administration cost?

                                                                                                    vi
   viii) Are there other measures which would achieve the same objectives more effectively and
         with greater economic efficiency?
37. Recommendation: Policy Options for the Reform of Programs:
   i)   Subsidy Programs: There are several policy options for reforming the current subsidy
        programs. The options are:
           Option 1 Maintain the current subsidy programs but shift some spending from those
            subsidies which distort production decisions the most to those which distort production
            decisions the least. This implies shifting some spending from crop area payments and
            production subsidies to input subsidies. This can be implemented soon.
           Option 2: Decouple subsidies from the production of specific crops. This means
            eliminating differences in the level of area payments for different crops – this can be
            implemented soon and would be an important steps towards deeper reform of the
            subsidy program.
           Option 3 Decouple subsidies from agricultural production completely drawing on lessons
            from EU experience. This means a shift from area and production subsidies to some form
            of income support for farmers not linked to production. This could be implemented in a
            gradual phased manner over the next 5 or more years.
        The purpose of decoupling subsidies from specific crops or from production altogether, is to
        ensure that production decisions are driven by market signals rather than by administrative
        decisions, while at the same time protecting rural incomes. These important reforms of the
        subsidy programs should be accompanied by a number of other fundamental reforms
        described below.
   ii) Public Services and Infrastructure: Reallocate any savings on subsidy programs to essential
       public services and infrastructure including, research and extension, sanitary and phyto-
       sanitary control, veterinary services and disease control in line with the requirements of
       WTO- these investments should be implemented soon;
   iii) Land Market: Create a more flexible land market. It will be important to allow the more
        competitive producers to expand and to allow uncompetitive farmers to move out of the
        sector by sub-leasing or selling their land;
   iv) Credit Market: Improve credit provision to allow farms to finance their expansion. This could
       be achieved by encouraging competitive private sector lending to agriculture. In the shorter
       term, the administration of state credit programs could be transferred to private financial
       institutions. In the longer term, the state provision of lease finance and credit could be
       gradually reduced, as provision from private financial institutions increases.




                                                                                                 vii
I.   Introduction
 1. This World Bank is supporting the government in conducting a Public Expenditure and
 Institutional Reviews (PEIR) in both the health sector and agricultural sector under the Joint
 Economic Research Program.
 2. The objectives of the Agriculture PEIR are:
        To conduct an assessment of the state of budgeting, budget execution and management in
         the agricultural sector.
        To assess the extent to which the composition of public spending in the agricultural sector is
         aligned with sector policies and strategies.
        To review the capacity of relevant institutions at different levels to plan and execute
         budgets.
        To provide recommendations for improving the quality and effectiveness of public
         expenditure as well as budgetary management and execution in agriculture.
        To support the preparation of the government’s budgetary reform, including the gradual
         introduction of results-based budgeting to serve as a vehicle for linking policy priorities with
         the allocation of resources through the budget.
 3. Kazakhstan has experienced strong economic performance. Annual growth averaged 10%
 between 2001 and 2007. However, growth was unbalanced and became unsustainable. High
 revenues from oil and other resource exports fueled domestic demand. Extractive sectors account
 for over 70% of exports and about 40% of state revenues. With the collapse in commodities prices
 and the deepening global financial crisis, GDP growth slowed to 3.2% in 2008. A GDP decline of 2-3%
 is projected for 2009 and 1-2% growth expected for 2010.
 4. The government recognizes the importance of the agricultural sector in diversifying economic
 growth, reducing rural poverty and in contributing to improved food security. The government has
 placed a high priority on agricultural sector development as voiced by the President in his address to
 the nation in 2008: “The agricultural industrial complex should become the most important and
 highly remunerative branch of the economy”. The government has consistently increased budget
 allocations to the sector since 2001 and plans further increases in 2009-2011. The government also
 recognizes the need to increase value added in the sector and envisages the development of large
 scale vertically integrated input supply, production and processing systems such as the proposed
 “cotton cluster” in Southern Kazakhstan.
 5. This study examines what adjustments could be made to the government’s substantial
 program of support to the sector to enhance its effectiveness and efficiency. It describes the
 current structure and performance of the agricultural sector, describes the government’s strategy
 for the sector, analyses trends in past and planned public spending, provides an assessment of the
 economic rationale behind the strategy and specific programs, examines arrangements for execution
 and monitoring the performance of the programs and provides recommendations to improve the
 their effectiveness and efficiency.




                                                                                                       1
II.   Sector Overview
  Performance
  6. Agricultural growth has generally been strong but agriculture’s share in total GDP has lagged
  behind many other sectors of the economy. Annual growth in agriculture accelerated to an average
  of 7.3 percent per annum in 2005-2007. The amount of arable land, hay fields, and pastures, has
  increased steadily in recent years. Between 2001 and 2008, agricultural labor productivity increased
  by 24%. However, productivity growth in agriculture has not kept pace with real wage growth. In
  this context, the share of agriculture in Kazakhstan’s GDP has declined (Figure 1). The share of
  employment in agriculture has also declined somewhat in recent years, from 36 percent of the
  population in 2005 to 30 percent in 2008, but remains quite significant (Figure 2). All data for this
  section is provided in annex 1.
  7. Agricultural employment remained fairly steady between 2001 and 2008 . Agriculture’s share in
  total employment fell from 36% to 30% during this period, as employment in some other sectors
  increased. This demonstrates that there has not been substantial migration out of the agricultural
  sector into the energy and construction related sectors, where the majority of new jobs have been
  created during this period, or elsewhere.
  8. Labor productivity in agriculture increased by 24% between 2001 and 2008 (Figure 3) but not
  to the same extent as in other sectors (53%). Consequently, disparity between incomes in the
  agricultural sector and other sectors increased as illustrated in Table 1. In an economy where almost
  one third of the population is employed in agriculture, this has important social consequences and
  provides further justification for the government’s prioritization of the agricultural sector.
  9. The declining share of agriculture in the national economy and increasing income disparity is
  not unexpected, particularly in a resource-wealthy growing economy. Figure 4 and Figure 5 show
  the share of agriculture in the economy for other countries. There are only a few countries in the
  world where income per capita in agriculture kept par with income per capita in the whole economy.
  These countries, such as New Zealand, managed to expand production of high value agricultural
  products. Nevertheless, Kazakhstan has an opportunity to minimize such income disparity by further
  increasing agricultural labor productivity and creating opportunities for migration out of the
  agricultural sector.
  Figure 1 Agricultural GDP and its share in total GDP




  Source: Adapted from Statistical Yearbook Kazakhstan




                                                                                                     2
Figure 2 Agricultural employment




Source: Statistical Yearbook Kazakhstan

Figure 3 Agricultural labor productivity




Source: Adapted from Statistical Yearbook Kazakhstan


Table 1 Disparity between agriculture and other sectors




Source: Statistical Yearbook of Kazakhstan

Note: The share of agricultural GDP in total GDP divided by the share of agricultural employment in total employment, can
serve as a proxy for income disparity. The coefficient would be one, if income per person employed in the agricultural
sector was the same on average as income per person employed in other sectors. A coefficient smaller than one, indicates
income disparity. This coefficient is low and declining. The only year without an increase in income disparity was the year
2007, during which worldwide agricultural prices soared.




                                                                                                                          3
Figure 4 Share of agriculture and income per capita




Figure 5 Agriculture GDP in total GDP in%

               12


               10


                8
  Percentage




                                                                        world
                6                                                       Midlde income
                                                                        Kazakhstan
                4


                2


                0
                2000   2001   2002   2003   2004   2005   2006   2007


Source: World Bank Development Indicators

Farm Structure and Productivity
10. The sector is highly heterogeneous in terms of farm structure and productivity and so average
data across regions and farm types gives quite limited information. The Northern region is
dominated by larger farms specialized in crops production, whereas smaller mixed farms, which
include substantial meat and dairy production for the domestic market, predominate in the South.
The total agricultural land area increased by about 6% between 2003 and 2007 including, growth of
4% in the area of arable land and 6% in the areas of hayfields and pastures. The share of agricultural
land farmed by agricultural enterprises has declined from 59% to 50% during 2003-2007, while land
farmed by individual farms has increased from 41% to 49%. Individual farmers have slightly reduced
their arable land (by 0.14 million ha) while increasing their hayfields and pastures (by 8.47 million
ha) between 2003 and 2007. In contrast agricultural enterprises have increased their arable area (by
0.92 million ha) and decreased their hayfields and pastures (by 5.14 million ha) (Figure 6).




                                                                                                    4
11. Agricultural enterprise output per ha has
increased faster than that of individual farms.                 Text Box 1 Farm Structure
While the share of agricultural land area farmed
                                                                Based on their legal status, there are three farm
by enterprises has declined, their share of
                                                                types in Kazakhstan: Agricultural Enterprises (AE)
output increased slightly from 23% to 27%
                                                                are incorporated farms, such as joint stock
between 2003 and 2007. In contrast, while the                   companies, limited liability partnerships, and
share of agricultural land farmed by individual                 cooperatives. Individual Farms (IF) (also called
farms has increased, their share in output                      peasant or family farms). They are physical rather
declined slightly from 27% to 24%. This suggests                than legal persons. Both AEs and IFs are legally
a higher rate of improvement of productivity in                 registered and are considered to have a
agricultural enterprises than in individual farms.              commercial purpose. Household Plots (HPs) are
                                                                not registered. They are managed by families that
12. Household plots produced a consistent and                   cultivate the small vegetable gardens around their
high percentage of total output - 50% between                   houses and raise small number of animals, mainly
2003 and 2007. This was mainly in the form of                   for personal consumption. They are considered to
meat, of which they produced over 80% of                        be subsistence rather than commercial farms.
output, and milk, of which they produced over                   Table 2 shows the area, output and employment
90% of output. Household plot owners farm                       of the different farm types.
only a small proportion of agricultural land
                                                                Starting around the year 1992, huge holdings in
(1%), but have access to pastures and, in some
                                                                agriculture have emerged. This is not reflected in
cases, may have access to fodder or feed from
                                                                the statistics. A holding consists of a hierarchical
larger farms in exchange for labor. It is                       structure and contains a number of agricultural
important that the contribution of household                    enterprises. These are often involved in input
plots to agricultural output is recognized in                   supply and processing. These holdings are
formulating agricultural policy.                                concentrated in the grain sector but also act in
                                                                other sectors such as the dairy sector and fruit
13. The relative profitability of different farm
                                                                and vegetable sectors. Unfortunately, there is no
types is not clear. Over 20% of farms were                      information on the exact number. According to
unprofitable in 2007 (Table 3). Unfortunately,                  Akimbekov (2006) about 40 holding companies
there is no disaggregation of this data by farm                 operate in the grain sector and some of them are
size, location, or cropping pattern to indicate                 very large, owning up to 1 million ha of arable
whether low profitability was a particular                      land. According to estimates, these holdings
feature of one farm type or whether it was                      control about 30% of crop land and provide for
common across all farm types. Evidence from                     about two third of all grain sold including, both
Ukraine4 suggests that low profitability is more                domestic and international sales (Wandel, 2008).
likely to be a result of the quality of
management rather than farm size.
Table 2 Farm Structure (2004)
                                                                   Commercial                          Subsistence
                                                    Agric. Enterprises    Individual Farms          Household Plots
    Number                                               4,600 (0.2 %)      156,000 (7.2 %)         2,000,000 (92.6%)
    Labor Force (‘000)                                      326 (14%)           280 (11.7 %)              1,782 (75%)
    Agricultural Land (‘000 ha)                         43,420 (56 %)       34,228 (44.3 %)                325 (0.4 %)
    Arable Land (‘000 ha)                               12,921 (59 %)         8,816 (41.2 %)                 231 (1 %)
    Arable land area/ farm                                  2,808.9 ha               56.5 ha                    0.1ha
    No. employees/farm                                            70.9                   1.8                       0.9
    Gross Agricultural Output (bn. KZT)                     171 (24 %)            178 (25 %)               349 (50 %)
Source: National Statistics Committee Note: Labor force in individual farms and household plots is probably
underestimated




4
    National Statistics Committee of Ukraine 2001
                                                                                                                       5
Table 3 Share of farms which were unprofitable in Kazakhstan in 2007

                                  2003            2004           2005            2006            2007
    Percentage of farms            28.4            42.2          47.9            38.8             22.6
Source: Statistical Yearbook of Kazakhstan 2007

Figure 6 Agricultural land and land use by farm categories




Source: Statistical Yearbook of Kazakhstan 2007

14. Processed food production has increased since 20085 but there is still potential for further
expansion. Processed food production in 2007 remained at only 53% of the 1990 level, and 80% of
food sold to consumers was unprocessed. Under its “Concept for Development of the Agro-
industrial Complex 2006 -2010” the government is supporting, through subsidies and credits, the
development of large vertically integrated units that involve both agricultural production and
processing.

Key Challenges in the Agricultural Sector
15. The government recognizes the considerable potential of the agricultural sector, and has
prioritized its development. Comparisons of productivity in similar environments, and between
farms in Kazakhstan, suggest that there is indeed great potential to increase farm productivity. For
example, average wheat yields in similar conditions in Canada reach almost double those of
Kazakhstan. There is also clearly potential to increase value added through investment in processing,
which is another key priority of government.


5
 Wandel, J.,2008, Agroholdings or Clusters in Kazakhstan’s Agri-Food Sector. Paper presented at the Forum, Halle,
Germany
                                                                                                                    6
   16. The government faces a number of challenges in designing spending programs which will
   promote competitiveness, while at the same time protecting the incomes of rural inhabitants,
   some of whom are dependent on the land and have few employment opportunities in other sectors,
   at least in the short term. These challenges include:
            Facilitating structural change, in terms of land ownership and management, so that the land
       is managed by the most efficient operators, while protecting individuals’ land rights and the
       livelihoods of those who are dependent on the land.
           A special challenge is to unleash the significant potential of the vast drylands and pastures
       for improved livestock production.
           Ensuring the provision of credit for working capital and investment to agricultural
       enterprises, individual farms and household plots, some of which are costly to administer
       because they are small, dispersed across an enormous geographical area and susceptible to high
       risk.
          Ensuring the provision of agricultural inputs and machinery to meet the needs of both large
       scale extensive wheat production and small scale agriculture.
          Rehabilitating the irrigation and drainage infrastructure and establishing financially
       sustainable arrangements for management of the on-farm, and off-farm systems. While
       investment in many of these schemes offer high economic returns, the government faces the
       challenge of how to deal with those schemes which are less economically viable but critical to
       the livelihoods of those using them.
         Providing essential public services to the private sector, including advisory services, research
       and extension, market information, sanitary and phytosanitary inspection, veterinary services
       and disease control, all of which will be critical to increasing competitiveness.
          Increasing value added in the agricultural sector. Facilitating investment in agricultural
       processing and increasing its competitiveness in former CIS, EU and other markets, which
       increasingly demands higher standards in terms of quality and food safety.
   17. The study now examines the government’s approach to dealing with these challenges.

III.   Strategy
   18. The preparation of a Strategic Plan for the Agricultural Sector for the Period 2009-2011 by the
   MOA is commendable. Only a few governments worldwide publish such a document for the sector.
   The Strategic Plan 2009-2011 sets out the government’s overall approach to improving sector
   performance. Measures to be implemented under the Strategic Plan are elaborated in the Set of
   Measures for Sustainable Development of the Agro-Industrial Complex of the Republic of
   Kazakhstan for the Period 2009-2011.
   19. Three Strategic Directions are indicated in the Strategic Plan; Strategic Direction One focuses
   on agriculture, while the other two deal with natural resource management and rural development
   as follows:
          Strategic Direction One: “Sustainable development of the agro-industrial complex sectors,
       increasing their competitiveness, ensuring food security and adaptation of agrarian production
       to the WTO accession conditions”.
          Strategic Direction Two: Preservation, rational use and rehabilitation of forest resources,
       fauna resources, natural reserve objects as well as establishment of conditions for sustainable
       water supply and efficient water management.



                                                                                                        7
       Strategic Direction Three: Establishment of normal conditions for rural welfare based on
    optimization of rural settlements, ensuring growth of rural territories’ capacity through
    integrated rural development.
20. These strategic directions highlight the role of the MOA in dealing with social and environmental
issues as well as economic development issues. Almost all agricultural programs in the Strategic
Plan, are aligned under Strategic Direction One6. Accordingly, the socio economic analysis of
programs in section IV of this study examines the performance of agricultural programs in achieving
Strategic Direction One, whilst recognizing their possible contribution to other social objectives set
out under Strategic Directions Two and Three.
21. Strategic Direction One, which relates to agriculture, actually deals with three different strategic
sub-directions:
             Competitiveness
             Food security
             Accession to the World Trade Organization (WTO).
22. The Strategic Sub-Directions of increased competitiveness and accession to WTO are sensible
and complementary. The first strategic sub-direction ‘increasing competitiveness’ and the third
strategic sub-direction ‘adaption of agrarian production to the WTO accession conditions’ are
complementary and completely in line with international good practice. WTO requires an open trade
regime and decoupling of state support for the sector from production, both of which will contribute
to increased competitiveness.
23. The Strategic Sub-Direction of food security is also a sensible but it would be better to
measure food security in terms of ability to pay for food at household level rather than in terms of
achievement of a standard level of import dependence which is currently the case. Absolute
availability of food is highly unlikely to be a constraint in Kazakhstan as discussed further under para.
59.
24. The three Strategic Sub-Directions are then linked to three Goals, one dealing with production-
based food security, the second dealing with productivity growth (competitiveness), and the third
dealing with the development of infrastructure and technical support.
25. The goal of WTO accession receives little attention in the specific proposals of the Strategy.
Having presented WTO access as being part of the overall Strategic Direction, there is no further
mention of WTO access, neither at the Goal nor at the Task level. Thus, there is no presentation of
measures to be put in place to achieve accession to WTO.
26. A major weakness in the Strategic Plan is that the situation analysis is narrow. Consequently,
the Strategic Plan does not adequately describe the key challenges and lacks a strategic approach
to addressing them. The situation analysis focuses exclusively on production, with little or no
information on the socio-economic or environmental aspects of agriculture. The situation analysis
also should address a number of questions under each of the strategic sub directions as a foundation
for the design of programs, for example:
        What is the structure of the sector in terms of farm type and the respective contribution of
         various farm types to agricultural output and employment? There is no information in the
         situation analysis on the nature and numbers of different types of farm structure
         (agricultural enterprises, individual farms, household plots). Since 2000, there has been
         substantial change in farm structures, with individual farms having increased from just over
         76,000 to more than 169,000. It is important to understand the dynamics taking place and to

6
  The exception to this are two small programs under strategic direction 3 which involve provision of microcredit which
may include some agricultural lending and some equity contributions to Kazagro but these amount to about only 1% of the
total MOA Budget.
                                                                                                                     8
    understand the economics which is driving change in agriculture. There is also no mention of
    household-based activities which provide the vast majority of livestock production.
   In relation to competitiveness - Where does Kazakhstan’s potential comparative advantage
    lie? What are the weakness in the land, credit, input, machinery markets, agricultural
    services, infrastructure and processing which are constraining achievement of Kazakhstan’
    comparative advantage? What are the barriers to private sector provision in these markets
    and how can government reduce these barriers? Which market failures would government
    intervention in these markets address?
   In relation to food security - Who are most vulnerable to food insecurity? What is the nature
    of the food security threat to these people – inadequate availability of food or inadequate
    income to purchase food? How can the incomes of vulnerable groups be increased in times
    of crisis and in long term? What is the role of the subsistence agriculture in alleviating food
    insecurity.
   In relation to Accession to WTO – which international standards in terms of sanitary and
    phytosanitary standards does Kazakhstan adhere to and where is further development
    required? which types of programs would cause Kazakhstan to exceed the levels of direct
    support allowable under WTO.




                                                                                                 9
IV.   The Spending Program
A. Budget Analysis
  27. This study examines the MOA budget which is disbursed through Kazagro and other
  organizations as described in para. 30 The MOA budget includes agriculture, forestry and hunting,
  fisheries and potable water. Where the report refers to the MOA agricultural budget, this means the
  MOA budget excluding, forestry, fisheries and potable water. All data are in current prices unless
  otherwise stated. The analysis examines budgeted amounts for all years. Budgeted and actual
  spending for MOA were very similar in all years except 2008, when MOA spending was
  supplemented by 31bn KZT from the reserve fund that was allocated through Kazagro.
  28. The MOA budget allocation was 139 bn. KZT in 2008. The report does not cover other sources of
  funding for the agricultural sector, specifically, Kazagro’s external borrowing and funds allocated to it
  from the national fund. In 2008, total Kazagro funding amounted to $1.2 billion, 70% of which came
  from external and domestic borrowing. In 2009, Kazagro received 120 bn. KZT from the national
  fund.

  MOA Budget Trends
  29. Large increases in the MOA budget have taken place since 2001, reflecting the Government’s
  increased prioritization of agriculture during the last eight years (Figure 7). The MOA budget as a
  percentage of agricultural GDP has increased from 9% in 2001 to 21% in 2008 (Figure 8). MOA
  budget allocations (inclusive of agriculture, forestry, hunting, fishing and the provision of potable
  water) rose from 26.3 bn. KZT in 2001, to 81 bn. KZT in 2005, to 139 bn. KZT in 2008. The average
  annual increase in the MOA budget in real terms between 2002 and 2008 was 17%, although this
  number has declined from 20% in 2002 to 6% in 2008, and is projected to decline to 2% by 2011.
  However, the budget for 2009 has already been supplemented by an off-budget allocation of 120 bn.
  KZT from the National Fund under the Crisis Program. This is provided as a credit line through
  Kazagro, and almost doubles the public spending for agriculture in 2009.
  Figure 7 MOA agricultural budget in nominal and real terms




  Source: Ministry of Agriculture




                                                                                                        10
Figure 8 MOA budget as a percentage of agricultural GDP




Source: Ministry of Agriculture

MOA Agricultural Budget by Organization
30. Figure 9 illustrates which organizations spend the MOA agricultural budget. The Ministry of
Agriculture (MOA) is the formal “Budget Administrator” as defined in the budget law. But, the MOA
transfers budget funds for agriculture to a number of implementing organizations, depending on the
purpose of the funds. These include the state owned enterprise (SOE) Kazagro and its subsidiaries
(Food Contract Corporation (FCC) responsible for output market intervention and more recently
seasonal credit; Kazagrofin responsible for machinery leasing and credit programs; Agricultural
Credit Corporation (ACC) which provides credit; Kazagromarketing mainly responsible for market
information; Fund for Financial Support of Agriculture (FFSA) which provides microfinance; and Mal
Onimdery Corporation responsible for marketing of livestock products); Kazagroinnovation a
separate SOE responsible for research and technology development; the Committee for Water
Resources (CWR) and; local government. A large share of the agriculture budget is therefore
allocated outside of the state treasury system.
31. In 2008, Kazagro accounted for 45% of the MOA agricultural budget. Since its formation as a
state owned holding company in 2007, Kazagro has taken a dominant role in public spending for
agriculture. Kazagro is essentially a development agency which acts as the implementation arm of
the state in the agricultural sector. In addition to appropriations from the budget, Kazagro accesses
loan finance from domestic and international markets. The share of Kazagro spending by Kazagro
subsidiary is shown in Table 4.
32. The share of the MOA agricultural budget allocated through local government is high due to
the fact that the large program of area subsidies and most production subsidies are realized at
sub-national level. In 2008, local government was responsible for implementing 22% of the
agriculture budget. The MOA spends 26% of the budget itself, and the CWR 4%. The CWR also
manages large state budget appropriations for potable water supplies, which are not included in this
part of the analysis.
33. The MOA agricultural budget administered by the MOA itself, is spent on administration and
crop and livestock services, mainly relating to inspections, crop protection, livestock inspection,
livestock disease control and veterinary services.




                                                                                                  11
Figure 9 MOA agricultural budget by organization in 2008




Source: Ministry of Agriculture

Table 4 Kazagro funds from the MOA agricultural budget by subsidiary
Kazagro Subsidiary                                          2007        2008
Kazagrofinance                                                 20%        30%
Food Contract Corporation (FCC)                                25%        33%
Agricultural Credit Corporation (ACC)                          31%        24%
Foundation for Financial Support of Agriculture (FSSA)             6%      6%
Mal Onimderi Corporation                                           4%      2%
Other                                                          13%         6%
Total                                                         100%       100%
Source: Ministry of Agriculture

MOA Budget Trends by Subsector
34. Budgeted expenditure on crop related programs has consistently been substantially higher
than for livestock related programs (Table 5 and Table 6 ). Livestock production contributes almost
as much to agricultural GDP as crop production. While the spending on crops and livestock need not
necessarily be proportionate to their contribution to agricultural GDP, this does suggest the need to
examine the requirements for and the relative efficiency of further public spending in the crops and
livestock sub-sectors. Given that the majority of livestock output is produced by household plot
owners, the relative allocation of spending on crops and livestock strongly influences the distribution
of benefits between farm types.
Table 5 MOA agricultural budget by functional groups (sub-sectors)
                                   2002              2004                2006             2008
 Crops                             55 %              42 %                45 %             40 %
 Livestock                         11 %              14 %                15 %             16 %
 Processing                         0%                1%                  0%               0%
 Cross-sectoral                    34 %              43 %                41 %             43 %
 Total                            100 %             100 %               100 %            100 %
Source: Kazakhstan Statistics Office

                                                                                                    12
Table 6 Agricultural gross output (millions of KZT)
                                     2002           2004               2006                  2008
 Crops                            325,283         391,249            432,492              679,674
 Livestock                        232,107         307,584            420,821              636,750
 Total                            557,390         698,833            853,313            1,316,424
Source: Kazakhstan Statistics Office

MOA Agricultural Budget Expenditure Trends by Functional Category
35. The MOA budget includes four sectoral categories which are agriculture, forestry and hunting,
fisheries and potable water (Table 7). Potable water supply increased from 9% in 2002 to nearly a
quarter of total MOA budget in 2008.
Table 7 MOA budget by sectoral category
                                     2002               2004           2006             2008
 Agriculture                          83%                75%            78%              71%
 Forestry and Hunting                  6%                 5%             5%               5%
 Fisheries                             1%                 1%             1%               1%
 Potable Water                         9%                19%            16%              23%
 Total                               100%               100%           100%             100%
Source: Ministry of Agriculture

36. For the purposes of analyzing the agricultural budget of the MOA, it has been broken down
into functional categories. For the purposes of budget analysis, the 79 programs under agriculture
have been categorised under eight functional categories:

     -    Subsidy Programs (sub-divided into 6 types of subsidy)
     -    Credit Programs
     -    Market Intervention Programs
     -    Crop and Livestock Services
     -    Infrastructure
     -    Research and Extension
     -    Administration
     -    Cross Functional

37. A brief description of some the main types of programs operated under each of these
categories follows:
Subsidy Programs
38. The percentage of budgeted spending on each type of subsidy program is shown in Table 8.
About 20 different subsidy programs are included under this heading, which can be broadly
categorised as follows:

          i) Area subsidies: These are also referred to in the budget as spring field and autumn
          harvesting works subsidies. These are administered by local government. Area subsidies are
          being paid to farmers for 11 crops in 2009 and are intended to cover 82% of arable land.
          Different levels of subsidy for different crops were established in 2009. In the two previous
          years, subsidies were paid as a flat rate for all crops. Different subsidy levels depend on an
          assessment of production costs and the percentage of domestic consumption provided
          through imports (referred to as import dependence). The subsidy rates for different crops
          for 2009 are shown in Table 9.

                                                                                                      13
            ii) Production subsidies: a range of subsidy programs administered by either MOA or local
            government for the provision of subsidies to producers for specific livestock breeding and
            production, seed breeding and multiplication projects, or for the purchase of inputs such as
            fertilizer and fuel. These programs administered by local government are referred to as
            targeted transfers. Some of these programs may also be referred to as input subsidies. The
            majority of these programs are currently for livestock production.

            iii) Interest rate subsidies: Kazagro subsidiaries (Kazagrofinance, Fund for Financial Support
            of Agriculture (FFSA), Agricultural Credit Corporation (ACC) and more recently the Food
            Contract Corporation (FCC)) provide finance at subsidized interest rates supported by the
            Government. These interest rate subsidies are provided under the credit programs described
            separately under para. 39 Interest rates subsidies are provided as follows:

                 -      Kazagrofin provides credit and leasing finance at subsidized interest rates;
                 -      ACC provides loans to farmers at subsidized interest rates;
                 -      FFSA provides microfinance loans to small farmers at subsidized interest rates;
                 -      FCC provides credit for the purchase of fuel and fertilizer for spring planting at
                        subsidized interest rates.

            iv) Irrigation water subsidies: These are administered by local government. Water users (e.g.
            water user associations) are directly reimbursed for a share of the costs of purchasing water
            from the raion level CWR.

            v) Standards subsidies: This small budget item includes subsidies to processors for upgrading
            to meet sanitary standards.

            vi) Insurance subsidies: The MOA assumes a part of the risk of weather-based crop insurance
            provided by private insurance companies7.

Table 8 Breakdown of MOA agricultural budget subsidies
                                                             2007         2008
    i) Area subsidies                                         59%         59%
    ii) Production subsidies of which                         30%         32%
        Livestock production                                  26%         27%
        Crop production                                        4%          5%
    iii) Interest rate subsidies                               5%          5%
    iv) Irrigation water subsidies                             3%          3%
    v) Standards subsidies                                     1%          1%
    vi) Insurance subsidies                                    1%          0%
    Total                                                   100%          100%
Source: Ministry of Agriculture




7
    The WB prepared a technical note on agricultural insurance in 2005.
                                                                                                             14
Table 9 Area subsidies 2009
    Crop                          Crop Area        Subsidy per        Cost of           Subsidy as %       Total
                                  (000 ha)         ha (KZT)           Production/       of production      subsidies
                                                                      Ha (KZT)          costs              (mln. KZT)

    Traditional grain crops              14,718               450             14,763                3%               6,623
    Moisture preserving crops             1,535               900             14,763                6%               1,381
    Corn                                     97             2,500             67,784                4%                 242
    Fodder crops                            442               800             14,236                6%                 353
    Oil crops                               820             4,790             15,753               30%               3,926
    Sugar Beet                               12            40,000            160,291               25%                 496
    Rice                                     84            14,000             74,054               19%               1,173
    Vegetables                               93             9,000            293,644                3%                 836
    Fruit                                    23             3,600            117,532                3%                  81
    Cotton                                  168             7,000            104,356                7%               1,173
    Vineyards                                 9             4,400            147,750                3%                  40
    Potatoes                                 62             2,500            343,539                1%                 154


Source: Ministry of Agriculture

Credit Programs
39. This functional category mainly includes the provision of funds to the Kazagro subsidiaries
(Kazagrofin, FFSA, ACC8) for provision of credit, lease finance and microfinance. The interest rate
subsidies under these programs are described separately under para. 38.
       -   Kazagrofin operates a machinery leasing program and a soft medium-term credit program.9
       -   ACC provides credit lines for agriculture.
       -   FFSA provides microfinance to small farmers directly and through lines of credit for 51
           microcredit organizations, operating in 94 raions.
       -   FCC operates a credit line funded from the National Fund for purchase of fuel and fertilizer
           for spring planting.

Market Intervention Programs
40. This category includes the funding provided to FCC for the purchase, handling and storage of
domestic grain. This is for establishment of a grain reserve, and for buying and selling in the grain
market to stabilize prices, particularly in cases where there is unusually high demand for Kazakh
wheat from exporters, causing a dramatic increase in domestic grain prices such as in 2008.
Crop and Livestock Services
41. This category covers essential public services which include, inspection of processing facilities,
crop protection, livestock inspection, public veterinary services, livestock disease control. The latter
particularly concerns diseases such as brucellosis, foot and mouth disease, anthrax, and rabies,
which are either of great economic importance or potentially transmittable to humans.
Infrastructure
42. This category is mainly rehabilitation of irrigation and drainage systems, related environmental
works and other miscellaneous costs such as MOA building repairs.


8
  FCC have also started providing credit for crop production but this is funded by the National Fund not the MOA budget
and not included in this budget analysis).
9
   Kazagro also operates service stations to maintain local machinery
                                                                                                                          15
Research and Extension
43. This category includes mainly Kazagroinnovation agricultural research program costs and some
minor MOA costs.
Administration
44. This category includes salaries, various administrative costs and training within the MOA and its
local branches.
Cross Functional
45. This category includes counterpart contributions to the operations of some donor funded
projects.
46. The breakdown of the MOA agricultural budget by functional category in 2001 and 2008 is
shown in Figure 10 and Figure 11, respectively. The trend in the budget from 2001 -2011 is shown in
Figure 12.
47. The share of subsidies in the MOA agricultural budget has increased dramatically from 6% in
2001, to 24% in 2008 and is scheduled to increase further to 39% by 2009. Within the subsidy
budget the key projected trends are as follows:
-   The largest share of the subsidy budget goes to area subsidies which represented 59% of
    subsidies in 2008. These are scheduled to decline to 43% in 2009.
-   Production subsidies are now mainly for livestock production (mainly for breeding and feed).
    These are scheduled to increase from 32% of the subsidy budget in 2008 to 47% in 2009.
-   Irrigation water subsidies represent a small percentage of subsidies (3%) and are budgeted to
    remain at this level in 2009.
48. The share of credit programs in the MOA agricultural budget has remained relatively stable
increasing from 24% in 2001 to 27% in 2008.
49. The share of the MOA agricultural budget allocated to market intervention has decreased
from 26% in 2001 to 13% in 2008, and the allocation to infrastructure, mainly irrigation and
drainage, from 16% to 5% during the same period. Other areas of the budget, including
administration and crop and livestock services, have been relatively stable as a share of the budget.
Research, extension and infrastructure have been given low priority in budget allocations.
Figure 10 MOA agricultural budget by functional category in 2001




                                                                                                  16
Source: Ministry of Agriculture

Figure 11 MOA agricultural budget by functional category in 2008




Source: Ministry of Agriculture

Figure 12 MOA agricultural budget by selected functional categories 2001-2011 (Constant 2001 Prices)




Source: Ministry of Agriculture




                                                                                                       17
B. Socio Economic Analysis of the Spending Program
 50. The government has strongly supported the sector by putting in place substantial programs and
 institutional arrangements to provide finance (including micro-finance) machinery, and inputs. It has
 also invested substantially in essential public infrastructure, including irrigation and drainage, and
 public services such as research and development, market information, sanitary and phytosanitary
 inspection and to some extent advisory services. The government has sought to maintain economies
 of scale in the sector by promoting the vertical integration of input supply production and processing
 such as in the “cotton cluster” in the south. These have been substantial and ambitious programs.
 51. In shifting to strategic budget planning in 2007, the government sought to ensure better
 targeting of public spending. This section examines the formulation of the spending program and its
 alignment with the government’s three Strategic Sub-Directions10 of competitiveness, food security
 and accession to the WTO. It also examines the effectiveness and efficiency of the spending program
 in implementing the strategy. It critically examines to what extent the programs bring about
 permanent structural and technological change in the sector to improve competitiveness rather than
 providing temporary financial support to farms; the mechanisms through which the programs
 achieve food security particularly for low income households and; the implications of the programs
 for WTO accession.

 Spending Program Formulation
 52. Partly as a result of weak situation analysis in the Strategic Plan, there is insufficient alignment
 between the budget and the Strategic Plan and inadequate explanation in the Strategic Plan of the
 way in which major programs such as the credit programs and subsidy programs contribute to the
 strategic directions. The lack of alignment with the strategy is largely due to the absence of
 economic analysis, particularly with regard to the main spending programs relating to subsidies and
 credit. Very large amounts of public funds are being spent without clear and evidence-based analysis
 being carried out. For the irrigation and drainage spending program, a feasibility study and
 economic analysis are already built into the system. While there may be questions about the quality
 of the analysis, a system of scrutiny exists and is reasonably transparent. This is not the case for
 subsidy and credit programs.
 53. The large numbers of programs and diversity in size of programs makes it difficult to monitor
 and analyze existing expenditure and outcomes, and to plan new expenditure specifically:
         The MOA Strategic (Budget) Plan 2009-11, has too many programs, 79 in total. This is a
          much larger number than is typically found in agricultural budgets of other countries which
          practice program budgeting. In most such countries, spending activities are clustered around
          6-10 main program areas.
         The MOA’s program budget structure is also somewhat unstable, with substantial changes
          taking place from year to year. For the 2008 MOA budget, there were 46 programs while for
          the 2009-11 budget there are 79 programs.
         Programs in the agriculture budget are extremely varied in size, ranging in value (in 2009)
          from 19 billion KZT (017/732/737 Water Transfers to Regions for Water Supply Systems
          Development) to 165,000 KZT (Government Awards in the Field of Agricultural Science).

     10
        These are the three strategic sub directions under Strategic Direction One in the Strategic Plan:
     “Sustainable development of the agro-industrial complex sectors, increasing their competitiveness,
     ensuring food security and adaptation of agrarian production to the WTO accession conditions”.


                                                                                                      18
Effectiveness and Economic Efficiency
Rationale for the Programs
54. In examining the rationale for a program, is important to: a) identify how the program will
contribute to the stated goal; b) examine whether the program is economically efficient - if it is not,
indicate the social, environmental or other rationale for the program; c) examine whether the
program will bring about permanent structural or technological change to permanently increase
productivity; d) identify the market failure which the program is intended to address, which justifies
the need for public intervention; e) examine whether the program reduces or at least does not
exacerbate income disparity; f) examine adherence to WTO rules; g) examine the costs of
administering the program; h) examine whether it is more or less economically efficient than
alternative measures in achieving the same goal.
55. Before discussing the specific programs, it is useful to further discuss some of the government’s
common rationales for the spending programs11 - these include: improved competitiveness or
efficiency of production, food security, rural employment, promotion of new technology and
promotion of processing.
56. Financial and economic efficiency rationale: There is often a misunderstanding of the meaning
of financial efficiency and economic efficiency. Financial efficiency refers to the profitability of a
business entity (e.g. a farmer), while economic efficiency refers to the profitability of the economy
as a whole (i.e. the whole of society)12. Subsidies involve a transfer from one part of society
(taxpayers) to another (e.g. farmers). While a subsidy may yield net benefits for farmers, they do not
necessarily yield net benefits for society as a whole.
57. For example, a subsidy on fertilizer prices, will reduce the costs of wheat production for a
farmer and his business may be more financially profitable (financially efficient) as a result.
However, this does not mean that the subsidy increases the economic efficiency of production. The
subsidy is paid for by taxpayers and so the costs to society of producing wheat has not changed. If
the value of additional wheat produced as a result of the subsidy is less than the cost to society of
producing the additional wheat, which includes the cost of the subsidy, then there is no economic
gain to society and the subsidy can be consider economically inefficient. This is likely to be the case
when a subsidy results in farmers cultivating marginal quality land, which it would not be financially
profitable to cultivate in the absence of a subsidy.
58. The economic costs and benefits of subsidy programs needs to be compared with those of
alternative uses of public funds. In this respect it is important to bear in mind that some public
investments such as investment in research or public infrastructure may yield benefits for many
years to come, whereas any benefits to producers from a subsidy only occur in the year in which
they are provided. For example, if government were to subsidize the price of a water saving
technology, with the objective of promoting the new technology, this should be compared with
investment of the same funds in research into water saving technology. Subsidizing the price of a
new water saving technology does not change the price of the technology to society, but investment
of the same public funds in research, might bring down the cost of the technology to society
permanently.
59. Food security rationale: Government’s key concern should be the ability of low income
households to pay for food. The physical availability of domestically produced and imported food
is not a constraint in Kazakhstan. Improved food security is indicated as one of the goals of the
subsidy programs. There are several questions which it is reasonable for a government to consider in
developing its food security policy.

11
  Described in government’s comments on earlier drafts of this report.
12
  For example, the analysis of investment projects normally provides an assessment of the financial viability of for example
an irrigation and drainage project for farmers and an assessment of the economic viability of the investment for the
economy.
                                                                                                                         19
    a) Is there a threat to the physical availability of food at national, regional and household level?
       There is not a threat to food security in the case of Kazakhstan. Kazakhstan is a major
       international exporter of wheat. Although it is a net importer of a wide range of agricultural
       fresh and processed products (meat, dairy products, vegetables, potatoes), it has good
       access to and established trading relationships with international markets, numerous
       borders with Russia, the Central Asian States and China as well as access to the Caspian Sea
       ports. It also has a storage, road and rail network which is sufficient to ensure that
       domestically produced and imported food can be distributed to all regions and households.
       In addition to food, which is traded domestically and imported, rural households fulfil part of
       their nutritional needs from household plot production.
    b) Ability to pay for food at national and household level: Kazakhstan is an oil rich country with
       more than sufficient foreign reserves to pay for food imports. The government’s main
       concern in relation to food security should be the ability to pay for food at household level.
       For the very poor, this may be a long term problem and the appropriate policy response is to
       set an appropriate level of social safety net. For the less poor, this may be a transitional
       problem caused through food price fluctuations and periods of economic recession. The
       appropriate policy response in this case may be a temporary expansion of the criteria for
       those qualifying for social safety net payments. An additional approach, practised in some
       countries, is to establish national stocks for intervention in the market to influence prices. To
       be effective these need to be large enough to influence market prices and markets need to
       be sufficiently competitive that there is price response to the increased volume on the
       market. In a relatively small economy, with an open trade regime, where prices are largely
       determined by international prices, this may not be an effective strategy for all products.
       The decision on how much and when to release reserves onto the market also requires
       careful judgement. Adjustment of the criteria for qualification for the social safety net may
       therefore be a more straightforward solution. A more permanent long term solution, is to
       promote programs which are targeted at raising the incomes of the rural poor, including
       small farmer, so that they can afford to buy more food.
60. Furthermore, programs which aim to increase wheat domestic production in an economy with a
free trade regime like Kazakhstan, will anyway, not affect the total supply on the domestic market
(only the proportion which is domestically produced) or market price and so will not affect food
security.
61. Other non-efficiency rationale: As in many fast growing oil rich economies, the Kazakh
government faces a major challenge in addressing increasing income disparities between urban and
rural populations. In such cases, agricultural subsidy programs are often used as a means of
temporary income support, until such times as other opportunities emerge in the non-farm sector.
In well developed economies, governments have various other non-efficiency objectives in mind
when designing agricultural policies, such as maintaining employment in rural areas to preserve rural
communities or ensuring the stewardship of natural habitats and landscapes.
62. These all provide a valid rationale for agricultural support programs. For strategic planning
purposes, it is important, firstly, that the non-efficiency rationale for such programs is clearly stated
in the sector strategy and program designs, so that the program can be properly evaluated; and
secondly that a thorough assessment is made of whether the program is the least costly and most
effective way of achieving that non-efficiency objective. For example, direct income support or
funding for retraining, may provide a more effective means of supporting rural incomes and
facilitating a shift to the non farm sector than agricultural subsidy programs, which may actually
impede restructuring of the sector and migration to the non farm sector.
63. This section now examines some of the specific programs in more detail.



                                                                                                      20
Area Subsidies
64. Area subsidies will be paid for 11 crops in 2009 at a total cost of 18 million KZT and covering
82% of arable land.
65. Area subsidies are not justified for food security, efficiency or income distribution reasons for
the following reasons:
       Area subsidy programs are intended to address food security by increasing food
    production but the key constraint to food security is poor households’ ability to buy food, not
    insufficient availability of food, as discussed. Furthermore, subsidies are also paid to farmers of
    traditional grain crops, for which Kazakhstan is one of the largest exporting countries in the
    world.

        Area subsidies temporarily provide financial support to farmers, but fail to promote
    productivity (competitiveness) in facilitating structural change (change towards the most
    efficient ownership, management or cropping structures) or technological improvements, and
    so do not increase the efficiency of agricultural production. They simply represent a transfer
    from taxpayers to farmers.

       Area subsidies lead to the cultivation of marginal land which is economically inefficient -
    an area subsidy means that land which would not be financially viable and excessively risky for
    farmers without a subsidy, becomes financially viable for the individual farmer. Society therefore
    pays the farmer to cultivate marginal land which generates a loss to the economy.

       Area subsidy programs exacerbate income disparities because larger farmers will capture a
    relatively higher proportion of the subsidies than smaller farmers. The main beneficiaries are
    those farmers who use a large area of land and those who have better soils. The quality of soil
    plays a role because sugar beet production, for which the payment per hectare is by far the
    highest, requires the best soils. Thus, the present system does little to improve the income of
    the poorest section of farmers who make their living from household plots.

66. Differentiated crop area payments are even less efficient than flat rate area payments. Crop
specific area payments in 2009 vary between 450 KZT/ha for wheat and 40 000 KZT/ha for sugar
beets, a shift from the flat rate payments in previous years. The key determinants of the level of
subsidy are, a) the level of import dependency and b) production costs, although these factors do
not explain the differences which range from 450 KZT/ ha to 40 000 KZT/ha or from 0.7 to 29.9% of
production costs (Table 9). These subsidies are even less efficient than flat rate area payment for the
following reasons:
        Differentiated area payments tend to favor the production of crops in which Kazakhstan is
    not highly competitive. Because these crops are unprofitable in the absence of subsidies,
    domestic production is inadequate to meet domestic demand and the economy is therefore
    more dependent on imports. Since import dependency is one of the key criteria for setting area
    subsidy rates, these crops tend to have higher area payment rates than for crops which
    Kazakhstan can produce competitively. Take for example the high area subsidy paid for growing
    sugar beet. Sugar beet production was on average loss making each year between 2004 to 2007,
    in spite of high world market prices in 2005, 2006 and 2007. The high subsidy for sugar
    production of 25% of production costs, encourages more production of a crop which is
    unprofitable for society as a whole, i.e. economically unprofitable. This runs contrary to the
    objective of budgetary policies, aimed at promoting productivity and competitiveness in the
    agricultural sector.



                                                                                                     21
       The most damaging impact of different area subsidies for different crops is that they delay
    structural adjustment of the sector, both in terms of cropping and farm ownership - subsidies
    mask market signals and slow down the sector’s natural adjustment to production of crops in
    which the sector is most competitive. Furthermore, they mask the inefficiency of some
    producers who in the absence of subsidies would naturally leave the sector and lease their land
    to more efficient producers.

       Differentiated area payments are even less compatible with WTO rules than flat rate area
    payments. Kazakhstan applied for WTO membership in 1996. Currently, only negotiations with
    three members of the working group are open. There is a serious concern that WTO
    membership will be delayed if the domestic policy changes after application are not in line with
    WTO rules. Differentiated area payments are not in line with WTO rules as they distort input use
    and production.

67. The increase in the proportion of agricultural spending on subsidies and the relative decline in
the proportion of spending on public service provision between 2001 and 2009 is dramatic and
may have led to a decline in the economic return on public spending in the sector. Given the often
high economic return on investment in essential public services and infrastructure and the often low
economic return on investment in subsidy programs, the overall efficiency of public spending in the
sector may well have declined.
68. The present amount of ‘amber box’ measures surpasses the allowed WTO De-Minims-Rule by
a large margin. This rule states that non-product specific agricultural support should not be higher
than 5% of the value of agricultural production, and that product related payments should not be
higher than 5% of the value of the product under consideration. According to calculations by the
Department in the MOA, which is in charge of preparing for WTO negotiations, total payments for
the period 2006 -2008 have already surpassed 10%, and the steep increase in subsidies in 2009 will
widen the gap further. Hence, WTO accession will require a significant change in policy on
agricultural subsidies. While the acceptable levels of amber box measures for any country are
negotiable, experience shows that it is highly unlikely that Kazakhstan would be able to negotiate
levels of direct support exceeding 10%, for either non-specific or specific product groups. China was
required to reduce support to 8.5%, even though most members at the time of negotiation had
levels of support which were higher than this.
69. There are not strong incentives for those local organizations responsible for program
management to provide the reliable information required to implement programs effectively and
efficiently. Local authorities, MOA local units and more recently oblast administrations have been
delegated responsibility for many aspects of program management. While no assessment of the
accuracy of information provided by these organizations has been undertaken for this study, in
theory, they have limited incentives to invest time in ensuring the accuracy of information about
beneficiary farmers, which is necessary for effective management. Such information could
potentially result in lower allocated subsidies to the region. Take, for example, the area subsidy
program for specific crops. The farmer has to inform the Rayon and Oblast Administration about the
area cropped, but both the farmers and the Administrations may have an incentive to inflate this
information to secure a larger transfer of funds to the region. Apart from poor incentives, there are
practical difficulties in measuring actual crop areas planted by each farmer.
Production Subsidies
70. Production subsidies are to increase significantly under the 2009-20011 budgets. Most of these
subsidies are allocated through Oblast Administrations for well defined activities such as livestock
breeding or seeds production. Livestock production has a high priority under this type of subsidy.
Rates paid for some of these programs in 2007 to 2011 are shown in Table 10.


                                                                                                  22
Table 10 Product subsidies for livestock
 KZT/ Kg              2007        2008     2009    2010      2011
 Beef                    90      125.5     134.5   134.5     134.5
 Pork                    88         98        98      98        98
 Wool                                       142     142       142
 Poultry meat            47         66        66      66        66
 Milk                                6        12      12        12
Source: Ministry of Agriculture

71. The government’s rationale for production subsidies is to improve food security but it is
unlikely that these programs will affect the key factors determining food security: a) a product
subsidy will result in some increased domestic production, which may substitute for imports, but the
overall supply of the product to the market will remain unchanged; b) the market price, in a
relatively small economy with an open trade regime price like Kazakhstan, will be determined by the
import price plus import tariff rather than domestic supply, so the program is unlikely to influence
the market price; and c) unless the target product is one which is mainly produced by the rural poor
who have least food security, their incomes will not be affected.
72. Such programs are difficult and costly to administer unless there is a natural bottleneck
through which all products pass (such as for processing units for sugar or cotton), where the volume
of production can be easily measured. The European Union had an extremely bad experience with
product subsidies even for products with a natural bottleneck in the marketing chain. Production of
durum wheat, olive oil and tomatoes, for example, was highly over-reported by farmers or
processors in order to earn higher subsidies.
73. There are obvious negative distributional effects of a production subsidy. The higher the
volume of production (i.e. the richer the beneficiary), the higher the payments received. Poor people
will only benefits if market prices decline as a consequence of the subsidies, but this will be unlikely
in an economy with a relatively open trade regime.
74. In common with area subsidies (as discussed under para. 65), product subsidies do not serve
to promote productivity growth or competitiveness of producers since they do not create
incentives for greater efficiency or bring about permanent structural or technological change.
75. Production subsidies are classified as ‘amber box’ in WTO terminology and are not consistent
with WTO rules.




                                                                                                     23
Text Box 2 Comparison of Support Total Support to the Agricultural Sector

The OECD publication “Agricultural Policies in Emerging Economies” examines the total support to the
agricultural sector and the composition of this support, in the some of the main emerging economies (
China, Russian, Ukraine, Brazil, South Africa and Chile) and OECD countries. The Total Support Estimate
(TSE) is measured as a percentage of gross farm receipts and disaggregated into: a) Producer Support
Estimate (PSE) which includes, market price support (tariffs, export guarantees, guaranteed prices), output
based payments and input based subsidies and b) General Service Support Estimate (GSSE).

PSE: The level of PSE in emerging economies was 4% in Chile, 6% in Brazil and South Africa, 9% in China and
Ukraine and 14% in Russia 14% - considerably less than an average of 26% in OECD countries - between
2005-2007.

In emerging economies PSE mainly takes the form of market price support (MPS), mainly in the form of
import protection, with only Brazil ,Russia and Ukraine providing payments output based payments. In
contrast to OECD countries, input based payments are also a major form of support in emerging
economies.

The level of PSE in emerging economies dropped between 2006 and 2007 due to a decline in market price
support (Text Box Table 1). In Chile and South Africa, this was driven by substantial decreases in unit rates of
market price support (-38% and -65% respectively), while in other countries it was driven by a decline in the
quantity of output supported.

With respect to changes in the type of producer support used, output based payments declined in
importance in Chile and South Africa while they increased in importance as a form of support in other
emerging economies.

Text Box Table 1
 Country              Percentage Change in PSE 2006 to 2007
 Brazil                                                -4.9%
 Chile                                                 -5.2%
 China                                                   -3%
 Russia                                               -22.6%
 South Africa                                         -47.6%
 Ukraine                                              -56.6%
 OECD                                                  -3.9%

The extent to which policies create disincentives for producers to change their production mix in response
to market prices, can be gauged by looking at the proportion of PSE provided as single commodity transfers
(SCT). In OECD countries, SCT fell from 74% in 1995-97 to 59% in 2005-07. In the emerging economies, SCTs
represent a low proportion of PSE in Chile and China (<30%) but a high proportion in Brazil and Ukraine
(around 50%). Text Box Figure 1 shows the relative importance of PSE measures which most severely
distort production decisions, in OECD and emerging countries.

Text Box Figure 1 Producer Support Estimates as a Percentage of Gross Farm Receipts


                                                          Blue- Other support in the PSE


                                                           Red Most distorting support in PSE




                                                                                                              24
Source: Agricultural Policies in Emerging Economies, OECD, 2009
 Text Box 2 continued..

 GSSE: GSSE includes research, extension and training, inspection, infrastructure, marketing and promotion,
 and public stockholding. Many of these represent investments that increase the long term competitiveness
 of agriculture rather than provide short term transfers to producers as is the case for PSE type support.
 In the six emerging economies, a greater proportion of TSSE is provided by GSSE than in OECD countries –
 about half in South Africa, about one- third in Chile and about one quarter in Brazil and China. The relative
 importance of GSSE in support has increased in South Africa and Chile but decreased in Brazil and China and
 remained stable in Russia.
 Investment in infrastructure is a major form of GSSE in emerging economies. In Chile and South Africa,
 Research and Extension spending is also important, in Russian and Ukraine spending on inspection has
 increased significantly, while in China public stockholding is important.

 TSE: TSE as a percentage of GDP is about 1% for OECD countries. In China, it has risen from 1.5% in 1995-97
 to 2.0% in 2005-07. In Ukraine, it represents about 2.5, while in Chile, Brazil, Russia and South Africa it
 represents less than 1%.


Credit Programs
76. Credit programs amounted to 27% of the MOA budget in 2008. MOA spending on credit
programs is mainly for the provision of funds to the Kazagro subsidiaries (Kazagrofin, FFSA, ACC) for
the provision of credit , lease finance and microfinance. In the case of FFSA, this involves the
provision of lines of credit to micro-credit organizations for on-lending to small farmers.
77. It is recognized that in the current financial sector climate, a substantial increase in agricultural
lending from private financial institutions is unlikely. In the medium term, there is much greater
potential for increased lending from private financial institutions but this will not be realized as
long as private lenders are crowded out by dominant subsidized state credit programs.
Agricultural lending is problematic by nature due to the risks associated with climatic variation and
disease incidence, the high costs of acquiring reliable information about borrowers and high
monitoring costs, particularly for small farmers. Nevertheless, the private sector has developed
innovative approaches (warehousing receipt schemes, crop insurance, social collateral based
lending, rotating savings and loan schemes) to overcome these constraints in many countries and
some of these approaches have also been used by the private sector in Kazakhstan (Text Box 3).
Further support to development and expansion of such mechansims in Kazakhstan would encourage
more private sector lending for agriculture. A substantial expansion of private sector lending to
agriculture in the short term is unlikely in the current financial sector climate. However, in the
medium term, there is much potential for expansion of private sector lending, which is currently
crowded out by the dominance of subsidized state credit programs.
78. The capture of the least risky borrowers by Kazagro subsidiaries operating state credit
programs, means that private sector lenders are left to serve the least creditworthy borrowers.
Consequently, their interest rates are higher and their credit volumes much lower, than would be
the case in the absence of such dominant state credit programs.
79. The restrictions on Kazagro subsidiaries in setting different interest rates for different
investments based on risk assessment, creates a disincentive for them to lend to high risk – high
profit investments, which can be important drivers of innovation and progress in the sector. A
proper assessment of the cash flow requirements and risk associated with such investments as well
as adequate provision of collateral, would allow such investments to be financed, if Kazagro
subsidiaries had greater flexibility in setting differential interest rates.
80. The government has put in place institutional arrangements to provide some credit to small
borrowers and encourage the development of microcredit organizations (MCOs). The FFSA
provides microloans for small farmers and rural entrepreneurs including, through credit lines to 51
                                                                                                           25
MCOs. During the first six months of 2009, the FFSA provided credit lines to MCOs totaling KZT
577.55 million for on lending to rural areas, benefiting around 16,000 borrowers. The 2009 budget
for FFSA represented about 5% of the total budget for Kazagro subsidiaries.
81. However, interest rate restrictions create a disincentive for other Kazagro organizations to
lend to smaller borrowers. Small loans incur higher transaction costs per Tenge lent than larger
loans. A private lender would typically increase its interest charges to cover the higher transaction
costs but the Kazagro subsidiaries are restricted from doing this and so have a disincentive to lend to
small borrowers. Interest rate restrictions are commonly based on an assumption that the limiting
factor in credit provision is a lack of demand at market interest rates. Removal of such interest rate
restrictions may reveal that there is a high demand at market interest rates but that the limiting
factor may be limited supply because of the poor quality or the low financial viability of loan
applications. A further assessment of the usefulness of interest rate restrictions in increasing access
to credit is therefore warranted.
82. Kazagrofin provides lease finance at highly subsidized interest rates, which undermines the
private lease and rural finance market and the development of a long term foundation for private
sector financing of farm equipment. Leasing contracts generally last for seven years, but can run up
to 12 years. Beneficiaries have to pay an advance payment of 15-25% and receive the remaining part
as a loan at interest rates as low as 6%, if financed out of the budget allocation. Over time,
KazAgroFin has been able to expand its programs significantly, from 38 bn. KZT in 2008 to 104 bn.
KZT in 2009. The increase has mainly been funded from the National Fund (in 2009) (20.6 bn. KZT at
6 % interest) and foreign borrowing (18 bn. KZT at 12.5 % interest on average). Thus, the interest
rate for leased equipment may be as high as 12.5 % for some borrowers but is nevertheless far
below the market rate of about 18%. This creates a disincentive for private lenders to enter the lease
finance market as they would find it difficult to compete with Kazagrofin’s subsidized interest rates.
83. The Kazagrofin programs include some features which ensure equitable distribution of
benefits from the programs. Kazagrofin programs are required to: a) meet requests from small
farmers as a priority; b) ensure not more than 10 percent of the total purchase of each type of item
is allocated to one lessee and; c) ensure proportional distribution of leasing contracts by the regions.




                                                                                                     26
     Text Box 3 Innovative Approaches to Providing Credit to the Agricultural Sector

     Innovative Lending Products: PRODEM is one of the largest providers of rural finance services in Bolivia. It
     conducted donor supported market research and product development to adapt its range of financial
     products to suit client needs, including financing the needs of small farmers. A customized repayment scheme
     was introduced for small farmers, with a differing repayment schedules to fit the harvest calendars and cash
     flows of individual borrowers. Individual loans were introduced with a collateral ratio requirement of 1.5:1 to
     the loan amount. PRODEM further minimizes risk by restricting final loan payments to 60% of the total loan.
     Money transfer, microleasing and microsavings products were also designed. Agricultural lending now
     accounts for one-fifth of PRODEMs loan portfolio. Source: Agricultural Investments Sourcebook, 2005. Also
     see: http://www.prodemffp.com/ingles.

     Agriculturally Based Credit Unions: SICREDI is the second biggest credit cooperative in Brazil. It is based on a
     savings and loan cooperative/ credit union model that serves the needs of small farmers and their
     households. It has the following characteristics: members must save before taking loans, it is owned by
     members, and members have equal voting rights in the organization. Over the last 20 years, SICREDI has
     evolved from a small network of rural production/credit cooperatives to a sophisticated financial institution,
     that serves both urban and rural areas. SICREDI has managed to restructure and consolidate its operations in
     recent years, creating a stronger foundation than other cooperative networks in Brazil. Leaders estimate that
     50 percent of SICREDI membership is rural, and that rural credit constitutes 50 percent of the cooperatives’
     loan portfolio. Sources: Bank Netherlands Partnership Program (BNPP) Publication January 2007 Also see
     http://www.sicredi.com.br/

     Market Linkage Schemes: V&M Grain Company is a leading domestic business company in Mozambique. V&M
     offers interest free advances to farmers and umbrella groups of producer associations. An overall repayment
     rate of 98 percent is reported. Advances to producer associations are based on 50 percent of the value of
     crops at an agreed price, with no other collateral arrangements and are provided for up to 20 days. The
     umbrella group use a portion of he advance to transport their collected produce to the warehouse, and the
     rest is distributed downwards to producer associations, who further distribute to their members. Source:
     Agricultural Investments Sourcebook, 2005. Also see: http://www.vandmrelief.com/grainandexport.asp.

     Warehouse Receipts System: A receipts system in warehouse receipts system is well advanced in USA,
     Slovakia, Bulgaria, Hungary, Lithuania. Kazakhstan is considered to have one of the most advanced warehouse
     receipt systems and has good potential for expansion. It has the necessary legislation, supervision and
     inspection in place and an indemnity fund under public-private management. Source: The Use of Warehouse
     Receipt Finance in Agriculture in ECA Countries May 2009.

Grain Market Intervention
84. The FCC grain reserve is intended to provide some measure of protection against low grain
stocks, which the government perceives to be a potential threat to food security. Kazakhstan is a
major producer and exporter of grain and so is not generally at high risk of domestic grain stocks
dropping to dangerously low levels, while simultaneously being unable to access supplies from other
countries. Unusually, in 2008, Kazakhstan did temporarily face what was considered to be
dangerously   low grain
  Innovative Lending    stocks13. This was due to a draw on its reserves from other countries,
                     Methodologies
following export bans in Russia and Ukraine. Accordingly, Kazakhstan imposed an export ban which
was later removed in favor of the use of a strategic reserve.
85. In addressing its concern about the availability of grain, the government should examine a
wider range of factors which influence grain production and marketing. For example, removing
administrative barriers to grain trading would increase Kazakhstan’s competitiveness in the grain
market and stimulate production. Trade tariffs are quite liberal at between 5 and 15 percent (with
the exception of a small number of products such as sugar (30%) and rice (20%)) but administrative

13
  Bread grain stocks stood at 4.7 million tons as of April 10th 2008. Between 1.1 and 1.4 million tons were being exported
at this time on a monthly basis. Source: Kazakh Government web site.
                                                                                                                        27
barriers increase costs between the farm gate and the point of export, reducing farm-gate prices and
creating an implicit tax on farmers. The publication “Doing Business 2009” states that non-tariff
barriers to trade are significant and only three countries out of 175 listed, are worse than Kazakhstan
in this respect. Removing these barriers would help to make the grain export market more efficient,
and increase grain producers’ revenues.
Infrastructure Programs
86. Public investment in drainage and irrigation infrastructure is low, but this is an important
resource in the South of Kazakhstan. While the government has supported a policy of transferring
on-farm systems to water user associations in the South, these systems need substantial public
investment before they can be sustainably managed by users. Off-farm systems under state
management also require major investments. The potential returns to investment in many of these
schemes are very high. It will also be important for the government to invest in the development of
the public and private institutions responsible for management of these systems if they are to be
successful.
Crop and Livestock Services - Essential Public Services
87. While public spending on subsidy and credit programs has been substantial and is due to
increase, some public services and infrastructure, which are critical to improving the sector’s long
term competitiveness, remain under-funded. These public services are described briefly below.
Research and extension
88. There are potentially high returns to investment in research and extension. Wheat yields in
Canada, whose climatic conditions are similar to Kazakhstan, are according to data by USDA, about
twice as high. It would seem that Kazakhstan has significant potential for improved yields if better
seeds, adjusted technology and improved crop rotation schemes are used.
89. Public expenditure on research and extension is very low compared to international
standards. Kazakhstan’s agricultural potential cannot be exploited by simply importing the needed
know-how. Domestic research is needed to adjust the Canadian know-how to the Kazakh
environment. Expenditure for agricultural research is still low at only 3 % of total expenditure on
agriculture, and the share of spending for research in agricultural GDP only amounted to 0.04%,
which is very low as compared to 0.8 % worldwide, 0.5 % in developing countries and 2.4 % in high
income countries (2000 data, see World Development Report 2008).
90. There is great variance in farm yields. If the weakest farmers could raise their yields to the level
of the strongest farmers, agricultural output could increase significantly. This suggests that
investment in extension may yield high returns.
Sanitary and Phytosanitary Control
91. Kazakhstan still faces a major challenge in ensuring that sanitary and phytosanitary (SPS)
standards are in compliance with WTO requirements. Further public investment in this area will be
critical to ensure that the government can achieve its aim of increasing value added in the sector
and ensuring access to export markets, which will increasingly demand adherence to such standards.
Veterinary Services and Epizootic Disease Control
92. Feasibility studies in neighboring countries (Mongolia, Kyrgyzstan) reveal substantial returns
to investments in veterinary services for the control of zoonotic diseases (such as brucellosis) both
in terms of improved human health and reduced treatment costs and in terms of animal production.
Increased public investments to improve veterinary services, support disease surveillance and
monitoring systems and implement vaccination programs, would bring about permanent
improvements in the competitiveness of the livestock sector.



                                                                                                     28
C. Execution and Performance Monitoring
 Execution
 93. The Kazakhstan budget system is strong on compliance and controls, but lacks flexibility. The
 control system ensures that funds are used for their intended purposes but the conclusion of the
 latest World Bank Country Program Portfolio Review was that the system of checks and controls also
 leads to implementation delays and a lack of flexibility in reacting to changing needs.
 94. The recent assessment of the public finance management system by the World Bank (PEFA,
 2009) identified strengths in accounting, recording and reporting. But, it reported that some
 standards, particularly for external performance audit, are below international levels. The report
 states that:
         “The scope of external audit did not include the year-end financial statements with respect to
         the Republican budget and of the Republican government bodies. The government external
         audit system is organized not fully in line with the international standards (i.e. the principle
         of the external audit’s financial independence is not fixed by law, and a clear distinction
         between internal and external audit (CFCP subordinated to the MOF and AC subordinated to
         the President) is not (yet) in place.”
 95. At the MOA level, the effectiveness of the Internal Control Unit is limited as a source of
 internal audit and assessment. It is understaffed and staff has limited awareness of its enhanced
 role. Given its capacity and institutional setting, it appears unlikely that it will be a strong force for
 independent evaluation.

 Performance Monitoring
 96. The results framework in the MOA Strategic Plan is far too complicated. There is a proliferation
 of indicators with around 150 (covering all three strategic directions) at the strategic level alone.
 There is a mixture of output (e.g. production of laboratories) and outcome type indicators. Many of
 the latter are production targets. Production targets are inappropriate to a market economy,
 especially where exogenous factors such as the weather have a significant influence. There are a
 further 320 indicators associated with the 79 programs. This number of indicators is extremely
 difficult to monitor and manage effectively. In a complex sector like agriculture, the evaluation of
 large spending programs will require more detailed evaluation than the use of simple indicators, to
 ascertain their effectiveness and efficiency.
 97. Performance indicators do not have clear relationships with program objectives . The Strategic
 Plan clearly spells out objectives for the individual programs, and also specifies performance
 indicators. However, the performance indicators often have no clear relationship to the stated
 objectives and focus on production rather than achieving efficiency and competitiveness within the
 world market.
 98. The details of how performance agreements will be monitored and reported need to be
 developed. As set down in these agreements, underperformance would be addressed through a
 process of dialogue between the parties. The outcomes of these arrangements should be monitored
 to assess whether they are an adequate basis for the implementation of budget plans. Twice yearly
 reporting and monitoring of Strategic Plans is supposed to take place, but detailed guidelines as to
 how this reporting should be carried out are not in place.
 99. A major weakness in the budget execution system at the moment is the lack of economic
 evaluation of the performance and efficiency of major spending programs. The weakness in ex-
 post evaluation of the budget is the counterpart of the weakness in policy and economic analysis at
 the formulation stage of the budget. The evaluation that is available from the current system refers
 almost exclusively to rates of expenditure, not to efficiency of expenditure, nor to the higher level
 impacts on the economy and people’s livelihoods. Spending programs, for example those relating to
                                                                                                   29
large infrastructure such as for irrigation and drainage, are subject to feasibility studies and
economic analysis at the preparatory stage. They should also be subject to ex-post evaluation.
Subsidy and credit programs are subject, neither to detailed feasibility studies, ex-ante evaluation,
nor to ex-post evaluation, which would provide critical feedback into the planning of new spending
programs.




                                                                                                  30
V.   Policy Options
 100. A number of key adjustments to the government’s existing program of budget management
 reform and agricultural sector reform could rapidly improve the effectiveness and efficiency of the
 public spending program, and help to achieve the government’s vision of a vibrant and competitive
 agricultural sector. These include: a) adjustments to strategy formulation, budget execution and
 performance monitoring systems, which can be implemented soon and; b) adjustments to the
 spending program, including a number of options for reforming the subsidy program, some involving
 rapid reform and others a more gradual approach. Specific recommendations and policy options
 from each of the key sections of the study are described below.

A. Budget Management
 Spending Program Formulation
 101. Recommendation 1: Restructure the large number of agricultural programs (currently 79)
 into 8-10 functional categories. The following set of program areas could be considered:
             Administration, Planning and Management
             Crop and Livestock Services
             Infrastructure
             Research and Extension
             Market Support
             Input and production subsidies
             Agricultural and microcredit

 102. Recommendation 2: Conduct more ex-ante and ex-post socio-economic and environmental
 analysis of program results as a foundation for budget formulation: Build capacity within the MOA
 and solicit consultancy services from an independent organisation for the analysis of budget
 programs and their efficiency in achieving the Government’s strategic objectives for the sector. Link
 this new function to the introduction of the central evaluation system under consideration for
 MEBP. Use the analysis to provide a basis for the annual reformulation of the Strategic Plan and
 budget.

 Execution, Performance Monitoring and Result Framework
 103. Recommendation 3: Review the costs and benefits of the current system of controls to strike
 an effective balance between compliance and flexibility in relation to the implementation of
 development programs. Proposals made in the World Bank Country Portfolio Performance Review
 FY 2008 provide some useful pointers:
        Delink preparation of investment projects from the annual budget cycle (this is being
         addressed in the shift to three-year budgeting);
        Relax budget implementation procedures preventing reallocation of funds between the time
         periods and categories of expenditure;
        Streamline Treasury procedures for contract registration and payments;
        Rationalize multiple inter-ministerial reconciliations of project documents which account for
         7-10 months of project effectiveness delay;
        Streamline functional responsibilities of central ministries to rule out duplication of
         functions and excessive control over procurement and disbursement during project
         implementation.

                                                                                                   31
 104. Recommendation 4: Clarify the role of the Internal Control Unit in MOA. Further build the
 capacity of the Internal Control Unit as a source of effective internal audit, particularly in relation to
 the major spending programs of the Ministry.
 105. Recommendation 5: Review the results framework at both the strategic and program levels
 with a view to dramatically reducing the number of indicators.
 106. At the sector level, indicators should measure the overall progress of the sector and its
 structural changes in the sector. Sector-wide indicators are typically designed to capture information
 on economic and social parameters.
 107. At the program level, the main step would be to identify a reduced number of indicators for
 each of the eight to ten functional areas. A format for a program description and performance
 framework might show:
        the program;
        the departments and agencies involved in its implementation;
        the related strategic objective of the program;
        outputs targets divided between quantity, quality and efficiency targets;
        the key investments and activities that are expected to lead to the realisation of the planned
         outputs, and their rationale; and
        the budget for the departments involved in the implementation of the programme.

 108. Recommendation 6: Conduct more ex-ante socio-economic and environmental analysis of
 programs as discussed under recommendation 5.

B. Strategy and Programs
 Strategy
 109. Recommendation 7: Situation Analysis: The situation analysis needs to be more holistic
 encompassing technical, economic, social and environmental analyses and identifying the key
 challenges in the sector. A good set of policies and programs for the sector can only be put in place
 when they are based on a clear analysis and understanding of the dynamics of the sector. Assistance
 should be requested from a reputable economic research or academic institution in Kazakhstan to
 help put a stronger situation analysis in place.
 110. Recommendation 8: Strategic Directions: Re-examine the strategic sub-direction - food
 security - in the Strategic Plan and redefine the performance indicators for this to reflect the ability
 of households to pay for food at household level - rather than the current definition - a low level of
 import dependence. For example, the indicator may be “percentage of households spending more
 than 70% of their income on food” which could be measured through annual poverty surveys.
 111. The ability of poor households to pay for food can best be addressed through social safety
 net programs. Social safety net programs can best be dealt with under other strategic plans dealing
 with poverty alleviation in urban and rural areas, rather than under the Strategic Plan for the
 agricultural sector.
 112. The ability of poor rural households (which include small farmers) to pay for food can also be
 addressed through programs to increase the competitiveness of small farms. These programs can be
 included under the Strategic Sub-Direction on food security in the Strategic Plan.




                                                                                                        32
113. Recommendation 9: Strategic Goals: Ensure linkage between strategic directions, goals and
tasks. Specifically, having indicated WTO accession as Strategic Direction, specific goals and tasks
should be indicated in the Strategic Plan to demonstrate how this will be achieved.

Effectiveness and Economic Efficiency of Programs

Assess the economic effectiveness and efficiency of the spending programs; implement phased
reform of the subsidy programs; reallocate funding to essential public infrastructure and; implement
complementary reform in the land and credit markets.
114.     Recommendation 10: Re-examine the rationale for each of the programs by considering:
    i)   Does the program contribute to the government’s strategic objectives and if so how?
    ii) Does the economic analysis demonstrate that economic benefits will be greater than
        economic costs? If not, is there a strong social or environmental justification for the
        program?
    iii) Does the program promote permanent structural changes and technological improvements
         within the sector and a move towards more efficient production?
    iv) Does the program provide an essential public good which will not be provided by the private
        sector or does the program help to overcome a market failure and promote provision of
        services by the private sector in the long term?
    v) Does the program reduce income disparity or at least not exacerbate it?
    vi) Does the program conform to WTO accession requirements?
    vii) How easy will it be to collect accurate information to administer the program and what will
         it cost?
115.     Recommendation 11: Policy Options for the Reform of Programs:
    i)   Subsidy Programs: There are several policy options for reforming the subsidy programs. The
         selection of the preferred option will depend on how fast the government believes the
         sector could adjust to the proposed reformed policies (i.e. how quickly farmers would be
         able to change their production practises in response to input and output prices after reform
         of the subsidy programs) and what speed of reform is acceptable from a social and political
         perspective. The options are:
            Option 1 Maintain the current subsidy programs but shift some spending from those
             subsidies which distort production decisions the most, to those which distort production
             decisions the least. This implies a shifting some spending from crop area payments and
             production subsidies to input subsidies. This can be implemented soon. These would be
             relatively shallow reforms.
            Option 2: Decouple subsidies from the production of specific crops. This means
             eliminating differences in the level of area payments for different crops – this can be
             implemented soon and would be an important steps towards deeper reform of the
             subsidy program.
            Option 3 Decouple subsidies from agricultural production completely drawing on lessons
             from EU experience (see annex 2). This means a shift from area and production subsidies
             to some form of income support for farmers not linked to production. This could be
             implemented in a gradual phased manner over the next 5 or more years to allow
             producers to adapt to the new conditions. In the longer term, as those who stay in the
             sector become more efficient and those who leave the sector find alternative
             employment, it might be feasible to reduce income support. Decoupling should also aim

                                                                                                   33
        to bring amber box measures gradually down to a level compatible with WTO accession.
        This would be the deepest and most comprehensive form of long term reform.
    The important reform of the subsidy programs should be accompanied by a number of other
    fundamental reforms described below.
ii) Public Services and Infrastructure: Reallocate any savings on subsidy programs to essential
    public services and infrastructure including: sanitary and phyto-sanitary control, veterinary
    services and disease control, in line with the requirements of WTO; investment in research
    and extension, which is unlikely to be fully provided by the private sector in the medium
    term; and investment in essential rural infrastructure, such as drainage and irrigation
    rehabilitation and the institutions responsible for its management. These changes could be
    implemented soon – even a reallocation of a small amount of funds to these services could
    yield high returns to the economy.
iii) Land Market: Create a more flexible land market - this will be important to allow the more
     competitive producers who are able to compete, to expand, and to allow uncompetitive
     farmers to move out of the sector by sub-leasing or selling their land.
iv) Credit Market: Improve credit provision to allow farms to finance their expansion. This could
    be achieved by encouraging competitive private sector lending to agriculture. In the long
    term, this would reduce the costs of credit provision to the economy and reduce the burden
    on the budget. It is recommended to examine the design of current credit programs and
    ensure that they promote rather than crowd out private sector provision of credit and lease
    finance to the sector. Specific reform options include:
       In the short term, transfer the administration of government state credit programs to
        private financial institutions. Initially, the private financial institutions may simply
        administer the programs on behalf of the government and in the medium term be
        engaged under a risk sharing agreement, with government involvement phased out in
        the long term.
       In the longer term, gradually reduce the state provision of lease finance and credit as
        provision from private financial institutions increases. In the meantime, invest further in
        measures to reduce risk to private financial institutions and borrowers, such as the
        warehouse receipt scheme, agricultural insurance and reinsurance and the training of
        private financial institutions in management of agricultural loans.




                                                                                                34
Annex 1 Key GDP, Employment, and Budget Data




                                               35
Annex 2 Reform of the CAP: Decoupling Agricultural Support

1. The European Union’s (EU) Common Agricultural Policy (CAP) has been subject to a series of
reforms since 1992 aimed at increasing competitiveness, reducing the costs of the CAP and reducing
trade distortions in line with the principles of the WTO. At the same time, reforms have been
designed to avoid a dramatic decline in farm incomes, promote rural development and encourage
environmentally sustainable farming. The reform process has been long and complex because of the
diverse political and economic interests of member countries, not least, the new member states,
whose farm incomes are considerably lower than the EU 15 countries. Substantial progress has been
made in a series of reform programs (primarily, the Mc Sharry Reforms 1992, the Agenda 2000
Reforms, and the 2003 Fischler Reforms, Health Check Reforms 2008) but further reforms are
expected in the run up to the forthcoming 2013-20 programming period.
2. The CAP provides support to farmers under two main pillars: Pillar 1 - Agricultural Market and
Income Support and Pillar 2 - Rural Development. Under Pillar 1, a central theme of the ongoing
reforms has been the decoupling of subsidies from production. The purpose of decoupling is to
ensure that production decisions are driven by the needs of the market rather than by subsidy
policies, to encourage structural change within the sector and to phase out amber box measures,
which are not in compliance with WTO requirements. A policy is fully decoupled if “it does not
influence production decisions of farmers receiving payments, and if it permits free market
determination of prices” (OECD, 200014). In order to ensure that farmer were able to adjust to the
reduced price support, CAP Pillar 1 funding was shifted, initially from price support to area based
payments and later to direct income support via Single Farm Payments (currently, the 2004 and
2007 accession countries continue to apply Single Area Payments). In order to protect farm incomes,
single farm payments are linked to levels of support received in 2000-2002, although they may be
phased out in the longer term. CAP spending is increasingly being shifted to a wide variety of
(decoupled) investment support programs under CAP Pillar 2, comprising investments to increase
competitiveness, environmentally sustainable farming and diversification, including investments
based on local development plans. Therefore, while the overall level of support to agriculture in the
EU has increased, the nature of support has changed considerably (Figure 1).
3. Kazakhstan faces similar challenges but in a much less complex political environment. The
decoupling of support in Kazakhstan also needs to be implemented in a gradual and phased manner,
so that farmers have time to adjust but the Government of Kazakhstan has the opportunity to draw
on lessons from the EU’s and implement reforms in a much shorter period.




14
  Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development, Directorate General for Food, Agriculture and Fisheries
(2000) Decoupling: A conceptual overview. Paris: OECD.
                                                                                                                    36
Figure 13 CAP expenditure and CAP reform path

                                                                                         % GDP
70 billion €                                                                                     0.7%

60                                                                                               0.6%

50                                                                                               0.5%

40                                                                                               0.4%

30                                                                                               0.3%

20                                                                                               0.2%

10                                                                                               0.1%

  0                                                                                              0.0%
      1980
      1981
      1982
      1983
      1984
      1985
      1986
      1987
      1988
      1989
      1990
      1991
      1992
      1993
      1994
      1995
      1996
      1997
      1998
      1999
      2000
      2001
      2002
      2003
      2004
      2005
      2006
      2007
      2008
          Export subsidies                 Market support                  Direct aids
          Decoupled payments               Rural development               % of EU GDP


Source: http://www.notre-europe.eu/fileadmin/IMG/pdf/Tassos_HANIOTIS.ppt




                                                                                                        37
Annex 3 Comparisons of Nominal Rates of Assistance in Selected Countries
1. The total Nominal Rates of Assistance (NRA) to the farm sector is a measure of the net taxation
of the farm sector based on a comparison of farm gate prices and border prices. An attempt at
estimating the NRA in the farm sector is described in the publication, “Distortions to Agricultural
Incentives in Europe’s Transition Economies”, World Bank, 2008. The NRA calculation incorporates
explicit taxes and subsidies and trade measures as well as implicit taxes on farms resulting from high
transport and marketing costs. The publication recognizes the significant methodological difficulties
in estimating the NRA on wheat because of the difficulty in choosing a single reference price for
wheat, when in practice a great variety of qualities of wheat are produced. The paper emphasizes
that although there are have been significant subsidies to the agricultural sector these are
outweighed by high marketing and transport costs, due to poor marketing infrastructure which
erodes the price paid at the farm gate. The paper estimates that overall the NRA the sector
consistently increased between 2000 and 2004. Given the trend of increasing explicit subsidization
of the sector after 2004, it is likely that the NRA to the sector continues to increase today, which is
consistent with the government’s policy statements. Table 11 and Figure 14 illustrate that in 2004
the NRA’s for Kazakhstan were much higher than in Ukraine where there was a net taxation of
farmers but less than in Russia were there was a net subsidization of farmers.
Table 11 Estimated rates of nominal rates of assistance for major agricultural products (percent)

 Kazakhstan                                   2000       2001        2002       2003       2004     2005
 Crop                                             -4       -16           0         -1        -17      na
 Livestock                                      -15           8        10          22         31      na
 All Agricultural Products                      -10          -5          5         10          8      na


 Russian
 All Agricultural Products                         0        13         16          11         22      17
 Importables                                       2        27         43          23         32      26
 Exportables                                    -22        -14         -29        -16          0      -4


 Ukraine
 All Agricultural Products                      -20        -3.8      -13.8      -11.4      -14.3     3.8
 Importables                                  -27.3       34.6       64.1           4       43.4    86.6
 Exportables                                  -17.2        -6.7      -18.2      -13.9      -17.9    -2.4
 Source: Distortions to Agricultural Incentives in Europe's Transition Economies, World Bank 2008




                                                                                                           38
Figure 14 Estimated rates of nominal rates of assistance for major agricultural products (percent)




                                                                                                     39
