        IMPLEMENTATION
          COMPLETION
         MEMORANDUM
Extractive Industries Technical Advisory Facility (EI-TAF) Multi-Donor Trust Fund



                             DECEMBER 15, 2016
Table of Contents
A. Basic Trust Fund Information ....................................................................................................1
B. Trust Fund Development Objectives and Design ......................................................................3
C. Outcome .....................................................................................................................................7
D. Risk to Development Outcome ................................................................................................24
E. Performance .............................................................................................................................26
F. Lessons Learned/Recommendations ........................................................................................27
G. ICM Processing and Comments...............................................................................................29
    A. BASIC TRUST FUND INFORMATION

TF Name: Extractive Industries Technical Advisory Facility (EI-TAF)1

TF Number: TF071265

Task Team Leader Name/TF Managing Unit: Paulo de Sa /GEEDR (as of Dec 31, 2016)

TF Amount: USD23,773,149

Recipient of TF funds: Hybrid

Type of TF: Programmatic

Single/Multi Donor: Programmatic Multi Donor

Donors Names: Australia, Belgium, Canada, Norway, Switzerland, and IFC.

TF Program Source Code: ETAF

Purpose of TF: Advisory Activities-Bank; Advisory Activities-Recipient

TF Approval/IBTF Clearance Date: August 28, 2009

TF Effectiveness Date: November 17, 2009

TF Closing Date(s): December 31, 2015

Date of ICM Submission to TFO: December 15, 2016

Cost and Financing Table: Table 1 overleaf




1
  Data provided by World Bank Secretariat. This EI-TAF ICM was prepared in parallel with the ICM for the
Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EI TI) MDTF. The EI-TAF MDTF and the EITI MDTF each had
their own Program Manager but in 2012 the two Program Manager positions were eliminated by World Bank
management and the two MDTFs were subsequently overseen by the (then) SEGOM Sector Manager and were
managed by the same World Bank Secretariat. The two MDTFs have been succeeded by the Extractives Global
Programmatic Support (EGPS) program.


                                                     1
                     Table 1: EI-TAF MDTF Cost and Financing Table
                                        (USD)

                                                                 Percent of Total Net
                                               Total Received
                                                                    Contributions
 Australia                                        5,024,654              20%
 Belgium                                          1,291,700               5%
 Canada                                          10,079,375              40%
 International Finance Corporation (IFC)          2,750,000              11%
 Norway                                           4,777,419              19%
 Switzerland                                      1,200,000               5%
 Total                                           25,123,149
 Development Grant Facility                       1,500,000
 Admin fee, net of investments                   (2,261,524)
 Disbursements                                  (14,813,000)
 Net Contribution                                 9,548,625
Note: Disbursements data is rounded




                                           2
 B. TRUST FUND DEVELOPMENT OBJECTIVES AND DESIGN

According to the Trust Fund Proposal (TFP), the objectives of the Extractive Industries
Technical Advisory Facility (EI-TAF) are to: (i) assist Resource Rich Countries (RRCs) to
correctly structure extractive industry transactions and related sector policies from the outset,
thus reducing the risk of costly or politically difficult remediation at a later stage; and (ii)
support production and dissemination of global knowledge products on extractive industry
sector issues to address the current lack of an integrated body of good practice for sound
extractive industry sector governance and management.
No revision has been made to the original development objective of this Trust Fund.

   1. Original (and Revised) Trust Fund Activities/Components

The EI-TAF has two key components: (i) rapid-response advisory services; and (ii) global
knowledge management/good practice in extractive industries sector governance in support
of grant implementation.

    a) Rapid Response Advisory Services

Rapid-response advisory service activities by their nature cannot always be predicted, but are
likely to focus on eligible countries with capacity needs in the following areas:
       Contract negotiation for extractive industry transactions (or where legally feasible,
          mutually-agreed dispute mediation), including the cost of logistics of such
          negotiations;
       Short-term capacity building for members of the beneficiary country’s negotiation
          teams, including studies to prepare for negotiations;
       Technical assistance in support of a specific extractive industry transaction under
          review, to update the policy, institutional, fiscal, legal and regulatory frameworks
          (including mining and hydrocarbon codes and licensing registers) of the country
          concerned, including revenue management and benefits sharing across levels of
          government and community; and
       Technical assistance on structuring extractive industry licensing rounds, public
          offerings (tender/auction), and competitive and transparent tender packages to help
          RRCs optimize the value of national extractive industry resources, including the cost
          of logistics of such negotiations.

         b) Knowledge Management

Knowledge management activities aim to facilitate the gathering and dissemination of good
practices in extractive industry sector governance. The focus is on:
      Providing a framework of good practices and discussion of issues that may be
         relevant for governments facing the task of making extractive industry resources
         available to private investors;
      Gathering and disseminating lessons of experience based on advisory services
         provided, including through publications, workshops, conferences, and the like;

                                                 3
        Preparing studies, reports, policy notes and other documents related to EI-TAF
         activities.

   2. Outcome Indicators

The TFP listed the following three key performance indicators:
a. Number of requests completed/responded to for rapid-response advisory assistance,
   including outcome of services provided (e.g., negotiations completed successfully,
   licensing round successfully held).
b. Enhanced capacity of country staff to carry out negotiations, manage the sector, etc. While a
   long-term outcome, advisers would work with counterparts to transfer knowledge; this would
   be tracked.
c. Establishment of good practice reference framework for EI sector advisory assistance and
   dissemination of knowledge products via workshops, etc. to build client country capacity over
   the long term.

   2. Other Significant Changes in Trust Fund Design

The original design anticipated that the majority of advisory services would be directed to rapid-
response support for negotiating transactions, related short-term capacity building, regulatory
improvements and undertaking licensing bidding rounds. While Bank staff and consultants hired
by the Bank can provide capacity building support, support for negotiating transactions has to be
provided through recipient-executed (RE) grants because the Bank staff and/or Bank-hired
consultants cannot directly participate in any sovereign decisions, such as extractives transactions
negotiations or drafting laws, agreements or regulations.

In the first two years of EI-TAF implementation, the majority of EI-TAF support was RE (out of
six approved projects, four were REs). There were no other EI-TAF RE grants after these four
early grants. While, because of country circumstances and grant size, it would not have been
expected that all grants would have been RE, it certainly would have been expected that more than
four grants would have been able to move along the original RE design requirements. With this
background, as best can be judged, there are a combination of factors as outlined below that
resulted in all the grants from 2012 onwards being Bank-executed (BE).

Many of the countries seeking EI-TAF support were countries that did not have strong
administrative capacity. While the lack of administrative capacity made these countries strong
candidates for EI-TAF support, the implementing ministries (usually mining or petroleum
ministries) did not usually have the experience needed to meet the World Bank’s fiduciary
requirements for RE grants in terms of being able to undertake procurement and financial
management tasks in a timely manner. The work needed to design and put in place the four RE
grants in large part reflected the strong role of the EI-TAF Program Manager at that time in
shepherding the grants so that they could be made.

But the experience of the four RE grants resulted in concerns as to the feasibility of the RE
arrangements. In particular, the grant to Liberia was made possible by making use of the Project
Implementation Unit (PIU) of the Ministry of Finance and the grant to Mozambique was made

                                                 4
possible by making use of the existing EITI Secretariat to handle procurement, disbursements and
financial management. But in both cases, there were lengthy implementation delays due to EI-
TAF being not a priority for the implementing entities (we note, however, that it cannot be verified
if the delays would have been less if the implementing arrangements were different – the delays
in early project implementation periods for TAs are very common for all project). Furthermore, it
became evident that the cost and time required to set up a project’s own RE arrangements were a
high overhead for the relatively small EI-TAF grants which created a bottleneck to provide the
needed rapid support.

The potential need for BE (as compared with RE) grants was recognized by the donors in 2011
when they agreed to relax the initial limit on coverage of Bank staff costs. The cap on staff costs
which was set at 10% of total was lifted at that time to allow more Bank execution of activities
under the MDTF. While RE was the preferred “design” option, after the relaxation of BE ratio,
the BE started to be used as an easier and faster option. As this experience was being absorbed in
2011, a number of other factors came into play.

There were two internal factors that contributed to the shift away from recipient grants in 2012.
First, the elimination of the dedicated EI-TAF Program Manager position in 2012 (the Extractives
Practice Manager acted as EI TAF Program Manager from 2012 onwards) seems to have resulted
in weakening the push to ensuring that the original design and intention of the EI-TAF to use RE
grants was accomplished. Second, the need to respond to “rapid-response” requests grants led to
countries seeking BE grants since it was difficult for them to obtain RE grants in a rapid manner
because of the length of time needed to meet the Bank fiduciary requirements and to put in place
the necessary capacity to undertake procurement and administer the grants in compliance with the
Bank’s requirements.

In parallel, a third factor was starting to occur that subsequently became much more important. A
substantial downturn in worldwide mineral commodity prices started in 2012 (the third year of EI-
TAF MDTF lifetime) and has continued until the present time for non-fuel minerals (as shown in
Table 2) and from 2014 onwards for oil and gas.

        Table 2 – Selected World Hydrocarbon and Minerals Prices – 2002, 2012 and 2016

                                                Annual           Annual Average July 2016
                                                Average 2002     2012
 Crude Oil Average Spot (USD/bbl)               28.2             105            44.1
 Natural Gas European (USD/mmbtu)               3.9              11.5           4.5
 Australian Export Coal (USD/mt)                26.3             96.4           63.1
 Gold (USD/toz)                                 279              1670           1337
 Copper (USD/mt)                                1813             7962           4865
 Iron Ore (USD/dmt)                             29               128            57

Data Source: World Bank Commodities Price Data
2002 and 2012: http://www.worldbank.org/prospects/commodities
2016: http://www.worldbank.org/prospects/commodities - World Bank Pink-Sheet-August-2016.pdf




                                                 5
The continuous climb in worldwide mineral commodity prices from 2002-2012 was a major driver
in the growth of extractives transactions during that period and hence the demand for the EI-TAF-
type rapid-response assistance for negotiating these transactions. Correspondingly, the downturn
in world commodity prices from 2012, as minerals supply overshot demand, subsequently resulted
in extractives companies, faced by declining profits and cash flow, cutting back sharply
investments in the greenfield and riskier projects - which would be the bulk of EI-TAF clients.
This caused a significant decline in projects moving towards negotiations and, in fact, even
postponement of some of the earlier negotiated projects (such as, for example, some of the iron
ore projects in Liberia and Sierra Leone).

Consequently, from 2012 onwards governments started to re-focus their EI-TAF requests on more
basic capacity building and legal and regulatory improvements that would modernize and improve
the investment climate for all future investments, rather than requiring support for specific
transactions. The regulatory framework improvements offered a very substantial benefit in that
updating general laws and regulations is a more sustainable and transparent way towards fair
contracts as compared with case by case negotiations and regulation by contract (which would
often apply to transaction negotiations where general laws and regulations are not adequate or are
superseded by contract terms).

But, equally it must also be recognized that legal and regulatory support provided through RE
grants can have a greater overall impact since the RE support can help directly draft laws,
regulations, agreements and fiscal terms as well as finance related consultations and support their
roll out into implementation. By comparison, as already noted, the Bank’s direct support has to be
restricted to good practice advice and capacity building.

The trend towards BE grants was also influenced by a fourth factor – namely countries trusting
that the Bank would ensure quality of advice and promptness of response in executing grant-
funded work - as compared to REs which would have to follow internal government processes and
rely on project management staff in the ministries themselves, often with capacity constraints and
high costs.

The shift from recipient-execution to Bank-execution of the program become apparent in 2013-
14. The MDTF could have been amended at that time, but instead the decision had been taken
with the donors that the EI TAF would be closed as scheduled in December 2015 and would be
replaced by the follow-on Extractives Global Programmatic Support (EGPS) program, so no
attempt was made to revise the original MDTF Development Objective or design. Following the
closure of the EI TAF accounts in August 2016, a part of the EI TAF undisbursed funds were
transferred to the EGPS so that they could be used for EGPS Grants.

It is noted (for lessons learnt) that for the EGPS Pillar 2, the Pillar that essentially took over support
provided under EI-TAF in its expanded form, the EGPS Program Secretariat is specifically
encouraging task teams to assist recipient countries to achieve the broader scope of activities
through RE grants, instead of being limited to what can be done under BE grants.




                                                    6
 C. OUTCOME

    1. Relevance of Trust Fund Objectives, Design and Implementation

Minerals, that is fuel minerals (such as oil, gas and coal) and non-fuel minerals (such as ores,
concentrates and metals), and gemstones have the potential to reshape economies and generate
substantial economic growth and wealth. The World Bank Group’s strategy towards the
extractives sector is to support well-designed responsible mineral sector development. The World
Bank’s (IDA and IBRD) role is primarily in providing advice and support to governments to help
design and implement sound sector development strategies and regulatory frameworks and help
develop the capacity to implement them effectively. The main lending instrument is the
IBRD/IDA Technical Assistance Loan/Grant which generally provides several years support for
regulatory reform and modernization and associated training and capacity building. In exceptional
circumstances, the WB may also help fund government investments. The IFC and MIGA provide
funding and guarantees to support responsible and efficient private sector extractives investments.

It is within this context that governments sometimes seek immediate “just in time” support for
negotiations with private investors, when government officials may lack the depth and experience
of the private sector parties with whom they are negotiating. Governments may also need rapid
support to strengthen legal frameworks or address gaps in regulatory requirements and build
necessary capacity if exploration or investment picks up in their country—especially if there is a
worldwide minerals boom as happened from around 2002-2012. But such support may be much
more urgent than a typical TA operation can provide and may also not need a full TA operation.

As stated in the TFP: “The EI-TAF is expected to support countries to correctly structure EI
transactions and related sector policies from the outset, thus reducing the risk of costly or
politically damaging remediation at a later stage. The Bank's existing instruments are inadequate
to provide this type of rapid-response, technical advisory assistance that is increasingly being
sought by countries and which is key to ensuring that countries correctly structure EI sector
policies and transactions from the outset to avoid environmentally, socially, or politically costly
remediation later. The EI-TAF will fill this gap. The benefit to sustainable development of 'getting
it right' from the outset, and to RRCs overall (in terms of financial benefits, etc.), is likely to far
outweigh the amount of investment in the EI-TAF.”

Thus, at the time it was introduced the EI-TAF was very relevant to the Bank’s strategy for
extractives countries since it was designed to address this “just in time”, demand-based need.
However, as discussed previously, as the demand for transactions assistance declined, it was
replaced by a demand for advice and building capacity to prepare modern extractives legislation,
related fiscal legislation/terms and sector development policies. Requested TA support activities
were not large enough to warrant a fully-fledged Technical Assistance task, but were substantive
enough to warrant an EI TAF Grant which in some cases was a step towards broader engagement
of the Bank on the extractives in these countries. As noted below in Section D.1 Follow on Results
and/or Investment Activities, the EI-TAF Grants provided the basis for a number of countries to
seek and receive additional extractives support from donors, including, in some cases, subsequent
World Bank/IDA Technical Assistance projects.


                                                   7
Requests for assistance were generated via:
    Direct requests from resource-rich, client governments;
    Sector dialogue between Energy and Extractives Global Practice (GEEDR) specialists and
      resource-rich client countries;
    Dialogue between other World Bank staff and resource-rich client countries;
    Commitments in World Bank Country Assistance/Partnership Strategies, linkages to
      World Bank lending operations, analytic work, technical assistance, and so on; or
    Dialogue between other stakeholders (e.g., donor partners) and resource-rich client
      countries.

Requests for support for rapid-response advisory services were assessed along the following lines:
    Level of political commitment and national ownership. Degree of commitment of a
      government and stakeholders to implement sound sector governance, including readiness
      to move on reform steps needed.
    Country capacity gaps/needs. The assessed capacity gaps (especially in fragile states, IDA-
      eligible, and post-conflict countries) in a country in which the EI-TAF interventions could
      have a high pay-off and impact.
    Resource dependency and poverty impact. The size of the extractives sector and revenues
      to the economy and exports—and the poverty-alleviation potential from rapid-response
      advisory services.
    Demonstration potential in sub-region context. Potential for demonstration effect to “pull”
      other countries in the sub-region to adopt sound sector governance principles
    Potential for sustainable investment. Impact in terms of facilitating sustainable private
      sector investment in the country’s extractives sector.
    Value for Money. Overall cost-efficiency of activities, which should aim to ensure value
      for money, consistent with appropriate standards of quality.

   2. Achievement of Trust Fund Development Objective

   a) Introduction

Put in the simplest of terms, successful sector development – for any sector - requires two things.
First, it requires sound rules i.e. a sound policy, legal, regulatory and fiscal framework. Second,
it requires strong institutional capacity to ensure that development takes place in compliance with
the rules. But this begs the question – what is “successful” extractives sector development – these
days often referred to as “sustainable” extractives development. It is proposed that
“successful/sustainable’ extractives development can be considered to be development that is well-
governed, non-corrupt, environmentally and socially responsible and acceptable, with a fair
sharing of financial income between the state (as owner of mineral resources) and the investor (as
developer of mineral resources) and a fair distribution of employment and other benefits between
the local, regional and national levels.

As such, “successful/sustainable” extractives sector development, requires sound legislation,
regulations and procedures for extractives licensing, land access, environmental protection, social
risk mitigation, benefit sharing and fiscal assessment, collection and auditing together with sound
mining development and hydrocarbon production sharing or similar agreements where used. It

                                                8
also requires competent and well-experienced extractives sector specialists, environmental and
social specialists and fiscal specialists and auditors employed by ministries, departments and
government agencies with clear (and to the extent possible) non-overlapping mandates,
responsibilities and authorities with effective collaboration and cooperation principle, protocols
and procedures.

In this context, what could reasonably have been expected of EI-TAF Grants, which were mostly
in the range of USD200,000 to USD1,000,000 for two to three years, was that the Grants would
clearly support countries to move forward on their pathways towards “successful/sustainable”
extractives development.

Regardless of the maturity of the country or its extractives sector, Grants would have been expected
to provide:
    (a) knowledge of good international practice regarding sound mineral sector development
    policy, legal, regulatory and fiscal frameworks; and
    (b) related mineral sector capacity building for government staff and – but the capacity building
    is unlikely to be across the board and will likely be focused in certain areas such as licensing,
    environmental, social or fiscal.

In addition to these over-arching objectives,

      for more mature countries where one or more specific transaction(s) are being negotiated,
       Grants would have been expected to help build the capacity of the government negotiating
       team and to support completion of the negotiations – though very likely a Grant would not
       be the only source of support to the government negotiating team. It may also have been
       expected to bring about some strengthening of the legal or fiscal regime along with the
       transaction.
      for other more mature countries or countries with an established extractives sector where a
       transaction is not being negotiated, Grants would have been expected to result in certain
       government actions – such as amendments to the mining or hydrocarbon laws and/or
       regulations or to the fiscal terms. Grants may also have been expected to be used to address
       specific issues such as improvements to tendering procedures. However, it must be
       recognized that enactment of a new law or amendments to a law is a multi-stage task
       involving policy making, stakeholder consultation, legal drafting, ministerial approval,
       submission to Parliament, Parliamentary and sometimes also Presidential approvals. More
       often than not a Grant can be expected to move draft legislation along this pathway through
       the executive branch but within the time available for the Grant the legislation may not
       reach the point of enactment by Parliament.
      for less mature countries and/or countries with less developed extractives sectors, Grants
       have been expected to provide a sector assessment and development or reform agenda for
       a government to implement in anticipation of future extractives contracts and revenues.




                                                 9
      b) The Country-specific Grants and their Results2
There were 31 country-specific Grant requests which were processed and approved for 28
countries3 for a total commitment of USD14.8 million (Table 3). There were also ten
Global/Regional projects for USD2.1 million. (Table 4).

For the purpose of the ICM, to allow an easier analysis, the EI-TAF Grants were organized into
four Groups which reflect the type of assistance provided. GROUP 1 consists of seven countries
where the Grants supported specific contract negotiations which were successfully completed in
six of the countries. GROUP 2 consists of four countries where the Grants focused on
accomplishing one or two specific tasks i.e. support was limited to just very targeted advice.
GROUP 3 consists of twelve countries where the Grant focused on building capacity to prepare
draft mining and/or hydrocarbon legislation (including mining agreement and hydrocarbon
production sharing agreements) and/or related fiscal legislation/terms. GROUP 4 consists of five
countries where support was given to help design extractives sector development policies or
strategies and/or start the process of building extractives sector institutional capacity.


                  Table 3: Country-Specific Activities – Disbursements and Delivery

                                                                                                Disbursement      Approval-
    Country                Project Name                                                            USD000          Delivery
    Group 1 – 7 Grants to 7 countries supporting specific contract negotiations
       Mining                                                                                                          FY
    Liberia                Extractive Industries Technical Advisory Facility Project                     1,055        2009-12
    Sierra Leone           Extractive Industries Technical Advisory Facility Project                       797        2011-14
    Guinea                 Extractive Industries Technical Advisory Facility Project                       803        2011-15
       Hydrocarbons
    Rwanda                 Petroleum Exploration Capacity Building Project                                 377        2010-12
    Mozambique             Extractive Industries Technical Advisory Facility Grant                         813        2011-14
    Mauritania             Gas-to-Power Negotiations TA                                                    363        2012-14
    Seychelles             Extractive Industries Technical Advisory Facility Grant                         556        2012-15
    Group 2 – 7 Grants to 4 countries that accomplished specific tasks
       Mining
    Mexico                 Royalties Reform for the Mineral Sector                                         228        2011-12
    Colombia               Strategic Mineral Reserve Areas                                                 624        2012-15
    Peru                   Policy Options to Enhance Mining Environmental Sustainability                   249        2014-15
    Peru                   Grant for Local Employment in Mining (Apurimac region)                          366        2014-16
       Hydrocarbons
    Chile                  Improving Natural Gas Distribution                                              367        2014-15
    Peru                   Developing a New Natural Gas Development and Use Policy                         852        2014-15
    Mexico                 Environmental Support to Hydrocarbon Agency                                      50           2015

2
  The country by country results are taken from summaries of EI-TAF project completion reports included in the
2015 EI-TAF Final Progress Report to donors.
3
  In addition, Yemen applied for a Grant to develop a coherent development strategy for its substantial oil and gas
resources. Preparatory work was undertaken but the proposed as never approved or executed, due to hostilities in
Yemen in 2011 and the suspension of IBRD disbursements

                                                         10
Group 3 – 12 Grants to 12 countries that built capacity for improved legislation and agreements
  Mining and Hydrocarbons
Madagascar             Extractive Industries Technical Assistance                                   445    2014-15
Ethiopia               Improving Extractive Industries Development TA Grant                         779    2014-16
Honduras               Building Regulatory Capacity for Improved Governance of EI                   609    2014-16
  Mining
Kyrgyz Republic        Mining Sector TA Project                                                     334    2011-13
Côte d'Ivoire          Support Mining Code Revision & Mining Cadastre Modernization                 328    2013-15
Togo                   Legal and Mineral Rights Cadastre Reform                                     227    2013-15
Haiti                  Mining Dialogue TA                                                           504    2013-16
Congo, Republic of     Mining TA Dialogue                                                           754    2013-16
Mongolia               Mining Law / Model Mining Agreements                                         150    2014-16
  Hydrocarbons
Kenya                  Oil and Gas Legal and Contractual Framework Review                           648    2012-15
Uruguay                Capacity Building for Oil & Gas Sector                                       391    2014-15
Somalia                Technical Assistance & Capacity Building                                     600    2015-16
Group 4 – 5 Grants to 5 countries that supported mining policy development and early capacity building
Pakistan               Balochistan Extractive Industries Technical Advisory Facility                515    2011-13
Uganda                 Mining Sector Development Support                                            206    2014-16
Armenia                Mining Sector Support                                                        324    2015-16
Dominican Republic Support for Sound Mining Development                                             406    2015-16
Guatemala              Sustainable Mineral Resource Management                                        40   2015-16
Grant that was prepared but not approved due to deteriorating country circumstances
Yemen, Republic of     Oil & Gas Strategy TA supervision                                              53   2010-12
Total Country-Specific Activities                                                              14,813

                                   Table 4: Global/Regional Knowledge

         Global/Regional Projects                                                   Amount (USD)
           Global
         Mining Governance Assessment                                                      699,913
         Training Program Mining Negotiation                                               592,639
         Massive Open Online Course (MOOC) on Extractives                                  100,000
         EI Source Book                                                                     99,998
         IBA Civil Society Forum                                                            25,000
         Contract Monitoring & Compliance in Extractive Industries                          24,919
         Integrating DFGG Approaches into EI Projects                                         7,500
           Regional
         Africa – Africa Mining Legislation Atlas (AMLA)                                   349,684
         Africa – African Mining Vision: Geo-science for Africa’s Transformation            99,603
         Africa – Regional Petroleum Sector Technical Assistance                            86,111
         Subtotal Global/Regional Projects                                               2,077,553
         Program Management and Administration (PMA)                                     2,684,411
         Total with PMA                                                                  4,761,963




                                                      11
GROUP 1 consists of seven countries where the Grants supported specific contract negotiations
which were successfully completed in six of the countries. The seven countries are: Guinea, Liberia
and Sierra Leone for mining negotiations; and Mauritania, Mozambique, Rwanda and the
Seychelles for hydrocarbon negotiations. The Grant to Guinea is a good example of what has been
accomplished by these seven grants in GROUP 1 that supported specific contract negotiations or
renegotiations.

Guinea - Mining Development: Guinea has rich iron ore deposits but they are located in inland
areas hundreds of miles from the coast. The project helped the Government of Guinea to study
various options for developing the world class Simandou iron ore deposit. It helped to identify and
pursue the Government's strategic interests in terms of equity participation both in the mine and
the related port and 650 km rail infrastructure development. The Bank team supported the
government by helping coordinate activities between key institutions (President's office, Ministry
of Mines, Ministry of Finance, Ministry of Transport) to advance the dialogue and policy
development. The engagement of the Bank team complemented support from Bank country
management and the Regional Vice President’s Office and synergies were developed through the
collaboration with IFC and the transport teams from the WB. The work under the grant was closely
coordinated with a World Bank 2012 USD20 million Guinea Mining Technical Assistance (TA)
operation.

The project helped strengthen the capacity of the Government team so that it was able to
successfully complete the Simandou Investment Framework which was signed and ratified
together with a new mining law which was prepared and adopted. The project helped the Guinean
Government to define its core strategic interests and to gradually build its negotiation capacity
through training but also through direct learning as the Government's advisers supported the
Government team in their exchanges with the private sponsors of the Simandou project. The
Government has now some practical experience with dealing with complex negotiations of deals
involving mining and transport infrastructure and it was also able to review some other major
proposed extractives investments.

Through the Simandou dialogue, it became evident that the largest immediate challenge facing the
Government and potential mining investors for the realization of mega projects related to the
absence of port and rail infrastructure to evacuate the ore from world class deposits that are such
long distances from possible sea ports. Therefore, the Government sought a grant from the Public-
Private Infrastructure Advisory Facility (PPIAF) and developed the Mining Transport Masterplan.
A follow-up second PPIAF grant was then obtained which is implementing the recommendations
of the masterplan. In addition, a second phase of EI-TAF funding was granted to provide the
Government with additional advisory services aimed at strengthening its technical and financial
negotiation skills on mining ancillary infrastructure to enable meaningful progress toward
infrastructure licensing and development.

Following is a brief summary of the other six grants in GROUP 1.

   (a) Mining

      Liberia: Liberia has substantial iron ore and other mineral reserves. The Grant

                                                12
        substantially improved government's ability to analyze mining investment proposals and
        negotiate concessions and helped develop a repository of information on all aspects of
        mining concessions; it helped develop an iron ore cash flow model to be used in
        negotiations and recommendations for follow up reforms. Government has since embarked
        on some of the recommended reforms. It also helped attract new resources to support
        mining sector development including additional Bank financing for Economic Governance
        and Institutional Reform Project - EGIRP (USD1.6 million); a USAID GEM project (about
        USD8 million allocation to capacity building on concessions); GIZ support for mineral
        governance and participation in EITI.4

       Sierra Leone: Sierra Leone has substantial iron ore and other mineral reserves. The grant
        helped build the capacity of the National Minerals Agency, the Ministry of Mines and
        Mineral Resources and the Policy Unit who were negotiating new mining agreements and
        reviewing mining investments to ensure that they complied with applicable laws and
        provided fair fiscal terms; a model mining agreement was developed and submitted to
        Parliament and the contract repository was placed online which provides greater
        transparency by providing access to contract terms which means that the government can
        be held more accountable for negotiated agreements; preparation of a new mining policy.
        Following completion of the grant, the Government is preparing, with Bank support, a new
        mining policy which includes lessons learned under the grant.

    (b) Hydrocarbons

       Mauritania: While Mauritania has a very large iron ore industry it has also discovered
        offshore gas deposits which it is seeking to develop. The grant helped build government
        capacity to complete negotiations for the USD1.46 billion Banda Gas-to-Power project (for
        electricity supply to Mauritania, Senegal and Mali) including Gas Supply and Purchase
        Agreements and the contractual arrangements related to the construction and operation of
        the power plant. The grant funded advisory activities focused on the legal and contractual
        aspects of the Gas-to-Power Project, and proved critical to fast-tracking the Negotiation
        Team’s learning curve in a cost-efficient and effective manner making a key contribution
        to a larger process which included support from an on-going World Bank Mining Sector
        TA Project and MIGA guarantees and several other sources of technical assistance which
        were mobilized to cover the technical, environmental, social, and legal aspects of the Gas-
        to-Power Project.

       Mozambique: Mozambique has the potential to become one of the world’s largest gas
        producers from offshore gas reserves which have been discovered in the past six years.
        The grant helped provide initial support to negotiations, for two highly complex LNG mega
        projects (at about USD20 billion value each) as part of a programmatic extractives sector
        reform approach which included a USD50 million Mining and Gas Technical Assistance
        Project (co-financed by DFID), the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI)
        and EFOs (funded by the UK, Canada and Australia). Negotiations for LNG were
        continued under MAGTAP and are still on-going. The grant also helped improve the
4
 Liberia also received assistance under the Africa Regional Petroleum Sector Technical Assistance – see Regional
Knowledge Section 2 c, page 18

                                                       13
       Government build more alliances with development partners. An update of the mining
       cadastre was also completed with support from the grant.

      Rwanda: Rwanda sought assistance as it prepared for the negotiation and finalization of
       a Special Hydrocarbon Exploration License (SHEL) with Vangold Resources Plc, a
       Canadian mining and petroleum company. An eight month grant supported the preparation
       of a Model Production Sharing Contract (PSC) which was used in negotiations for an oil
       and gas investment and development of an economic/fiscal model to assess the fiscal and
       financial impact of proposed contract terms under a variety of economic conditions. The
       grant also supported a review of the legal and policy framework for the petroleum sector
       and training on valuation methods to be better prepared for negotiations.

      Seychelles: The Seychelles has significant offshore oil and gas potential and is seeking to
       attract exploration and development investments. The grant helped strengthen government
       capacity, which with support from other stakeholders, led to enactment of amendments to
       the Model Petroleum Agreement which put in place a new Petroleum Licensing approach
       with competitive tendering (as compared to the previous open door policy). The grant also
       supported capacity building that led to modernization of the Petroleum Taxation Act
       including introduction of progressive taxation through a modern two-tier special petroleum
       tax. The modernization of the legal and fiscal regime led to renewed petroleum exploration
       interest in the Exclusive Economic Zone and resulted in about USD80 million investment
       in data acquisition and processing, six blocks under contract, and two blocks under
       negotiation.

GROUP 2 consists of the following seven Grants to four countries—Colombia, Chile, Mexico
(hydrocarbons environmental and safety), Mexico (mineral royalties), Peru (natural gas), Peru
(mining environmental sustainability), and Peru (mining-related local employment)—where the
Grant focused on accomplishing one or two specific tasks. The Grant to Colombia is a good
example of what has been accomplished by the Grants in GROUP 2.

Colombia - Strategic Mineral Reserve Areas: Colombia has set aside almost all of its mineral
resources in Strategic Mineral Reserve Areas (SMRAs) but did not develop a transparent and non-
discretionary tendering methodology to lease out those areas for exploration and development. The
grant provided support for developing a transparent and non-discretionary methodology for the
allocation of mineral rights and tendering of SMRAs including preparation of draft regulations
based on an analysis of the improvements needed in the legal and regulatory framework and inputs
for the tendering template documents based on good international tendering practices. It also
supported related capacity building for two of Colombia's main mining institutions: the Colombian
Geological Survey (SGC) and the recently created National Minerals Agency (ANM). With
support from the grant, the SGC prepared and approved its ten-year Strategic Plan with a revised
focus on generating geodata to support the development of strategic minerals and increase
knowledge for strategic mineral areas. The ANM is a new institution with little experience in
mineral sector development, and grant activities helped to develop in-house technical capacity.
Both institutions have been operating more efficiently and strategically after implementation of
grant activities. The grant also supported a visit of the Brazilian Geological Survey (CPRM) to


                                               14
build SGC's capacity on the analysis of airborne geophysical data and its use for geological
mapping, and resulted in an agreement between the two geological surveys for further cooperation.

Following is a brief summary of the other six grants in GROUP 2:

      Chile: While Chile is best known as one of the world’s leading mining countries, it is
       seeking to modernize and improve its natural gas distribution system. The grant supported
       preparation of a “Short Law” with rather modest changes to improve Natural Gas
       Distribution which has been submitted to Congress. It also supported preparation of
       recommendations for substantial reforms in gas distribution which would be the basis for
       a subsequent “Long Law” including the creation of an independent regulator of the gas
       infrastructure; vertical and horizontal unbundling of the different activities in the gas value
       chain; and more open commercialization of natural gas.

      Mexico (Hydrocarbons ASEA): Mexico only established the Agency for Safety, Energy
       and the Environment (ASEA) in 2014 and is seeking to build the capabilities and strengthen
       the capacity of the Agency. The grant supported preparation of a Roadmap for ASEA to
       address the gaps in environmental management and safety of hydrocarbons; it also
       provided good international practice on regulation of health, safety and environmental
       aspects of oil and gas hydraulic fracturing, advice on insurance (liability) for hydrocarbon
       operations and technical support to prepare an "institutional memory" as part of the
       capacity building and institutional strengthening for ASEA.

      Mexico (Mineral Royalties): Mexico has a long established mining sector, but unlike
       almost all other countries does not have a mineral royalty. The grant provided a review of
       the mining fiscal regime and helped the government to select a preferred mineral royalty
       and prepare a detailed roadmap to carry out the necessary legal reforms to put in place the
       mineral royalty; it also helped the government to develop an approach that supports direct
       investment by miners in mining community development and to identify the need for
       updates to the current mining law and regulations so that the sector is in line with best
       international practices.

      Peru (Mining Environmental Sustainability): Peru has seen considerable unrest and
       conflict in mining communities due to poor environmental performance and inadequate
       titling for land ownership. The grant supported the preparation of a regional level Strategic
       Environmental Assessment (SEA) of the mining development activities in the one of the
       poorest regions - the Apurimac region - and a national level analysis on the prevention and
       management of environmental conflicts in mining in Peru; it resulted in recommendations
       to the Government to : (i) strengthen regional government capacity to identify, monitor and
       address environmental and natural resource priorities, (ii) enhance transparency of
       environmental information and foster demand for good environmental governance of
       public entities and mining operations; and (iii) establish a framework for land ownership,
       land transactions and natural resource development decision making that protects the right
       of self-determination of the peasant communities affected by mining development.



                                                 15
      Peru (Mining-related Local Employment): Mining has not resulted in expected
       employment and other benefits for many mining communities in Peru. The grant supported
       preparation and adoption of new procedures to gather/process/analyze information
       provided by mining companies and reduce information gaps regarding social investments
       and promote greater local benefits, in particular, by using multipurpose infrastructure to
       improve watershed management and leverage mining investment to promote improved
       access to water for human and agricultural use; it also helped set up decentralized training
       programs and networks for local leaders in mining and identified ways to improve ASM
       mining title management.

      Peru (Natural Gas): Peru has considerable gas potential but lacks adequate reserve data
       and a Master Plan to guide gas development and transmission. The grant supported
       preparation of gas reserves studies and Master Plans for the Southern and Northern
       Peruvian Gas Pipelines to guide both public sector and private sector investment decisions
       in the oil and gas sector and help achieve sustainable, reliable and cost-effective supply of
       natural gas with higher levels of social inclusion and shared prosperity; preparation of a
       capacity building plan and strategy to strengthen the Hydrocarbons Unit in gas matters
       capacity.

GROUP 3 consists of Grants to the following twelve countries (a) Cote D’Ivoire, Haiti, Kyrgyz
Republic, Mongolia, Congo Rep and Togo for mining; (b) Somalia and Uruguay for hydrocarbons;
and (c) Ethiopia, Honduras and Madagascar for both mining and hydrocarbons — draft mining
and/or hydrocarbon legislation (including mining agreement and hydrocarbon production sharing
agreements) and/or related fiscal legislation/terms were prepared. The Grant to Kenya is a good
example of what has been accomplished by Grants in GROUP 3.

Kenya - Oil and Gas Legal and Contractual Framework Review: Kenya has offshore gas
deposits for which a number of exploration licenses have been issued. There is an expectation
that these blocks will be mostly gas-prone and a number of international oil and gas companies
have asked the Ministry of Energy to propose gas terms for the contracts prior to signing
exploration contracts. However, the Ministry of Energy asked for more time due to its lack of
experience in negotiating gas terms. The grant provided three key deliverables to the
Government, namely: 1) a report focusing on providing guidance on how best to update Kenya’s
petroleum sector legal and regulatory framework; 2) recommendations relating to Kenya’s fiscal
framework and guidance on contractual and fiscal terms; and 3) a financial model that will aid
the Government in sector planning and contract negotiations, together with training sessions on
the model. An Inter-Ministerial Technical Committee, in consultation with the State Law Office
of Kenya, is preparing a Petroleum Bill that will incorporate recommendations from the
activities supported by the grant. Stakeholder engagement and consultations were built into the
design of the work from the start and contributed to the wide acceptance of the recommendations
by government, civil society, and private sector and development partners. The Bank approved
the Kenya Petroleum Technical Assistance Project (KEPTAP) in FY16, a USD50 million IDA
credit. The project development objective to strengthen the capacity of the Government of
Kenya to manage its petroleum sector and wealth for sustainable development impacts.

Following is a brief summary of the other eleven Grants in GROUP 3:

                                                16
(a) Both Mining and Hydrocarbons

   Ethiopia: Ethiopia is seeking to develop both its minerals and hydrocarbon sectors. The
    grant supported preparation of an Agenda of suggested reforms which informed the
    government’s draft Mineral Policy and short, medium and long term options for legal and
    policy reform for the oil and gas sectors; and preparation of proposed measures to
    harmonize the oil, gas and mining fiscal terms (which are currently separate) within income
    tax code of the country. Follow-up FY18 IDA support has been requested by the Ministry
    of Mines, Petroleum and Natural Gas.

   Honduras: Honduras has both mining and hydrocarbons potential and was seeking support
    to modernize its mining law and improve its oversight of both sectors. For mining, the
    grant, first, strengthened government capacity to prepare new revised mining regulations
    for implementing the 2013 Mining Law which have been presented to the cabinet for
    approval and, second, supported reorganization of the Honduran Institute of Geology and
    Mines with concrete measures for cleaning mining titles and setting up a more effective
    mining cadastre unit. For hydrocarbons, the grant supported capacity strengthening for
    oversight of production sharing agreements including development of a contract audit
    manual and guidance note and a first ever contract audit.

   Madagascar: Madagascar is seeking to attract new mining and petroleum investment by
    modernizing its mining legislation and mining and petroleum fiscal regimes. The grant
    supported the preparation of comments on draft laws and fiscal regimes and
    recommendations to improve extractives legal and institutional frameworks; it also
    provided inputs for institutional reforms and improvements and an assessment of mining
    and petroleum fiscal terms supported by the development of a mining and petroleum fiscal
    model. Substantial follow up needs were identified, and additional technical assistance
    activities are now being funded by the Africa Sustainable Extractive Industries (ASEI)
    Trust Fund.

(b) Mining

   Côte d’Ivoire: The mining sector has the potential to be an engine of growth for Cote
    D’Ivoire but the institutional and legal framework need to be modernized if the country is
    to become a much more attractive and sizeable mining investment destination. The grant
    helped strengthen government capacity to prepare a new Mining Act which was enacted in
    2014 and also prepare draft implementing regulations together with the design for a modern
    Mining cadastre; it also supported stakeholder engagement and establishment of a national
    association of Women in Mining. In addition, it supported organization of a June 2014
    four-day Regional Workshop on best-practices in international mining law and local
    procurement with over 250 participants from 20 countries including senior officials
    (Mining Ministers, Mining Company Managing Directors, Heads of Chambers of Mines
    and regional institutions such as WAMU and ECOWAS).

   Congo, Republic: The Republic of Congo is an oil producing country that also has

                                            17
        significant mineral resources and has now explicitly identified the mining sector as a
        priority for its economic diversification strategy, to move away from oil dependency. The
        grant supported strengthened the government’s capacity to prepare a near-final draft of a
        Modern Mining code, as well as the first drafts of the associated regulations and
        establishment of a manual cadastre system, which can be used as a basis for the
        development of a modern cadastre system; preparation of negotiation-related training
        plans.

       Haiti: The Government of Haiti sees mining as a potentially important sector but there is
        opposition to sector development partly because a lack of transparency around some of the
        negotiation of agreements that have previously been signed with mining companies. The
        grant provided expert advice to government officials in preparing new draft mining
        legislation5 and supported an assessment of the institutional framework for mining; a full
        evaluation of mining title and cadastre management; a comprehensive inventory of past
        and present mining titles; advice on environmental protection and social mitigation
        provisions; and a large multi stakeholder Mining Forum with additional events and
        workshops with private sector and civil society.

       Kyrgyz Republic: The Kyrgyz Republic has a number of generally small, identified
        mineral deposits and was seeking assistance to improve its tendering of those deposits and,
        specifically, to prepare the Togolok gold deposit for tendering. The grant helped support
        improvements to the mining (subsoil) law and an improved tendering process based on a
        review of good practice international mineral licensing, legal, regulatory and institutional
        arrangements including tendering procedures. The grant supported preparation for
        tendering the Togolok gold deposit through due diligence work and valuation of the
        mineral deposit and work on community engagement/social aspects around the Togolok
        deposit.

       Mongolia: Mongolia has rich mineral resources and a rapidly developing large mining
        industry and was seeking assistance to improve the consistency and quality of mining
        agreements for large scale mine investors and improve procedures for community
        agreements to be put in place. The grant supported an intense period of debate and
        consultation leading to increased knowledge among stakeholders on mineral sector
        development and management, and provided recommendations to the Ministry of Mining
        on best practices regarding mining investment agreements for large scale mine
        developments and the preparation and negotiation of community agreements between mine
        investors and affected communities.

       Togo: Togo was seeking assistance to establish two modern operating instruments—a
        mining cadastre and mining legislation—to make its mining sector internationally
        competitive The grant provided assistance to the Ministry of Mines who were able to draft
        the main terms for new Mining Legislation. It also funded a study on the establishment of
        a transparent title registry and inventory to be installed at the Mines Department including

5
 Advisory services on the preparation of the draft mining law were subject to a complaint to the Bank’s Inspection
Panel from a group of Haitian NGOs in regards to the application of the Bank’s safeguards requirements. The case
was dismissed by the Inspection Panel.

                                                        18
       funding requirements; and supported a multi-stakeholder dialogue around the new African
       Mining Vision (Lomé, June 2014) and the need to revise several regional legal texts such
       as the ECOWAS Directives on Mineral Development

   (c) Hydrocarbons

      Somalia: Somalia presently lacks a clear petroleum legal framework that defines
       ownership and control over resources in order for its hydrocarbon resources to be
       developed. An eight month grant strengthened Government capacity to prepare proposed
       changes to the hydrocarbon legislation and related fiscal terms so that they took into
       account the main concerns of both Government and investors and recognized both the
       principles of federation and decentralization to meet the legitimate expectations of all
       Somali stakeholders; in addition the grant supported substantial training to strengthen the
       technical and commercial capacity for Government officials regarding petroleum and gas
       contracts

      Uruguay: Uruguay is seeking assistance for its oil and gas sector reform agenda including
       strengthening the legal and regulatory framework and building up the institutional capacity
       in the sector. The grant supported preparation of a draft decree for the establishment of an
       Inter-ministerial Commission for Hydrocarbons and preparation of a first draft sector
       overview as an input to the petroleum sector reform agenda as a key input to strengthen the
       legal and institutional framework for the oil and gas sector in Uruguay and develop a
       sustainable development policy and strategy for the oil and gas sector and its contribution
       to social and economic growth.

GROUP 4 consists of Grants to five countries where support was given to help design mining
sector development policies and/or start the process of building extractives sector institutional
capacity. The countries are Armenia, Dominican Republic, Pakistan, Uganda and Guatemala –
but in the case of Guatemala Grant-related mining work was halted by the 2015 political crisis.
The Grant to Armenia is a good example of what has been accomplished by the by Grants in
GROUP 4.

Armenia - Mining Sector Assistance: The Armenian mining sector is an important contributor
to the national economy as a source for export incomes, foreign direct investments, and for creating
relatively high paid work opportunities outside of urban centers. But, none of the existing metal
mining operations is environmentally sustainable and there is significant air and water pollution
from existing mines and processing activities. There are also major environmental problems at
some of the waste dumps of abandoned mines, plus an overall lack of adequate plans and funds to
enable reclamation and rehabilitation of old mine sites and associated waste facilities. The grant
strengthened government capacity and supported preparation of a "Strategic Mineral Assessment
for Armenia", which assessed the state of the mining sector in Armenia, and its development
potential, as well as the key social and environmental challenges the sector is facing; in particular
with regards to the rehabilitation of old tailings.

The work showed that whereas mining is important to the Armenian economy, notwithstanding a
range of past and ongoing initiatives taken by the regulators to reform the sector, individual

                                                 19
operations are not generally contributing sufficiently to Armenia’s longer term sustainable
development. The work was undertaken in close collaboration with the government officials and
provided a concrete series of recommendations, which are supported and 'owned' by the relevant
government agencies, and are being used to develop a National Mining Policy, based on a vision
of what the mining sector should look like, as the basis for addressing the key challenges. Such a
policy will help ensure that development and regulation of the sector holds together, and
contributes to the achievement of an overall vision for national development. The work also feeds
directly into the development of a national EITI work plan, as Armenia prepares to submit their
candidacy application for the EITI Process, and also feeds into the dialogue (in mid 2016) on a
Development Policy Loan, for which the effective management of mine waste is one of the
triggers.

Following is a brief summary of the other four grants in GROUP 4:

      Dominican Republic: The Ministry of Energy and Mines (MEM) was only established in
       2013 and is in need of capacity building and institutional strengthening to so that it can
       effectively meet its responsibilities. The grant supported capacity development for MEM
       by providing training and technical advice that contribute to the improvement of mining
       title and cadastre management. In addition, inputs and training regarding the
       modernization of the existing mining legal and regulatory framework and the promotion of
       more sustainable artisanal and small-scale mining practices contributed to improved
       understanding of these complex issues and greater capacity to better manage them and
       address the existing gaps

      Guatemala: Guatemala was seeking assistance to improve its mineral record keeping and
       improve early stage mining exploration consultations between companies and mining
       communities. The grant supported preparation of a roadmap for capacity building and the
       development of a modern and fully transparent, non-discretionary mining cadastre
       including an inter-agency, multi-stakeholder approach for generating and storing
       geological information and making it more accessible to the public. However, progress was
       foreshortened by the resignation of Ministers and staff at the Ministry of Energy and
       Mining due to due to political circumstances surrounding a national corruption scandal and
       government crisis in Guatemala in 2015.

      Pakistan (Balochistan): Balochistan is a mineral-rich province which is one of Pakistan’s
       impoverished regions where mineral development could have a significant economic
       impact – but the government has limited mineral experience and knowledge. The grant
       supported establishment of a Minerals Working Group which aims to provide a
       consultative forum that can effectively address mineral sector development issues; it also
       provided two workshops that introduced global norms of large-scale mineral development
       to a broad range of stakeholders and a round table discussion, targeted towards provincial
       secretaries (mining) from around the country and relevant federal government
       representatives; the grant was expanded to provide some initial capacity building for
       Government of Punjab which led to a request for further Bank support.




                                               20
      Uganda: Uganda was planning for a new round of mineral licensing for highly prospective
       mining exploration areas across the country identified from recently-acquired airborne and
       geophysical data. The grant supported formation of an Inter-ministerial Committee and
       Task Force and development of a Mineral Policy Green Paper as a basis for wider
       stakeholder discussion to improve and harmonize mining policy, laws and taxation and
       support the planning of the new round of mineral licensing.

           c. Regional Knowledge

In addition, there were three Africa Regional Grants. First, the Africa Regional Petroleum Sector
Technical Assistance which focused on Liberia and supported preparation of the draft of a new
petroleum law, new NOCAL law, and new model PSC that were presented in a series of public
consultations and enactment of a modified Petroleum Law (but the legislation has not gone into
effect because the bill passed by Congress was not accepted by the President’s office). Second,
the African Mining Vision: Geo-science for Africa's Transformation which is supporting
preparatory work which should lead to development of a “Billion Dollar Map” of Africa’s
geological resources. Third, the African Minerals Legislation Atlas has collected, processed and
stored and made available the mining laws and regulations of Africa’s 53 existing mining codes in
searchable and downloadable format and provided training to more than 50 legal professionals.

           d. Global Knowledge

The Global Knowledge program (see Table 4) consisted of two relatively large activities.

The first was a USD700,000 Grant with USD1 million in co-funding for the Mining Governance
Assessment (MGA – renamed MinGov) which has produced country reviews for Zambia
(published), Mozambique, Ghana, Botswana, Peru (Latin America pilot), Kenya, and the DR
Congo using a comprehensive questionnaire to gather information from primary and secondary
data sources as well as from in-country interviews.

The second was a Global Capacity Building and Training Program for Mining Negotiation
USD592,000 which developed course materials and provided three international training
workshops on the negotiation of mineral development agreements and provided training to 90
professionals on mining contract negotiations.

The other two somewhat large activities at USD100,000 each were support for the Extractive
Industries (EI) Source Book and development of a Massive Open Online Course (MOOC) on
Good Governance of Oil, Gas and Minerals for Sustainable Development. The support for the
EI Source Book included preparation of customized knowledge products that were included in
the EI Source Book for global dissemination. The EI Source Book is available through an online
platform and draws 6,000-7,000 unique users monthly. The MOOC included video
presentations by leading international extractives experts and reached 5,560 participants. The
MOOC benefitted from and made use of material from the EI Source Book. The MOOC may
be replicated under EGPS funding later.



                                               21
    e) Achievement of Objectives

With regard to the objective to assist resource-rich countries to correctly structure extractive
industry transactions and related sector policies from the outset, the development objective is
considered to be partially met.

At the time it was established in 2009 in response to demand from resource-rich countries, the EI-
TAF was highly innovative since the Bank had not previously attempted to provide such a rapid-
response facility to assist countries to correctly structure extractive industry transactions.6
However, as noted in the earlier sections the need for assistance with negotiations considerably
declined with the decline in world commodity prices (as shown previously in Table 2). Since
negotiations support was at core of the MDTF’s PDO, while the MDTF provided only 7 out of 31
grants directly targeting extractives transactions, the development objective is considered to be
partially met.

While the program continued to provide extractives support to governments, the 22 grants that
were approved from 2012-2015 focused more targeted advice and building capacity to prepare
modern extractives legislation, related fiscal legislation/terms and sector development policies
which were assessed as among key bottlenecks to client governments being able to structure future
oil, gas and mining transactions.

It is noted for the purposes of lessons learnt, that design of the successor EGPS MDTF has
specifically taken into account these lessons learned from EI-TAF in that the EGPS has a more
broadly designed Development Objective.

The grant by grant analysis indicates that most of the individual grants made contributed to
potentially important capacity building and investment environment improvements for the
countries concerned – even though only six of the 31 Grants directly supported successfully
completed project negotiations.

The Grants that supported negotiations for the countries in GROUP 1 resulted in important
outcomes in terms of completed negotiations (but, again, it should be noted that due to the
downturn of the commodity prices not all of them resulted in development – for example in Liberia
and Sierra Leone all projects were delayed first because of low iron ore prices but then also due to
Ebola epidemic in 2015). Two other grants supported the preparation of financial/fiscal models
that could be used in negotiations but were “a step removed” and thus not included in Group 1.
As summarized in the project-by-project descriptions, the other 24 Grants made some potentially
important contributions in terms of moving countries in the direction of “correctly structuring
sector policies and improving the investment environment for extractives”.

With regard to the objective to support production and dissemination of global knowledge
products on extractive industry sector issues to address the current lack of an integrated body


6
  There was a facility for contract negotiations under UNDP jointly with International Senior Lawyers Program but
it was very different in nature and in financing structure, and its scope was considerably narrower and reliant on pro-
bono legal support.

                                                          22
of good practice for sound extractive industry sector governance and management, the
development objective is considered to be met.
EI-TAF supported major global work on extractives knowledge with some products being truly
innovative and unique. The Mineral Governance Assessment (later renamed into MINGov),
and the other two larger products (the EI Source Book and the MOOC) – are products that each
produce and disseminate global knowledge on extractive industry sector issues that help address
the current lack of an integrated body of good practice for sound extractive industry sector
governance and management.
The MinGov has now been applied to nine countries with the results being written up and
published. Based on the first round of activities. MinGov is advancing towards becoming a
globally accepted mining sector assessment tool and substantial additional donor support has
been received. MinGov is working closely with the Intergovernmental Forum on Mining,
Minerals, Metals and Sustainable Development (IGF MMSD) for MinGov to become an
assessment tool for the IGF MMSD Mining Policy Framework.
As noted previously, the EI Source Book and the MOOC have both made substantial
contributions to global extractives knowledge with the EI Source Book reaching 6,000-7,000
unique users monthly and the MOOC having reached 5,560 participants so far.
The Global Capacity Building and Training Program for Mining Negotiation was ran in several
regions and contributed to assisting resource-rich countries to correctly structure extractive
industry transactions.

   f) Efficiency

Through the respective child trust funds established for all activities, the disbursements made
under this Trust Fund were efficiently managed and implementation progress for individual
activities was timely monitored by the World Bank Secretariat. Some of the Grants have been
extraordinarily efficient – a leading example is the USD363,000 Grant to Mauritania which made
a key contribution to a larger programmatic approach by providing funding for advisory activities
focused on the legal and contractual aspects of the negotiations for the USD1.46 bn Banda Gas-
to-Power project which was successfully completed. Another example is a very modest
USD50,000 Grant to Mexico which supported preparation of the Roadmap for the ASEA to
address the gaps in environmental management and safety of hydrocarbons.

   3. Development Impacts, including those that are Unintended/Unrelated to TF
      Objectives

A March 2015 Evaluation Report by Orbicon concludes that “The relevance of the EI-TAF Rapid
Response Advisory Services has been high. Recipient governments have requested concrete and
timely support to extractive industry governance in view of national strategic priorities….. The
Evaluation Team found that the approach and modality of the EI-TAF Rapid Response Advisory
Services is unique and an innovative concept in all the regions covered by the interventions
……There are good examples and anecdotal evidence that the EI-TAF projects have contributed
to improved relevant capacities within its target groups both organizationally and individually.”


                                               23
In the SWOT analysis, the Orbicon report also comments “The EI-TAF support modality is unique
compared to other donor-supported interventions in the extractive industries sector as it provides
an opportunity for qualified, targeted, rapid-response support. The EI-TAF support is therefore
seen as providing comparative strengths which opens for potential synergies with other donor
interventions in the sector” and references the Grants to Kenya, Mozambique and Colombia as
good examples.

From the standpoint of overall development impacts, the Summary details of the 31 Grants
provided above demonstrate many substantial accomplishments which support the positive
conclusions of the Orbicon Team. As noted previously, the combination of direct interventions
and capacity-building for the four recipient-executed grants and capacity-building and related
support for the other 27 grants resulted in the successful completion of contract negotiations along
with legal improvements in six countries; and preparation of draft mining and/or hydrocarbon
legislation (including mining agreement and hydrocarbon production sharing agreements) and/or
related fiscal legislation/terms in another twelve countries. Mining cadastre work was undertaken
in six countries; financial/fiscal models to support negotiations prepared for four countries; and
tendering improved in three countries. There were reports issued on seven specific development
issues in four countries and mining sector policies developed and/or early capacity-building
provided for another five countries.


       4. Conclusion: Overall Trust Fund Outcome

As noted previously in terms of achieving stated objectives of the program, the MDTF is rated
only Moderately Satisfactory (MS). However,

      from the standpoint of overall development outcomes the MDTF is rated Satisfactory
       based on the capacity building and substantial project by project accomplishments as
       outlined previously and the very positive evaluation of the Orbicon Team.

 D. RISK TO DEVELOPMENT OUTCOME


       1. Follow-On Results and/or Investment Activities.

The Orbicon Evaluation commented that “In a number of cases, the [EI-TAF] projects have served
as highly relevant linkages to other operations carried out by the respective World Bank Country
Offices” and also that “there are examples of linkages and synergies to other regional/country-
level development interventions funded by other development partners (e.g. Kenya and
Mozambique).” Grants have led to follow-up World Bank Technical Assistance projects in seven
countries—Guinea, Kenya, Liberia, Madagascar, Mozambique, Sierra Leone, Togo; proposed
Reimbursable Assistance Services (RAS) in Colombia and Mexico; and a proposed Global
Environment Facility (GEF) project in Colombia. It is of note that four of the seven countries with
follow-up World Bank TA projects are GROUP 1 countries (i.e. countries where the Grants
supported specific contract negotiations). With regard to other Groups, two of the four countries
in GROUP 2 had follow-on RAS and GEF Projects but only 3 of the 12 countries in GROUP 3

                                                24
and none of the 5 countries in GROUP 4 had follow on projects. This indicates that follow-ons
tended to take place for the Grants targeted to negotiations and specific tasks rather than to the
more general advisory services.

       2. Replicability

While the shift to Bank-executed grants moved away from the original objective of recipient-
executed grants, one important outcome worth noting is that it resulted in many of the Bank’s Task
Team Leaders (TTLs) gaining more hands-on and up-to-date experience in core extractives
reforms management in a wide range of countries. The TTLs had to work as closely as they could
to support the countries and this was an overall win-win situation which brought benefit not only
to the countries in terms of advice received and capacity building accomplished but also to the
TTLs in terms of new knowledge which was brought back to improve the capabilities and to be
applied in other countries. There were many lessons learnt and shared experiences coming out of
this work.

The progress reports for five of the Grants - Kenya, Liberia, Chile, Colombia, Mexico
Hydrocarbons TA - comment that the grants have resulted in outputs that could be usefully applied
in other countries, and some examples are even mentioned, but there is little information on any
application taking place. Certainly, one would expect that a suite of products should be emerging
from the 31 grants that could be suitably packaged and countries informed of their availability.
Government’s would need to be approached for permission to share the final reports, but this
should be feasible and any material considered overly sensitive could always be modified if needed
for a report to be released.

But there is a major challenge in terms of dissemination of EI-TAF Reports and knowledge to
other resource-rich countries. For the most part broad based dissemination has not taken place –
partly because some of the reports were classified as “for official use only” or “confidential” which
does not allow the Bank to share them unless the country agrees for them to be released more
widely, and partly because there are no mechanisms in place to release the reports for wider
dissemination to other countries. This is in fact, a sub-set of a somewhat bigger issue. GEEDR
staff have produced many first-rate products which are readily available in their Washington DC
Office, but there is little evidence of these products being widely distributed to Bank clients in
resource rich countries and other interested civil society and industry stakeholders.


       3. Overall Risk to Development Outcome.

The risk to development outcomes is considered negligible to low since the various products
identified previously have been produced and capacity building has taken place. However, it is
possible that the sustained use of the knowledge generated could be interrupted by a change of
government or even a change of minister.




                                                 25
    E. PERFORMANCE

        1. Bank Performance

Overall Bank performance is considered Satisfactory. The rating is a composite of the rating of
performance of the World Bank secretariat (Moderately Satisfactory - MS) and the Task Team
Leaders (TTLs) (Satisfactory - S to Highly Satisfactory - HS) as shown below.

        (a) World Bank Secretariat

The performance of the World Bank Secretariat is considered moderately satisfactory. The
moderately satisfactory assessment is primarily based on the March 2015 Evaluation by Orbicon
which identified several areas where performance was viewed as needing improvement, namely
the need to:
     Develop of an operational framework for results-based management and monitoring
       (which is needed to better evaluate and measure the results of the country by country
       capacity development achieved by the Grants)
     Focus more on developing partnerships with co-funding agencies at regional and national
       levels
     Base project selection on more strategic selection criteria to reflect the potential wider
       impact and sustainability from the project activities
     More systematically share experiences / learning across the EI-TAF
     Improve the interaction between the World Bank Secretariat and the EI-TAF donors for
       mutual benefits and accountability including more frequent and better quality
       status/progress reports

These are observations which the World Bank Secretariat accepted and responded to in a
proactive manner.7
The moderately satisfactory assessment also based on a lack of aggregation of results,
dissemination, and cross-project and cross-country collaboration - which is seen as deficient. This
reflects in part the Bank management decision to eliminate the EI-TAF Program Manager position
and place oversight of the EI-TAF (as well as the EITI8) work with the (then only) SEGOM Sector
Manager who already was responsible for the entire load for the group. The EI-TAF work involved
oversight of nineteen TTLs working on the 31 projects which was not sustainable considering all
other projects and programs managed by the same Sector Manager. This situation has been
corrected under the EGPS which will have a designated Program Manager.

        (b) World Bank-executed Work/ Task Team Leaders

The Bank executed about 79% of the work under the Trust Fund (Table 6) as a result of 27 of the
31 grants being Bank-executed


7
 Further information is provided in the 2015 Final Progress Report, Annex 1 and will not be repeated here
8
 As noted previously, oversight of the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI) MDTF was also placed
with the SEGOM Sector Manager at that time, further reducing time for oversight of the two MDTFs

                                                       26
                                   Table 6: Disbursement of MDTF Funds
                                                   (USD)

                Programs and Activities                         USD                %
                Country-executed                             3,042,000             21%
                World Bank-executed                         11,771,000             79%
                Grand Total Disbursements                   14,813,000             100%

The role of GEEDR Task Team Leaders is considered Satisfactory to Highly Satisfactory.
The satisfactory to highly satisfactory assessment is based on evaluation and beneficiaries’
feedback including the Orbicon Report which commented that a benefit of hosting the EI-TAF
within GEEDR has been engagement of the Bank’s “highly experienced” extractives staff. The
GEEDR staff have both supported the four recipient-executed Grants and managed the 27 “Bank-
managed” Grants. Each country level project was properly processed within the World Bank’s
ADM (Administrative Decision Making) framework, had measurable indicators, and outputs.
Based on evaluation and beneficiaries’ feedback, overall the quality and responsiveness of the EI-
TAF teams (and also the companion EITI MDTF) was timely and of high technical quality.

       2. Recipient (for Recipient-executed Trust Funds only) Performance

The Grants to Liberia; Sierra Leone; Mozambique and Rwanda were recipient-executed but these
grants but the format of the GRM was not conducive to properly reflect on how well the different
tasks that were expected from the Recipient under this Trust Fund were carried out. Looking
forward, the new World Bank small grants procedures now require annual Implementation Status
Report (ISRs) – the same as for IDA/IBRD financed operations. This will greatly improve
reporting under recipient-executed grants that will be implemented under EGPS.

 F. LESSONS LEARNED / RECOMMENDATIONS

There are a number of major lessons learned from the Grant activities.

The 2015 EI-TAF Annual Report provides the following important conclusions and lessons
learned—each of which is being incorporated into EGPS projects:
     Robust results framework and regular reporting structure is essential.
     Capacity building and advice on contract negotiation (output) is costly and does not always
       end in intended result (outcome) of a closed deal.
     Robust and inclusive stakeholder consultation is a key component to the process in cases
       of legal and regulatory reforms.9
This ICM supports each of the above conclusions. The ICM also supports the recommendations
from the Orbicon report in particular regarding the theory of change and need for results-based


   9
     The 2015 EI-TAF Final Progress Report also concludes that “The recipient-executed nature of legal and
   regulatory frameworks is key” but it must also be recognized that that for reasons explained previously only four
   of the 29 EI-TAF grants were recipient-executed.


                                                       27
management and monitoring (noted previously in Section E.1 Bank Performance) which are being
taken into account in the management of EGPS MDTF.

That said, this ICM would add three other recommendations.

First Recommendation: The first recommendation relates to the Progress Reports, Completion
Summary and summaries thereof. The Grant Progress reports and Completion reports and
summaries follow a wide variety of styles and have no consistent coverage of exactly what outputs
and outcomes were accomplished. For some it is very clear. But for others it can be somewhat
blurred, at least at first reading, as to what was intended and what was accomplished. For example,
the statement that “The objective of strengthening government capacity was achieved” is far too
vague – there need to be specifics of what type of capacity was improved and what evidence if any
is available that it has improved

      It is recommended that the instructions/templates for EGPS Grant Progress Reports and
       Completion Reports include specific requirements regarding referencing actual outputs e.g.
       reports produced or workshops/trainings held etc; and outcome e.g. Government actions in
       response to the Grants such as legislation or standardized agreements/contacts drafted;
       regulations prepared; legislation enacted; agreements modified; fiscal terms adopted;
       regulations issued; negotiations undertaken; negotiations completed etc.

Second Recommendation: This recommendation is considered to be the most important.

EI-TAF Grants are not “original”-type scientific research that creates new knowledge and insights
that were previously unavailable anywhere in the world. Rather, EI-TAF Grants mobilize the best
presently available information and make it available in a focused manner to the direct benefit of
the country that is the recipient of the Grant. A potentially very important implication is that in
this way, each Grant generates substantial information that can be of use to many other resource-
rich countries facing similar challenges.

While the findings of the 31 grants could potentially be very valuable to other resource-rich
countries, the overriding lesson learned for this ICM is that there are no established mechanisms
for ensuring that other countries are certain to be informed about the findings of the activities
supported by the 31 grants. This is an issue which is so far unrecognized or addressed in the EGPS.
It can be addressed in the EGPS by using an allocation of Global Knowledge funds to proactively
and intentionally make the findings of work undertaken using EGPS Grants available to other
countries. With this in mind, the EGPS Grant conditions could state that, subject to the
Government removing any material that is considered country-confidential, all EGPS reports
produced would be public documents once a Grant is completed.

But beyond the EI-TAF, in the past decade the Word Bank’s oil, gas and mining experts have
produced and published many important reports, but it is far from clear how many have left the
shelves of the World Bank offices in Washington DC and actually reached government officials,
company representatives and civil society stakeholders in resource-rich countries. The EGPS
could be of great service by proactively and intentionally also making these publications widely
available.

                                                28
      It is recommended that the EGPS consider an activity to (a) prepare a one day “road
       show” on the results of all the EI-TAF Grants plus all the publications of the GEEDR staff,
       over say the past decade, and (b) take the “road show” and offer it to all resource-rich
       countries and potential resource-rich countries in stakeholder forums with interested
       government institutions, investors and civil society organizations, including most
       importantly representatives of communities impacted by oil, gas and mining operations.
       This could be done on a trial basis to ascertain its usefulness and then more widely if there
       is a positive response.

While the initial presentation might be a one-day event in resource-rich and potential resource-rich
countries, depending on the response and interest it may also be desirable to make a number of
follow-up Road Show presentations in each interested country to so that the different stakeholder
groups have time to ask their questions and get in depth response on all key issues. The Road
Shows would make available on the spot both hard copies and soft copies of all relevant EI-TAF
reports and other key reports produced by GEEDR staff plus the EI Source Book. The Road Show
could also be presented to any interested donor countries.

The over-riding objective would be to give interested resource-rich countries and potential
resource-rich countries access to knowledge resources that would enable each of them to make
progress from their present situation, to modernize their policy/regulatory frameworks as needed
in line with good international practice and strengthen their institutional capabilities, as needed,
learning from the experience of experts with well-developed and internationally recognized strong
institutional capabilities regarding the extractive industries.

 G. ICM PROCESSING AND COMMENTS

1. Preparation
TTL at Approval: Michael Stanley
TTL at Closing: Paulo de Sa
Comment of Practice Manager: Christopher Sheldon
Prepared by (if other than TTL): John Strongman
Date Submitted to Approving Manager: December 15, 2016

2. Approval
Practice Manager: Christopher Sheldon
Date Approved by Practice Manager:
Practice Manager’s Comment:

3. DFI Evaluation of ICM Quality
DFI Reviewer: Eka Zarmen Putra
DFI Rating on the Quality of ICM (Satisfactory or Unsatisfactory):
Comment and Justification for Rating Given by DFI:




                                                29
