This volume is a product of the staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development/The World Bank. The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data
included in this work. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper do
not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the
governments they represent.

The material in this publication is copyrighted.




FINANCIAL SECTOR ASSESSMENT PROGRAM -
DEVELOPMENT MODULE

EL SALVADOR

NON-BANK SAVINGS AND CREDIT INSTITUTIONS

TECHNICAL NOTE
NOVEMBER 2016

This Technical Note was prepared in the context of a World Bank Financial Sector Assessment
Program mission in the Republic of El Salvador in March 2016 led by John Pollner and overseen
by Finance and Markets Global Practice, World Bank. The document contains technical analysis
and detailed information underpinning the FSAP assessment’s findings and recommendations.
Further information on the FSAP program can be found at www.worldbank.org/fsap.




                         THE WORLD BANK
                         FINANCE AND MARKETS GLOBAL PRACTICE
                         LATIN AMERICA AND THE CARIBBEAN REGION
                                                                     CONTENTS
Abbreviations and Acronyms .................................................................................................................. i
Preface .................................................................................................................................................... ii
Executive Summary ............................................................................................................................... iii
   Background and current situation ........................................................................................................ 1
    Extension of the regulatory perimeter ................................................................................................ 4
     Select Latin American experiences on supervision of NBSCI ......................................................... 6
    A. The case of Mexico ........................................................................................................................ 6
    B. The case of Brazil .......................................................................................................................... 8
    C. The case of Ecuador ..................................................................................................................... 10
Annex 1 ................................................................................................................................................. 11




                                                                              i
                ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

ABANSA        Banking Association

Bandesal      Banco de Desarrollo de El Salvador

BCR           Central Bank of El Salvador (Banco Central de Reserva)

BL            Bank Law

CAR           Capital Adequacy Ratio

CBB           Central Bank of Brazil

CBL           Cooperative Banking Law

              National Banking and Securities Commission (Comisión Nacional Bancaria
CNBV          de Valores –Mexico)

              Salvadoran Federation of Associations of Cooperatives and Savings and
FEDECACES     Loans

              Federación de Asociaciones Cooperativas de Ahorro, Crédito y Servicios
FEDECRECE:    Múltiples Afines de El salvador,

FEDECREDITO   Federation of Credit Unions and Worker's Banks

FSAP          Financial Sector Assessment Program

FSG           Salvadoran Guarantee Fund (Fondo Salvadoreño de Garantías)

IGD           Deposit Insurance Fund (Instituto de Garantía de Depósitos)

IFI           International Financial Institutions

INSAFOCOOP    Salvadoran Institute of Cooperative Development

NBSCI         Non-Bank Savings and Credit Institutions

SAC           Savings and Credit Institution (Sociedades de Ahorro y Credito)

              Superintendency of Popular and Solidarity Economy (Superintendencia de
SEPS          Economía Popular y Solidaria –Ecuador-)

              Saving and Loan Cooperative (Sociedad Cooperativa de Ahorro y Préstamos
SCAP          –México-)

SOFIPO        Popular Financial Company (Sociedad Financiera Popular –México)

              Multi-Purpose Financial Companies (Sociedad Financiera de Objeto Múltiple
SOFOM         –México)

              Financial System Superintendence (Superintendencia del Sistema Financiero,
SSF           El Salvador)




                                       i
                                               PREFACE

A World Bank mission visited San Salvador from March 6 to 16, 2016 to update the
developmental aspects of the Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP) conducted in
2010. 1 As agreed with the authorities, this FSAP Development Module focused on
(i) financial systems issues, including competition and efficiency; (ii) financial inclusion and
non-bank financial institution issues, (iii) public sector banks, (iv) financial system
infrastructure, including payments, remittances transfers, and credit information systems;
(v) capital market and private pensions development issues; and (iv) insurance.

With the main aim to review the regulatory and supervisory topics of Non-Bank Savings and
Credit Institutions (NBSCI) as well as some of the main characteristics of the NBSCI sector,
there were meetings with the main stakeholders, including the Central Bank of El Salvador
(Banco Central de la Reserva – BCR), the Financial Sector Superintendence
(Superintendencia del Sistema Financiero, SSF), private commercial banks, cooperative
banks, savings and credit companies, and microfinance institutions, development banks,
public financial sector institutions. Finally, there were meetings with two cooperative
federations (FEDECACES and FEDECREDITO) and with the Salvadorian banking
association (ABANSA).

Section V of the Technical Note 2 describes the background and current situation of the sector
of NBSCI in El Salvador, including its legal and regulatory framework, and its main
characteristics. Section VI discusses challenges related to the potential expansion of the
regulatory perimeter in El Salvador. Section VII includes a description of some auxiliary
supervisory experience of NBSCI in Latin America that, although are for countries with a
more developed NBSCI sector and its regulatory/supervisory framework, could provide
useful insights for El Salvador.




1
  The team comprised John Pollner (Mission Chief), Rekha Reddy (Deputy Mission Chief), Maria Teresa
Chimienti, Denise Dias, Tamuna Loladze, Fredesvinda Montes, Mateo Clavijo Munoz (all World Bank staff);
José Rutman (Former Regulation General Deputy Manager, Central Bank of Argentina), and Monica Caceres
(Former Deputy Superintendent, Insurance, Chile).
2
  This note was prepared by José Rutman with input from John Pollner and Rekha Reddy.

                                                    ii
                                   EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

The Salvadoran legal framework considers varied NBSCI, establishing the factors that trigger
their inclusion within the regulatory perimeter. There is a range of NBSCI, some of which are
under the regulation and supervision of the SSF.

The funding of regulated and non-regulated NBSCI include deposits, bank lending, loans
from abroad (including donors and International Financial Institutions -IFIs) and
loans/guarantees from Bandesal (Banco de Desarrollo de El Salvador).

The regulatory framework for regulated NBSCI has no substantial differences with the
requirements established to banks. However, the legal framework for the regularization and
resolution process of cooperatives is unclear and presents uncertainties, which could limit its
effective implementation. The savings and credit institutions (sociedades de ahorro y crédito,
SACs) are small specialized institutions that can perform similar operations to banks.

There are two active federation bodies (of which only one is supervised by SSF) that provide
different types of services to NBSCI, including a self-regulatory and supervisory framework.

INSAFOCOOP, the Salvadoran Institute of Cooperative Development in charge of
registering, supervising and promoting cooperatives, does not exercise prudential supervision
on cooperatives. There is no public information available (neither to the general public nor to
the SSF/BCR) of the financial statements (and other financial information) of the non-
regulated NBSCI, which limits SSF´s exercise of supervision, the analysis of the performance
of the market and the effectiveness of market discipline

There are preliminary draft laws to extend the regulatory perimeter of NBSCI, including the
use of auxiliary supervision by the SSF. The proposal includes an amendment on the CBL,
expanding the concept and reducing the threshold for being a cooperative bank regulated and
supervised by the SSF. According to preliminary information provided by INSAFOCOOP,
around 23 new cooperatives (with $716 million of assets) will fall under the new regulatory
perimeter of SSF.

The auxiliary supervisory scheme based on specialized external auditors and federations
requires proper design and control by the SSF to avoid potential conflicts of interest. The SSF
should establish the minimum standard with which the auxiliary supervision should comply,
and supervise its effective implementation both by the federation and by the contracted
external auditor.

The appropriate incentives should be considered to ensure the compliance of NBSCI of the
applicable prudential regulations within the maximum deadline legally established. The
deposit insurance and resolution framework applicable for cooperative banks and for the new
type of financial cooperatives should be clarified and reinforced. The legal framework should
consider the possibility for the SSF and the BCR to have access to the financial statements of
the cooperatives that are outside the regulatory perimeter.

The SSF should enhance and reinforce the training and number of supervisors to be prepared
for its supervision of the new entities. INSAFOCOOP should be strengthened to be able to
perform certain prudential supervision of cooperatives that are outside the regulatory
perimeter of the SSF.

                                              iii
Some Latin-American countries have adopted –with different approaches- auxiliary
supervision in their supervisory scheme of NBSCI. The strengths and weaknesses of the
approaches of Mexico, Brazil and Ecuador are discussed in this technical note. Although
these countries might have a more developed NBSCI sector and a more advanced legal and
regulatory framework, its experiences could be useful to be taken into account for the case of
El Salvador.

                                   Table of Recommendations

                                                                               Timeframe   Priority

 The BCR and SSF should develop a consensus version of a draft law for         ST          High
 the extension of the regulatory perimeter to cooperatives.

 The draft law should include:                                                 ST          High
     -   Incentives for the prompt compliance with the regularization plan
         applicable for the institutions entering into regulatory perimeter
     -   Mechanisms to mitigate potential conflict of interest arising from
         auxiliary supervision
     -   Access to financial information from unregulated financial
         institutions.

 Clarify and reinforce the deposit insurance and resolution framework          ST          High
 applicable for cooperative banks and for the new type of financial
 cooperatives.

 The SSF should reinforce its training and prepare staff for the supervision   ST          High
 of additional NBSCI under its responsibility.

 Strengthen the capacity of INSAFOCOOP to provide prudential                   MT          Medium
 supervision of financial cooperatives outside the regulatory perimeter of
 the SSF.




                                                  iv
                                  BACKGROUND AND CURRENT SITUATION
1.      The legal framework contemplates different type of regulated NBSCI, establishing
for the cooperatives the factors that trigger the inclusion of them in the regulatory
perimeter. Article 114 of the National Constitution establishes, without distinguishing if they
operate with their members or not, that the State shall protect and promote the cooperative
associations, facilitating their organization, expansion and financing. In February 2000 the law
on “Non-Bank Financial Intermediaries” was approved; afterwards (September 2008) this law
was reformed and renamed as “Law on Cooperative Banks and Saving and Credit Companies
(CBL)”, being the current applicable legal framework for NBSCI. The aforementioned law
establishes that any cooperative that receives deposits not only from its member but also from
the general public and/or whose total deposits plus contributions surpass USD92.8 million will
fall within that law and the regulatory/supervisory perimeter of the SSF. Other institutions
covered by this law are: the federation of cooperatives that will perform financial intermediation
with their affiliates and the SAC.

2.       There is a range of NBSCI, some of which are under the regulation and supervision
of the SSF. There are 11 regulated institutions under the CBL, including 4 SAC, 2 saving and
loan cooperatives, 4 Workers’ Banks (banco de los trabajadores) and one Federation
(FEDECREDITO). Their total assets (without counting the federation) is $0,9 bn, which
represents around one-third of the estimated total assets of the NBSCI sector. The unregulated
institutions include two Saving and Loan Coops Federation (FEDECACES and FEDECRECE),
58 Credit Unions and Workers’ Banks, and an estimated 448 saving and loans coops. The
unregulated institutions have an estimated total asset of $1.9 bn 3, two-thirds of the total assets
estimated for the sector (see Figure 1).

Figure 1: Non-Bank Savings and Credit Institutions (NBSCI)
As of Dec 2015
                                                                           # of          Assets    Regulated
                                                                       institutions       (bn $)     by SSF
    Saving and Loan Companies                                                4               0,2         Yes
    Cooperative Banks*                                                       7               0,7         Yes
        Saving and Loans Coops                                         2               0,4         Yes
        "Banco de los Trabajadores" (BT)                               4               0,3         Yes
        Federation (Credit Union & BT) FEDECREDITO                     1                           Yes
    Sub Total of Regulated                                                   11              0,9
    FEDECACES (Saving and Loans Coop Federation)                              1                          No
    FEDECRECE (Saving and Loans Coop Federation)                              1                          No
    Credit Unions and BT (associated to Fedecredito)                         51              1,1         No
    Saving and Loans Coops                                                  448              0,8         No
    Sub Total estimated of Unregulated *                                    501              1,9
        Estimated Total of NBFI                                             512              2,8
The information on unregulated NBCI is an estimation based on partial information available.
Source: FSAP elaboration with data from SSF, FEDECREDITO and INSAFOCOOP.




3
 There is no official published information about the total number and assets of the unregulated NBSCI. The
estimations included came from partial information available from FEDECREDITO and INSAFOCOOP.

                                                              1
3.       The funding of regulated and non-regulated NBSCI include deposits, bank lending,
loans from abroad and loans/guarantees from Bandesal (Banco de Desarrollo de El
Salvador). Loans from abroad include donors, international banks and International Financial
Institutions (IFIs), while Bandesal provides to the NBSCI both second-tier funding as well as
partial guarantees through the Salvadoran Guarantee Fund (FSG).

4.      The regulatory framework for regulated NBFI has no substantial differences with
the requirements established to banks. Some differences exist related with a lower nominal
minimum capital required (although the required capital over risk weight assets -12.0% - is the
same for both type of institutions) and the possibility of constituting 50% of the liquidity
requirements in banks (instead of having to deposit them at the Central Bank of El Salvador –
BCR 4).

5.      The legal framework for the regularization and resolution process of cooperatives is
unclear and presents uncertainties, which could limit their effective implementation. Some
examples are: (a) the CBL has specific sections and articles establishing aspects related to the
regularization, intervention and dissolution of cooperatives, as well as the existence and
functioning of a Stabilization Fund; the same law (article 106) establishes that it applies Titles
IV and VI of the Banking Law, which present differences with the aforementioned sections and
articles; (b) the same article 106, establishes that the Deposit Insurance Agency (Instituto de
Garantía de los Depósitos -IGD-) must have separate (from the banks) administration and
accounts for the cooperative banks; then, it is unclear if the IGD could use the resources
accounted at the Bank and SAC IGD´s Fund account in case the Cooperative Banks IGD´s Fund
does not have enough resources to pay the deposit insurance of a failed cooperative bank (which
might be the case for almost any of the cooperative banks; see Figure 2); and (c) the SSF has not
granted the cooperative banks an “official” license; so they might have difficulties (legal
challenges) in revoking it.

Figure 2: Insured Deposits of Cooperative Banks and Resources of the IGD
                                                       % over
                                 Insured
                                          % over Coop Banks and
     As of December 2015        deposits
                                          Banks IGD´s SAC IGD´s
                                 (mill $)
                                             Fund       Fund
Coop Bank 1                         2,62          86%        2%
Coop Bank 2                         5,81        190%         4%
Coop Bank 3                         8,66        284%         6%
Coop Bank 4                         9,18        301%         7%
Coop Bank 5                        39,76       1302%        29%
Coop Bank 6                        41,07       1345%        30%
    Funds at the IGD (mill $)
Banks and SAC IGD´s Fund         134,82
Cooperative Banks IGD´s Fund       3,05       100%
Total                            137,88                    100%
Source: IGD

6.     The SACs are small specialized institutions that can perform similar operations to
banks. The 4 authorized institutions have focused in different segments of the market
(microfinance, consumption loans, SMEs, etc.). Some of them have started to provide checking
accounts to their clients. The minimum nominal capital required is lower than banks, which


4
  For operating with checking account, the cooperatives have to deposit all the liquidity requirements at
theircorresponding account at the BCR (on September 2016, BCR approved a change in the regulation where the
100% liquidity reserve requirement to the Cooperative Banks that implement current account was replaced by a
50% requirement established in the “Normas para el Cálculo y Utilización de la Reserva de Liquidez sobre
Depósitos y otras Obligaciones” -NPB3-06)-.

                                                       2
reduces barriers to entry and facilitates the potential participation of local investors in the
Salvadoran financial market.

7.       There are two active federation bodies (of which only one is supervised by SSF) that
provide different types of services to NBSCI, including a self-regulatory and supervisory
framework. FEDECREDITO, which is regulated by the SSF and has 55 associated entities
including credit unions and workers’ banks - banco de los trabajadores (only 4 of these
institutions, all workers’ banks, are regulated and supervised by SSF), operates as a second-tier
entity, with the following activities and tasks: standardization of deposit products and credit,
management of corporate business (debit / credit, remittances), administration of electronic
channels and common computer systems; organization of compensation between members and
provision of training and advisory services, among others. In addition, it has developed
prudential regulations based on SSF/BCR´s regulation, and performs certain on-site and off-site
supervision on the compliance of this regulation by its member institutions. The other federation
body, FEDECACES, is not regulated by the SSF and has 32 members (all of them saving and
loan cooperatives) with similar activities as FEDECREDITO albeit with a narrower scope.

8.       The institution in charge of registering, supervising and promoting cooperatives
(INSAFOCOOP) does not exercise prudential supervision of cooperatives. INSAFOCOOP
has 1,078 cooperatives registered, of which 447 are financial cooperatives and, among them,
only 2 5 are regulated and supervised by the SSF. INSAFOCOOP has limited staff (17 auditors
for the supervision and 18 people for promotion of all the institutions registered) and their tasks
are confined to registration, receiving accounting information, addressing legal issues and
providing advice. Although they intend to strengthen the prudential regulation and supervision
of the financial cooperatives, they do not have the resources and capacity to do it.

9.      There is no public information available (neither to the general public nor to the
SSF/BCR) of the financial statements (and other financial information) of the non-
regulated NBSCI, which limits SSF´s exercise of supervision, the analysis of the
performance of the market and the effectiveness of market discipline. Both Federations and
INSAFOCOOP believe that the information of these institutions is for exclusive interest of their
members and should not be publicly disclosed and shared with the SSF. Hence, the SSF cannot
detect when a NBSCI exceeds the threshold to be regulated and has not presented that situation
to the SSF. The SSF cannot detect how many NBSCI are close to the threshold, nor can it keep
track of developments of the market where NBSCI operate. Additionally, the lack of
standardized and easily accessible information of cooperatives reduces the (already low)
capacity of the cooperative´s current or potential members to compare the performance of the
different cooperatives.




5
    Comédica and Vicentina.

                                                   3
                            EXTENSION OF THE REGULATORY PERIMETER
10.      There are preliminary draft laws to extend the regulatory perimeter of NBSCI,
including the use of auxiliary supervision by the SSF. Currently, there are 2 draft laws (one
prepared by the SSF and the other by the BCR 6) with some commonalities between both of
them. Both initiatives propose that cooperatives that have between $10 and $30 million of
deposits plus contributions and/or assets will fall into a new category of institution to be
regulated and supervised by the SSF. For this purpose, a specific legal framework, similar to that
for cooperative banks, is created. The draft includes a role for auxiliary supervision of these
institutions through the federations of those institutions and through specialized external auditors
hired by the SSF. In the case of institutions not affiliated to a federation, the supervision will be
performed only through the specialized external auditors and the SSF (with no involvement of a
federation). Annex 1 describes the main differences between them.

11.     The proposal includes an amendment on the CBL, expanding the concept and
reducing the threshold for being a cooperative bank regulated and supervised by the SSF.
Currently, any cooperative having deposits plus contributions over $92.8 million is regulated and
supervised by the SSF under the CBL. Both (the SSF and the BCR´s) draft laws propose to
expand the concept to be measured including deposits plus contributions (concept currently
used) or assets (new concept incorporated), and to reduce the threshold to $30 million (less than
one-third the current level) 7.

12.     According to preliminary information provided by INSAFOCOOP, around 23 new
cooperatives (with $716 million of assets) will fall under the new regulatory perimeter of
SSF. The $30 million floor is surpassed by 10 cooperatives (including FEDECACES) that are
not currently regulated by SSF (with total assets of $477 million). Additionally, 13 cooperatives
with assets between $10 and $30 million will fall under the new type of cooperative (with total
assets of $239 million). Finally, 10 cooperatives with assets between 7 and 10 million will be
relatively close to entering into the regulatory perimeter in the short and medium term. These
figures likely underestimate the total number of institutions that would enter into the regulatory
perimeter, since it does not include the credit unions (whose information has not been available).

13.     The auxiliary supervisory scheme based on specialized external auditors and
federations requires proper design and control by the SSF to avoid potential conflicts of
interest 8. Despite using auxiliary supervision, the responsibility for the oversight of cooperatives
remains at the SSF. The federations provide technical services and support for which they charge
the NBSCI, and could be influenced and conditioned to act when regulatory breaches or
weaknesses are detected in one of their associated entities. The alternative of using auxiliary
external auditors hired by the SSF (included in one of the draft laws) to verify compliance and
evaluation of internal policies and risk management could be an alternative to mitigate conflicts
of interests.

14.     The SSF should establish the minimum standard with which the auxiliary
supervision should comply, and supervise its effective implementation both by the
federation and by the hired external auditor. The SSF should have and should perform, at any
time, the possibility to exercise direct supervision, and be the only body with the power to

6
  Afterwards (as noted by the Salvadorian authorities on their comments to the TN), the BCR and SSF agreed on
one consensual draft law (reforming the CBL instead of having a separate new lew).
7
  The new draft law reduces the threshold to $10 million.
8
  The new draft law considers only direct supervision of the SSF (does not contemplate any delegated and/or
auxiliary supervision)
                                                          4
impose sanctions and penalties. The fees charged to the NBSCI for being supervised (either
directly or using auxiliary supervision) should be included in the law (e.g. as a percentage of the
assets of the supervised institution) and channeled through the SSF to be distributed to the
external auditor, the federation and the SSF.

15.     The appropriate incentives should be considered to ensure the compliance of
NBSCI of the applicable prudential regulations within the maximum deadline legally
established. The SSF should be granted explicit authority that, if the regularization plan is not
completed within the maximum period established by law (2 years), they may apply sanctions,
including immediate suspension of the entity, or its dissolution 9. A complementary incentive
could be the incorporation of the cooperative to the deposit insurance mechanism only when it
complies with the regularization plan and when the SSF has granted an authorization to continue
performing its operations. The above recommendations should apply to both the new
cooperative banks (with deposits plus contributions or assets above $30 million) and the other
cooperative entities entering into the regulatory perimeter (between with deposits plus
contributions or assets between $10 and $30 million).

16.     The deposit insurance and resolution framework applicable for cooperative banks
and for the new type of financial cooperatives should be clarified and reinforced 10. These
issues are already relevant for the current number of institutions involved; considering the
entrance of new institutions, it became urgent to be solved as soon as possible.

17.     The legal framework should consider the possibility for the SSF and the BCR to
have access to the financial statements of the cooperatives that are outside the regulatory
perimeter. An alternative (included in one of the draft law) could be to require cooperatives to
report directly to the SSF. Although this might solve the problem of lack of access to the data, it
could face sectorial resistance (e.g. to have direct requirements from SSF). Another alternative
could be to include in the law that any federation and INSAFOCOOP are obligated to report
such information to the SSF, while the (few) institutions that are neither federated nor registered
at INSAFOCOOP should report directly to the SSF.

18.      The SSF should enhance and reinforce the training and number of supervisors to be
prepared for its supervision of the new entities. If the regulatory perimeter is expanded, the
number of NBSCI that the SSF would have in charge could be multiplied by 3 or 4 (there is no
exact figures available) from the current number. When added to the distinctive characteristics
of these institutions (small size, cooperative form, etc.), this presents a significant challenge for
the SSF. The use of auxiliary supervision mechanisms will only marginally reduce the initial
effort, as training and supervision of those who will carry out this auxiliary supervision by the
SSF will be time consuming as well as essential. While the new institutions have no systemic
impact, the consequences of an inadequate supervision would be relevant for the clients /
members of such entities (particularly vulnerable populations), the general view of the financial
sector and the reputation of the SSF as supervisor.




9
  The new draft law establishes certain incentives (e.g. the coops that do not comply with the regularization plan
will not be member of IGD and will not have deposit insurance)
10
   The new draft law clarifies this point. Under this draft, Title II of the LBCSAC (regularization, special
supervision, intervention, dissolution and liquidation) is abolished, making clear that it has to be applied Title IV of
the Banking Law. Additionally, article 106 of the LBCSAC is reformed, providing clarity on the usage of the
deposit insurance fund managed by the Deposit Insurance Agency (IGD); the approach is that the capital of IGD is
only one, for which could be used for the resolution of any type of supervised institution member of IGD.
                                                             5
19.     INSAFOCOOP should be strengthened to be able to perform certain prudential
supervision of cooperatives that are outside the regulatory perimeter of the SSF 11. It should
include not only the allocation of greater resources but also mechanisms to ensure the separation
of the functions between promotion and supervision, as well as adequate training of its staff.
This monitoring would not only improve the functioning of the cooperatives outside the
regulatory perimeter of SSF but also would help them prepare for their inclusion in the SSF´s
regulatory perimeter.



               SELECT LATIN AMERICAN EXPERIENCES ON SUPERVISION OF NBSCI

20.     Some Latin-American countries have adopted –with different approaches- the
auxiliary supervision in their supervisory scheme of NBSCI. Some examples are Mexico,
Brazil, Ecuador, Colombia and Peru. There are differences in the degree of delegation and the
usage of independent third parties, as well as the role of the federation and the involvement of
the supervisory agency. This section contains a brief description of the cases of Mexico, Brazil
and Ecuador. Although these countries might have a more developed NBSCI sector and its
regulatory/supervisory framework, they could provide useful insights for the case of El Salvador.

                                             A. The case of Mexico

21.      The legal and regulatory framework of the NBSCI sector in Mexico has been
undergoing substantial changes in the past 7 years. The Popular Savings and Credit Law
dates from 2001. During 2009 a new legal framework was approved for the sector, establishing a
specific law for the regulation of the saving and loan cooperatives (SCAP). Another legal
framework was introduced for the regulation of the “for-profit” financial institutions such as
Sociedades Financieras Populares, (SOFIPO, Popular Financial Companies). Other actors in the
sector include non-deposit taking institutions such as Credit Unions with their own dedicated
law and the Sociedades Financieras de Objeto Múltiple (SOFOM, Multi-Purpose Financial
Companies), which are covered by the General Law of Auxiliary Credit Organizations and
Activities 12. Figure 3 describes the type and number of NBSCI, whether they are deposit taking
institutions and prudentially regulated by the banking supervision agency (Comisión Nacional
Bancaria y de Valores –CNBV), who performs the different type of supervision, and if auxiliary
supervision is used in prudential regulation.




11
  The new draft law contemplates the requirement to non-regulated coops to submit quarterly financial statements
to the SSF. Additionally, they would be obliged to send monthly information on their credit portfolio, deposits and
other obligations.
12
     This law covers also leasing and factoring companies, which are outside the scope of this Technical Note.

                                                            6
Figure 3: NBSCI in Mexico *
  As of September 2015 except
  unregulated SOFOMs (as of                  Number       Deposit                     Supervision
  January 2016)                              of insti-    taking
                                             tutions                 Market       Auxiliary      Prudential   AML
                                                                     Conduct     Supervision
  SOFIPO                                           44      Yes       Condusef       Yes            CNBV       CNBV
  SOFOM regulated**                                31       No       Condusef        No            CNBV       CNBV
  SOFOM not regulated                           1,432       No       Condusef        No              No       CNBV
  Credit Unions                                    98       No       Condusef        No            CNBV       CNBV
  SCAP (cooperatives)                             147      Yes       Condusef        Yes           CNBV       CNBV
  SCAP (cooperatives) not
                                                                                     Yes             No       CNBV
  regulated***                                    433      Yes       Condusef
  SOFINCO regulated                                 1      Yes       Condusef        Yes           CNBV       CNBV
  SOFINCO not regulated ***                        26      Yes       Condusef        Yes             No       CNBV
     Total (regulated institutions)               323
   Total (unregulated institutions)             1,891
            TOTAL NBSCI                         2,214
  * Does not include auxiliary credit institutions (leasing, factoring, and deposit warehouse companies).
  ** Only when there is an ownership link with banks or they have issue commercial papers in the stock market.
  *** Assets below 2.5 million UDIS, or in the process to be authorized by CNBV or under liquidation.
  Source: CNBV, Focoop, CONDUSEF, Fedrural.

22.     The CNBV has been incorporating many SCAP under its regulatory and
supervisory perimeter. The Law for the Regulation of the Activities of the Savings and Loans
Cooperatives (LRASCAP) approved in 2009 established a deadline for the SCAP above a
certain level of assets (2.5 million UDIs, ~$0.75 million) to become regulated and supervised by
CNBV. After several postponements, in April 2014 it was established that the SCAP with assets
above 2.5 million UDIs that have not submitted the corresponding authorization request to
CNBV would be able to continue receiving deposits and granting credits (only from the current
members) subject to a series of requirements related to their willingness to be subject to a
consolidation process (e.g. being assessed to determine if viable or not, presenting balance sheet
according to CNBV regulations). Since 2010, 100 new SOCAP were authorized (Figure 4), most
of them during 2013.
Figure 4: New licenses for NBFIs in Mexico

                                                                        Credit
                     SCAP           SOFIPO               SOFINCO        Union
     2010               9                3                  -              -
     2011               5                3                  -              -
     2012               7                -                  -              -
     2013              62                3                  1              -
     2014              12                3                  -              -
     2015              5                 -                  -              -
Source: Annual Reports of CNBV.

23.    The legal framework establishes auxiliary supervision –through the Federations- for both
SOFIPO and SCAP, as well as certain roles to them on resolution and deposit insurance. Each
Federation has a specific auxiliary supervisory committee (whose members are appointed by the
Technical Committee formed by representatives of the affiliated institutions) and exercise direct
supervision of the institutions assigned. They must perform an assessment of any institution that
                                                                 7
wishes to get a license from CNBV. Its supervisory process and manuals have to be approved by
CNBV, and they must regularly send reports to CNBV. The deposit insurance scheme is
separated from the bank´s deposit insurance fund, and is administrated by a specific Committee
made up of representatives of the sector; with deposit insurance coverage is around $ 7,800,
compared with the $125,000 established for bank´s deposits.

24.     The experience of auxiliary supervision of the SOFIPO has shown weaknesses. Each
SOFIPO can choose a Federation (there are 6) to be affiliated and to be (auxiliary) supervised,
with the possibility of moving to another Federation. The SOFIPO’s power to choose and to
change their supervising federation creates a conflict of interest for the federations, because
thorough supervision may lead their members to shift to other federations. The conflict of
interest is particularly strong, when the SOFIPO is large relative to the federation. Additionally,
the lack of standardization in the auxiliary supervision methodology (each federation has its own
“technology”) and the deficient validation of the SOFIPO’s information turned the auxiliary
supervision for the CNBV into more of a burden than a help. In practice, CNBV is currently
performing supervision as if there were no auxiliary supervision, which is inefficient and costly
for the sector. In this context, taking into account the negative experiences of auxiliary
supervision with the SOFIPOs’ Federations, and the reduced (compared with SCAP) number
and limited geographical dispersion of the SOFIPO, the supervisors are considering legal
amendments to enable direct supervision.

25.      The auxiliary supervision of SCAP sector is performing relatively well; the
significant number of SCAP included in the regulatory perimeter poses challenges for
CNBV. In the case of the cooperative sector, there is only one supervisory committee which
facilitates CNBV the process of revision of their supervisory manuals and policies, as well as the
quality of the information on cooperatives provided to CNBV. The Supervisory Committee has a
good reputation in the market and plays an important role not only for supervising the
institutions that are within the regulatory perimeter but also to collect information from the
smallest one (below 2.5 million UDIs, ~$0.75 million of assets). The incorporation in the
regulatory perimeter of 100 SOCAP in the last 5 years demands supervisory efforts from the
CNBV, including the continuous revision of the appropriateness and effectiveness of the
supervisory methodology applied by the auxiliary supervision.

                                      B. The case of Brazil

26.      Brazil has a significant a number of financial cooperatives, most of them organized
in 2-3 levels and with a broad geographical distribution. As of mid-2015 there were 1,100
cooperatives, 35 Central Cooperatives (CC), operating at the second level, and 2 confederations
at the third and highest level. The cooperatives have presence in almost all states of the country,
with no systemic impact (2.2% of share in total assets of the financial system).


27.      The supervisory scheme of the NBSCI is based on delegated supervision, with a key
role set for the Central Cooperatives (CC). The Central Bank of Brazil (CBB), through the
specific department in charge of the supervision of the NBSCI, has direct supervisory powers for
the CC and for the individual independent cooperatives; while the CC are the main supervisory
body of the individual cooperatives (see Figure 5). The CC has the responsibility of supervising
the affiliated cooperatives, verifying their compliance with regulation and recommending and
imposing corrective actions. Its supervisory activity should be on a continuous basis (both off-
site and on-site), in a proportional way (considering the volume and complexity of the
cooperatives to be supervised), and with the adequate resources. The CBB´s regulation has set

                                                 8
what should be covered by the evaluation process of the CC to the individual cooperative,
establishing it has to include an assessment on the adequacy of: institutional policies, governance
practices, risk management, internal control systems and compliance with applicable laws and
regulations. Additionally, the CBB has established guidelines in terms of the activity that should
be performed during on-site and off-site supervision

Figure 5: Structure of the supervision of financial cooperatives in Brazil




Note: full arrow implies direct supervision, while dotted arrows are indirect
Source: FSAP analysis based on Central Bank of Brazil (CBB) information

28.     The CC have to submit information to CBB regarding the past and future direct
supervision plan, as well as on any relevant fact detected in an individual cooperative
during the supervisory process. Before the end of each September, the CC has to submit to the
CBB the annual program projected for on-site supervision of the individual cooperatives for the
following year; and by the end of March of each year the results of the supervisory program of
the previous year. In addition, the CC has to send to the CBB -within the following 30 days of
identification- any relevant facts detected during the on-site and/or off-site supervision of
cooperatives, as well as the actions to be implemented to address them.

29.     The CBB has the power to affect the supervisory program of the CC, as well as to
ask for specific tasks and information. Ad-hoc requirements from CBB to CC could cover: (a)
adjustments to the annual supervisory program including changes in the frequency, scopes and
prioritization of the on-site supervision to be performed by the CC, (b) requirements for tasks to
be done and information to be provided with specific deadlines (that could differ from the
regular ones already included in the regulation).

30.     The Cooperatives have their own Deposit Insurance System. The “Fundo Garantidor
do Cooperativismo de Crédito (FGCoop)” was created in 2012, and it covers deposits and other
credits held at the singular cooperative or a cooperative bank in case of intervention or extra-
judicial liquidation. Currently, the coverage of the deposits insurance for cooperatives is the
same amount that the established for banks.


                                                          9
                                    C. The case of Ecuador


31.    The cooperative sector of Ecuador comprises a significant number of institutions, with
946 saving and loan cooperatives supervised by the Superintendency of Popular and Solidarity
Economy (SEPS) –see Figure 6.

Figure 6: Organizations of the Popular and Solidarity Economy in Ecuador




Source: own elaboration based on SEPS


32.     The supervision of the NBSCI is performed by SEPS through specialized rating
agencies. These agencies have to be registered and rated by SEPS, and their analysts must be
certified. They perform off-site and on-site supervision of regulated financial cooperatives and
microfinance institutions, using a standardized methodology which includes the type and
frequency (quarterly and every half year) of the reports to be provided to SEPS.




                                                10
                                                 ANNEX 1


Comparative table on draft laws for expanding the regulatory perimeter 13

     Issue/Topic           Version SSF*                Version BCR*                     Comments

 Requirement to   Not mentioned                   Explicitly established.    There is a need to have
 get basic                                        They have to provide       this info available for
 information from                                 quarterly information to   SSF and BCR. The
 institutions                                     the SSF (June and          approach to acquire it
 outside the                                      December must be           should take into account
 regulatory                                       audited.)                  the sensitivity of the
 perimeter                                                                   unregulated sector.
 Reference to     Intensively used                Minimized. The text is     The references to the
 articles of the                                  “self-contained”           CBL (instead of
 Cooperative                                      copying a significant      duplicating the text from
 Banking Law                                      part of the Cooperative it) has the purpose to
 (CBL)                                            Banking Law (CBL)          assure that any future
                                                                             changes in the CBL law
                                                                             automatically applies to
                                                                             this law.
 Possibility of      Explicitly include           Include 3 general          It should be clear that the
 Auxiliary           it, detailing the            articles establishing that SSF keeps the
 Supervision         tasks, activities and        the SSF is responsible     responsibility for the
                     responsibilities of          for supervision, and       supervision of the new
                     the SSF,                     could use the              institutions. If auxiliary
                     Federations and              federations and other      supervision is used, it
                     other specific               organisms for auxiliary must be clearly defined
                     “delegated”                  supervision.               its powers, activities they
                     auditors (that have                                     have/can perform and
                     to be registered at                                     responsibilities.
                     SSF)
 Compensation        Established as a      Not considered                       The mechanism for
 for the cost of     maximum of                                                 compensating the cost of
 the supervision     0.05% of total                                             the auxiliary supervision
 (included the       asset, to be                                               should be included in the
 auxiliary           distributed 60% to                                         legal framework
 supervision)        SSF and 40% to the
                     Federation. For
                     entities not
                     federated, 100% is
                     assigned to SSF
* Draft laws were provided during the mission



13
  At the time this document has been revised, the BCR and SSF has reached an agreement on one consensual draft
law.

                                                      11
Comparative table on draft laws for expanding the regulatory perimeter (Cont´d.)

 Issue/Topic           Version SSF*           Version BCR*                Comments

 Deposit            The institutions    Does not include a         Since the regulation will
 Insurance          will be covered by deposits insurance          be very similar to the
 Coverage           the Deposits        coverage.                  cooperative banks, it
                    Insurance Agency                               should be considered the
                    (IGD) once they                                provision of deposit
                    have complied with                             insurance coverage.
                    the initial                                    Some current weaknesses
                    regularization plan                            on the deposit insurance
                                                                   scheme should also be
                                                                   addressed.
 Resolution          Refers to Chapter    Includes the             It is very important to be
                     IV and VI of the     Stabilization Fund (with clear about the process of
                     Banking Law          some articles that had   resolution (this
                     (similar to the      been deleted from the    uncertainty also exists in
                     treatment at the     CBL); no reference to    the Cooperative Banks’
                     CBL)                 Chapters IV and VI of    Law.
                                          the Banking Law
* Draft laws were provided during the mission




                                              12
