Report on the Observance of
Standards & Codes (ROSC)
Accounting & Auditing (A&A)
MODULE B: INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK
FOR CORPORATE FINANCIAL REPORTING

B.6 Accountancy Education
TABLE OF CONTENTS

INTRODUCTION TO THE QUESTIONNAIRE								3
A. INSTITUTIONAL ENVIRONMENT FOR ACCOUNTANCY EDUCATION				                                                            4
B. ADMISSION CRITERIA 										6
C. ACCOUNTANCY CURRICULUM 									8
D. POST-UNIVERSITY CAREER 									14
Additional information 										15




© 2017 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank
1818 H Street NW
Washington DC 20433
Telephone: 202-473-1000
Internet: www.worldbank.org

This work is a product of the staff of The World Bank with external contributions. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions
expressed in this work do not necessarily reflect the views of The World Bank, its Board of Executive Directors, or the
governments they represent.
The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries, colors, denominations, and
other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning the
legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

Rights and Permissions
The material in this work is subject to copyright. Because The World Bank encourages dissemination of its knowledge, this work
may be reproduced, in whole or in part, for noncommercial purposes as long as full attribution to this work is given.
Any queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to World Bank Publications, The World
Bank Group, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA; fax: 202-522-2625; e-mail: pubrights@worldbank.org

                                                                                                                                2
                                       ROSC Accounting & Auditing Module B: Institutional Framework – B.6 ACCOUNTANCY EDUCATION




INTRODUCTION TO THE QUESTIONNAIRE



The purpose of this questionnaire is to gain an understanding of the institutional environment underpinning
accountancy education at the tertiary level as well as the practices followed by leading universities in the teaching
of accountancy.

Questions are based on examples of international good practice for the education of aspiring accounting
professionals and auditors such as the International Education Standards (IESs) issued by the International
Accounting Education Standards Board (IAESB).The questionnaire is structured as follows:


  A. Institutional environment for
  accountancy education

  B. Admission criteria


  C. Accountancy curriculum


  D. Post-university career




How should the questionnaire be completed?

•	 Section A should be completed by counterparts from the body with overarching responsibility for higher
   education (or tertiary-level education) in the jurisdiction (e.g., Ministry of Education).
•	 Sections B, C and D, should be completed by individual universities or tertiary-level institutions.




                                                                                                                             3
                                        ROSC Accounting & Auditing Module B: Institutional Framework – B.6 ACCOUNTANCY EDUCATION




[For completion by counterparts from the Ministry of Education or equivalent. Where applicable, please
state the legal instrument or code that establishes a requirement and the date of enactment.]


Please provide the following information when completing this questionnaire.

Country                                                         Organization



Date of preparation                                             Telephone number



Individual(s) responsible for preparation                       Address




Job Title(s)                                                    Email




A. INSTITUTIONAL ENVIRONMENT FOR ACCOUNTANCY EDUCATION

1. Please indicate how many of the universities/ tertiary-level institutions in the jurisdiction offer programs in
accountancy. Provide an approximation of the proportion of these that are public and private institutions.




2. Is accountancy more commonly taught as a stand-alone discipline/degree program or as part of another discipline
such as business, economics, finance and law?




3. Is there a national curriculum/minimum requirements for accountancy programs which applies to all
universities/tertiary-level institutions? If so, please indicate the body responsible for setting the curriculum/
minimum requirements.




                                                                                                                              4
                                        ROSC Accounting & Auditing Module B: Institutional Framework – B.6 ACCOUNTANCY EDUCATION




4. To what extent do individual universities/tertiary-level institutions have autonomy to determine the structure and
content of curricula?




5. Is there a formal process for evaluating and revising the curricula? If so, please briefly describe.




                                                                                                                              5
                                      ROSC Accounting & Auditing Module B: Institutional Framework – B.6 ACCOUNTANCY EDUCATION




[For completion by individual universities/ tertiary-level institutions]

Please provide the following information when completing this questionnaire.

Country                                                       Organization



Date of preparation                                           Telephone number



Individual(s) responsible for preparation                     Address




Job Title(s)                                                  Email




B. ADMISSION CRITERIA

6. Does the university have an entrance examination? If so, please provide the minimum entrance grades for
admission to the accountancy program and to at least three other programs/disciplines (e.g. business, economics,
finance and law)




7. Please indicate the number of years that the university has been offering programs in accountancy.




8. Please provide the following information for the university for each of the last three years, including a breakdown
by male/female candidates where data is available.
                                                                     Current year Prior year            Two years prior

 a. Total number of applications to enroll in                  Male
 accountancy/auditing programs, of which:                    Female

 b. Total number of students admitted on                       Male
 accountancy/audit programs, of which:                       Female

 c. Total number of international students admitted            Male
 on accountancy/audit programs, of which:                    Female


                                                                                                                            6
                                      ROSC Accounting & Auditing Module B: Institutional Framework – B.6 ACCOUNTANCY EDUCATION




9. Please indicate the types of courses, diplomas or degree programs the university offers in accountancy, noting
the following: (i) course name; (ii) the number of students enrolled (iii) percentages of male and female students
(where data is available) and (iv) length of the program (use the ‘Additional Information’ page at the end of this
questionnaire if necessary).

a. Undergraduate degree in accountancy
Full-time                                                     Part-time




Evening program                                               Distance-learning




b. Undergraduate degree in another discipline (please indicate which) with concentration in accountancy
Full-time                                                     Part-time




Evening program                                               Distance-learning




c. Master’s degree in accountancy
Full-time                                                     Part-time




Evening program                                               Distance-learning




d. PhD in accountancy
Full-time                                                     Part-time




Evening program                                               Distance-learning




                                                                                                                            7
                                                         ROSC Accounting & Auditing Module B: Institutional Framework – B.6 ACCOUNTANCY EDUCATION




e. Accountancy Diplomas
Full-time                                                                                Part-time




Evening program                                                                          Distance-learning




f. Other (please specify)
Full-time                                                                                Part-time




Evening program                                                                          Distance-learning




10. Please indicate the source(s) of funding for the university.




C. ACCOUNTANCY CURRICULUM

11. Please indicate which of the following competence areas and learning outcomes1 are covered in the accountancy
curriculum and provide the name(s) of the relevant course(s) (use the ‘Additional Information’ page at the end of
this questionnaire if necessary). Select all that apply.
  Competence area/                                                                          Course name
  Learning outcomes

  Financial accounting and reporting
           i. Apply accounting principles to transactions
           and other events.


1
  According to IES 2, Initial Professional Development – Technical Competence, the content of accounting education should cover these areas. Students should attain
‘intermediate’ level proficiency for all areas except for Economics where ‘foundation’ level of proficiency is sufficient. ‘Intermediate’ proficiency is defined as the level
where the learning outcomes in a competence area focus on:
• Independently applying, comparing, and analyzing underlying principles and theories from relevant areas of technical competence to complete work assignments
and make decisions;
• Combining technical competence and professional skills to complete work assignments;
• Applying professional values, ethics, and attitudes to work assignments; and
• Presenting information and explaining ideas in a clear manner, using oral and written communications, to accounting and non-accounting stakeholders.
Learning outcomes at the intermediate level relate to work situations that are characterized by moderate levels of ambiguity, complexity, and uncertainty.
                                                                                                                                                                                8
                                   ROSC Accounting & Auditing Module B: Institutional Framework – B.6 ACCOUNTANCY EDUCATION




Competence area/                                             Course name
Learning outcomes

    ii. Apply International Financial Reporting
    Standards (IFRSs) or other relevant standards to
    transactions and other events.

    iii. Evaluate the appropriateness of accounting
    policies used to prepare financial statements.


    iv. Prepare financial statements, including
    consolidated financial statements, in accordance
    with IFRSs or other relevant standards.

    vi. Interpret reports that include non-financial
    data, for example


Management accounting
    i. Apply techniques to support management
    decision making, including product costing,
    variance analysis, inventory management, and
    budgeting and forecasting.

    ii. Apply appropriate quantitative techniques to
    analyze cost behavior and the drivers of costs.


    iii. Analyze financial and non-financial data to
    provide relevant information for management
    decision-making.

    iv. Prepare reports to support management
    decision making, including reports that focus
    on planning and budgeting, cost management,
    quality control, performance measurement, and
    benchmarking.

    v. Evaluate the performance of products and
    business segments.


Finance and financial management
    i. Compare the various sources of financing
    available to an organization, including bank
    financing, financial instruments, and bond,
    equity and treasury markets.

    ii. Analyze an organization’s cash flow and
    working capital requirements.



                                                                                                                         9
                                     ROSC Accounting & Auditing Module B: Institutional Framework – B.6 ACCOUNTANCY EDUCATION



Competence area/                                               Course name
Learning outcomes

    iii. Analyze the current and future financial
    position of an organization, using techniques
    including ratio analysis, trend analysis, and cash
    flow analysis.

    iv. Evaluate the appropriateness of the
    components used to calculate an organization’s
    cost of capital.

    v. Apply capital budgeting techniques in the
    evaluation of capital investment decisions.


    vi. Explain income, asset-based, and market
    valuation approaches used for investment
    decisions, business planning, and long-term
    financial management.

Taxation
     i. Explain national taxation compliance and filing
     requirements.


     ii. Prepare direct and indirect tax calculations for
     individuals and organizations.


     iii. Analyze the taxation issues associated with
     non-complex international transactions.


     iv. Explain the differences between tax planning,
     tax avoidance, and tax evasion.


Audit and assurance
     i. Describe the objectives and stages involved in
     performing an audit of financial statements.


     ii. Apply relevant auditing standards (for
     example, International Standards on Auditing),
     and applicable laws and regulations to an audit
     of financial statements.

     iii. Assess the risks of material misstatement in
     the financial statements and consider the impact
     on the audit strategy.

     iv. Apply quantitative methods that are used in
     audit engagements. Explain the key elements
     of assurance engagements and applicable
     standards that are relevant to such engagements.

                                                                                                                          10
                                      ROSC Accounting & Auditing Module B: Institutional Framework – B.6 ACCOUNTANCY EDUCATION



Competence area/                                                Course name
Learning outcomes

Governance, risk management and internal control
     i. Explain the principles of good governance,
     including the rights and responsibilities of owners,
     investors, and those charged with governance; and
     explain the role of stakeholders in governance,
     disclosure, and transparency requirements.

     ii. Analyze the components of an organization’s
     governance framework.


     iii. Analyze an organization’s risks and
     opportunities using a risk management
     framework.

     iv. Analyze the components of internal control
     related to financial reporting.



Business laws and regulations
     i. Explain the laws and regulations that govern
     the different forms of legal entities.


     ii. Explain the laws and regulations applicable
     to the environment in which professional
     accountants operate.

Information technology
     i. Analyze the adequacy of general information
     technology controls and relevant application
     controls

     ii. Explain how information technology
     contributes to data analysis and decision making.


     iii. Use information technology to support
     decision making through business analytics.


Business and organizational environment
     i. Describe the environment in which an
     organization operates, including the main
     economic, legal, political, social, technical,
     international, and cultural forces.




                                                                                                                           11
                                     ROSC Accounting & Auditing Module B: Institutional Framework – B.6 ACCOUNTANCY EDUCATION




Competence area/                                               Course name
Learning outcomes

    ii. Analyze aspects of the global environment that
    affect international trade
    and finance.

    iii. Identify the features of globalization,
    including the role of multinationals


Economics
    i. Describe the fundamental principles of
    microeconomics and macroeconomics.


    ii. Describe the effect of changes in
    macroeconomic indicators on business activity.


    iii. Explain the different types of market
    structures, including perfect competition,
    monopolistic competition, monopoly, and
    oligopoly.

Business strategy and management
    i. Explain the various ways that organizations
    may be designed and structured.


    ii. Describe the effect of changes in
    macroeconomic indicators on business activity.


    iii. Analyze the external and internal factors that
    may influence the strategy of an organization.


    iv. Explain the processes that may be used to
    implement the strategy of an organization.


    v. Explain how theories of organizational
    behavior may be used to enhance the
    performance of the individual, teams, and the
    organization.




                                                                                                                          12
                                       ROSC Accounting & Auditing Module B: Institutional Framework – B.6 ACCOUNTANCY EDUCATION




12. Please indicate the language(s) in which accountancy programs are taught.




13. In which languages are the textbooks and other teaching materials available?




14. Please indicate how often the accountancy curriculum is subject to review.




15. Does the completion of certain accountancy courses at the university provide accreditation for exemptions for
a professional accountancy qualification offered by a professional accountancy organization (PAO)? If so, please
indicate the exemptions and the PAO(s) (local and/or international).




16. Provide the following information for the university for each of the last three years.
                                                                        Current year      Prior year        Two years prior
 a. Number of teaching staff of accounting/                 Full Time
 auditing programs, of which (include male/
 female ratio if data is available):                       Part Time


 b. Number of international teaching staff of               Full Time
 accounting/auditing programs (include male/
 female ratio if data is available)                        Part Time




                                                                                                                            13
                                       ROSC Accounting & Auditing Module B: Institutional Framework – B.6 ACCOUNTANCY EDUCATION




D. POST-UNIVERSITY CAREER



17. Please provide the following information for the university for each of the last three years:
                                                                        Current year      Prior year        Two years prior

 a. Graduation rates for students on Accountancy/               Male
 Audit programs                                               Female

 b. Average alumnus salary three years after                    Male
 graduation (if data is available):                           Female


18. To the best of your knowledge, indicate the percentage of university alumni employed in the following (and
provide percentages for male and female graduates if possible):
                                                                                        Percentage
  a. Local audit & assurance companies

  b. International network audit & assurance companies (e.g., ‘Big 4’)

  c. Financial sector (banking, insurance, etc.)

  d. Non-Financial sector
  	    i. Domestic small and medium sized enterprises (SMEs)
  	    ii. Large domestic companies
  	    iii. Multinationals

  e. Government bodies or other public sector organizations

  f. Non-governmental organizations

  g. Academia

  h. Other (please specify)




                                                                                                                            14
                                     ROSC Accounting & Auditing Module B: Institutional Framework – B.6 ACCOUNTANCY EDUCATION




Additional information


Please indicate the corresponding section and question number if using this page to provide additional information.




                                                                                                                          15
