Report on the Observance of
Standards & Codes (ROSC)
Accounting & Auditing (A&A)
Module A - Accounting & Auditing Standards

A.1 Financial Reporting Standards Analysis
TABLE OF CONTENTS

1. INTRODUCTION											3
2. APPROACH FOR ASSESSING NATIONAL GAAP							4
3. CHECKLISTS FOR ASSESSING KEY DIFFERENCES WITH IFRS (FOR PIES) 			                                                  5
A. PRESENTATION OF FINANCIAL STATEMENTS 							6
B. ACCOUNTING POLICIES, ESTIMATES AND ERRORS 						10
C. REVENUE RECOGNITION 										14
D. IMPAIRMENT OF ASSETS 										18
E. LEASES												24
F. PROVISIONS AND CONTINGENT LIABILITIES							28
G. EMPLOYEE BENEFITS										31
H. FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS									34
I. BUSINESS COMBINATIONS										39
J. CONSOLIDATION AND JOINT ARRANGEMENTS							42
K. OPERATING SEGMENTS										46
L. OTHER TOPICS											49
ANNEX: REPORTING OF KEY DIFFERENCES BETWEEN NATIONAL GAAP AND IFRS		                                                  57




© 2017 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank
1818 H Street NW
Washington DC 20433
Telephone: 202-473-1000
Internet: www.worldbank.org

This work is a product of the staff of The World Bank with external contributions. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions
expressed in this work do not necessarily reflect the views of The World Bank, its Board of Executive Directors, or the
governments they represent.
The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries, colors, denominations, and
other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning the
legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

Rights and Permissions
The material in this work is subject to copyright. Because The World Bank encourages dissemination of its knowledge, this work
may be reproduced, in whole or in part, for noncommercial purposes as long as full attribution to this work is given.
Any queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to World Bank Publications, The World
Bank Group, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA; fax: 202-522-2625; e-mail: pubrights@worldbank.org

                                                                                                                                2
                                             ROSC Accounting & Auditing – Module A: A&A Standards – A.1 Financial Reporting Standards Analysis




1. INTRODUCTION


The quality of financial reporting depends to a great extent on the quality of the A&A standards on which the
reporting is based. Accounting standards are seen as a critical “language” of business. In countries seeking to
improve their business environment to attract foreign direct investment and mobilize savings and finance to
support productive and job-creating activities, if national accounting standards differ significantly from the
increasingly universal international benchmark, International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRS)1, it becomes
difficult for foreign investors to understand the financial reports of domestic companies, thus potentially
hampering investment and growth.

The objective of the Financial Reporting Standards Analysis is to compare national financial reporting standards
(or generally accepted accounting principles - “national GAAP”) with IFRS with a view to capturing significant
differences (where applicable) in order to provide (a) readers with a clear sense of where key areas of divergence
lie, and (b) country counterparts with concrete suggestions for improving national GAAP and aligning them to
the extent possible with IFRS.

When should teams perform this exercise?

The Financial Reporting Standards Analysis is normally required when carrying out a ROSC A&A in
a country that:
    a) has developed its own financial reporting standards/GAAP and these are widely known to be
    different from IFRS;
    b) uses an older version of IFRS (i.e., the most current version of IFRS has not been officially accepted by the
    local standard-setter); or
    c) uses IFRS as the basis for developing its national GAAP, but has made modifications (including omissions
    or “carve-outs”) to individual IFRS.

If the country has adopted full and current IFRS without any modification, IFRS is the national GAAP and
therefore the task team does not need to complete A.1.




1
 IFRS are the standards issued by the International Accounting Standards Board (IASB), the standards issued by its predecessor the
International Accounting Standards Committee (IASC) and adopted by the IASB, and the Interpretations issued or adopted by IFRIC.
                                                                                                                                            3
                                                ROSC Accounting & Auditing – Module A: A&A Standards – A.1 Financial Reporting Standards Analysis




2. APPROACH FOR ASSESSING NATIONAL GAAP


Wherever possible, ROSC A&A teams should rely on published or available analysis on differences between
national GAAP and IFRS by the national standard-setter, professional accountancy organization(s), or one of the
most prominent accounting firms in the country. Another potentially relevant source is the notes to the financial
statements of large domestic companies which may contain explanations on differences between national GAAP
and IFRS. If such analysis/information is available and deemed reliable, the ROSC A&A team may decide not to
perform the analysis in this module on the grounds that it would represent a duplicative effort and instead rely on
the existing analysis. In such cases, the source(s) of the information should be clearly disclosed in the ROSC A&A
report.

One difficulty the ROSC A&A team may face in carrying out this analysis is the use of multiple financial reporting
standards in the same country. Indeed, IFRS is developed with a primary focus on listed companies and many
jurisdictions mandate IFRS (or financial reporting standards based on/similar to IFRS) only for public interest
entities (PIEs), i.e., listed companies, banks, insurance companies and companies deemed of particular importance
from a public-interest perspective, based on size, type of sector or whether or not they are state-owned.

For instance, a country may mandate: full IFRS for its listed companies; a different set of financial reporting
standards reflecting prudential considerations for its banks; public-sector standards for its state-owned enterprises;
and another set of standards (typically simpler) for other types of companies required to prepare general purpose
financial statements such as small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs). In that case, the ROSC A&A team would
normally use the checklists in Section 3 below to assess the financial reporting standards applicable to banks and to
non-listed companies.

Teams should always use professional judgment in determining which tools to use and sources to rely on. The ROSC
A&A report should provide readers with a clear sense of the approach followed and sources used for assessing
financial reporting standards.

Table 1: Type of Analysis to Perform for Different Categories of Companies/Standards

      Type/category of entity                 Relevant international                                        ROSC A&A Team to use
                                              standards*

      Public Interest Entities                IFRS                                     • Publication from                   Checklists A-L in
      (PIEs)                                                                           reputable source on                  Section 3. as adapted
                                                                                       differences between.
      Non-listed entities                     IFRS (for larger entities)               national GAAP
      including SMEs                          or the IFRS for SMEs                     and international
                                                                                       standards***
                                                                                       • Notes to financial
      Micro-enterprises                       Guide on the IFRS for
                                                                                       statements of PIES or
                                              SMEs**
                                                                                       large companies




* The only internationally endorsed financial reporting standards as part of the Standards and Codes/ROSC initiative are
the (full) IFRS. The World Bank has no official position on the IFRS for SMEs but encourages its adoption in lieu of full
IFRS for entities other than PIEs.
** Typically for jurisdictions that have adopted both full IFRS and the IFRS for SMEs (refer to http://www.ifrs.org/use-
around-the-world/pages/jurisdiction-profiles.aspx).
***
      IFRS for PIEs and the IFRS for SMEs for non-listed companies excluding. Micro-enterprises.
                                                                                                                                                    4
                                                ROSC Accounting & Auditing – Module A: A&A Standards – A.1 Financial Reporting Standards Analysis




3. CHECKLISTS FOR ASSESSING KEY DIFFERENCES WITH IFRS (FOR PIES)


With a view to assisting teams in the assessment of national financial reporting standards for PIEs as part of a ROSC
A&A, 12 areas/topics were identified based on the extant IFRS as of June 2016. These areas were selected with the
assumption that they provide the most efficient way and relevant basis for identifying key differences with IFRS, as
they correspond to:
       a) recently issued/revised IFRS (the rationale being that national GAAP are less likely to diverge with IFRS when
       it comes to transactions for which the corresponding IFRS has not been significantly modified for a relatively
       long time);
       b) some of the transactions that are inherently more complex to treat from an accounting standpoint, from the
       perspective of a PIE;
       c) types of transactions that have universal relevance, including to developing countries.

The areas/types of transactions to be assessed, as a minimum, as part of the Financial Reporting Standards Analysis
are shown below:



     A. Presentation of financial statements                                     G. Employee benefits (IAS 19)
     (IAS 1)

     B. Accounting policies, estimates and                                       H. Financial instruments (IFRS 9)
     errors (IAS 8)

     C. Revenue recognition (IFRS 15)                                            I. Business combinations (IFRS 3)


     D. Impairment of assets (IAS 36)                                            J. Consolidation and joint arrangements
                                                                                 (IFRS 10-12, IAS 28)

     E. Leases (IFRS 16)                                                         K. Operating segments (IFRS 8)


     F. Provisions and contingent liabilities                                    L. Other Topics – Fair value (IFRS 13) – Income
     (IAS 37)                                                                    taxes (IAS 12) – Foreign exchange (IAS 21)




Moreover, the ROSC A&A team - through discussion with local experts and country counterparts, with reference
to IFRS jurisdiction profiles0, and using professional judgment -should determine whether additional areas should
be included in the Financial Reporting Standards Analysis – i.e. whether standards other than those listed above
are particularly relevant to the country and may significantly differ from IFRS. This could include, for example,
property, plant and equipment (IAS 16), agriculture (IAS 41), and mineral assets (IFRS 6).




0
    http://www.ifrs.org/Use-around-the-world/Pages/Jurisdiction-profiles.aspx
                                                                                                                                               5
                                  ROSC Accounting & Auditing – Module A: A&A Standards – A.1 Financial Reporting Standards Analysis




How should this exercise be performed?

• Teams should complete each of the sub-sections, providing yes/no responses, selecting applicable items from a
checklist, or fill in the text box as indicated. Where national GAAP is known to differ significantly from IFRS, teams
should consider providing a high level overview of the differences in these areas instead of completing the detailed
checklists.
• Based on the responses to the checklists, teams should prepare a schedule outlining the areas identified where
national GAAP differs from IFRS, and noting whether the difference is likely to significantly affect a user’s
understanding of the financial statements.
• The results of the analysis should then be discussed with the national standard-setting body, experts from the
profession, and other relevant technical counterparts for corroboration and validation.
• A summary of the key differences identified in the analysis should be included in the ROSC A&A report.
ROSC A&A teams are expected to not just highlight technical differences in the standards, but also the resulting
implications in the way the financial position and performance of companies will be reported. Guidance on what to
include in the report is provided in the annex.



A. PRESENTATION OF FINANCIAL STATEMENTS


IAS 1 Presentation of Financial Statements establishes the overall requirements for an entity’s financial statements,
including guidelines for their structure and minimum requirements for their content. The focus in this
questionnaire is on the core principles and on the most recent changes introduced in the standard. Entities that
comply with IFRS are required to make an explicit statement to that effect in the notes and should not describe
financial statements as complying with IFRS unless they comply with all of the requirements of IFRS.

The following terms are used as defined in the standard:
• Financial statements – a structured representation of the financial position, financial performance and cash flows
of an entity
• General purpose financial statements – financial statements intended to meet the needs of users who are not in a
position to require an entity to prepare reports tailored to their particular information needs.
• Notes – information in addition to that presented in the financial statements which provides narrative descriptions
or dis-aggregations of items presented in the statements and information about items that do not qualify for
recognition in the statements.
• Other comprehensive income (“OCI”) – items of income and expense that are not recognized in profit or loss as
required or permitted by other IFRS.
• Materiality – omissions or misstatements of items are material if they could, individually or collectively, influence
the economic decisions that users make on the basis of the financial statements.
• Fair presentation – requires the faithful representation of the effects of transactions, other events and conditions
in accordance with the definitions and recognition criteria for assets, liabilities, income and expenses set out in the
Conceptual Framework for Financial Reporting.




                                                                                                                                 6
                                               ROSC Accounting & Auditing – Module A: A&A Standards – A.1 Financial Reporting Standards Analysis




1. Please indicate if IAS 1 has been adopted in full in the jurisdiction or note the national standard which addresses
the presentation and composition of financial statements.
    IAS 1
Adopted in full?                                                                       National Standard




2. Indicate which of the following are required to be included in a complete set of financial statements under
national GAAP. Select all that apply.

         Complete set of financial statements
         Statement of financial position at the end of the reporting period (or “balance sheet”)2

         Statement of profit or loss and other comprehensive income for the period3

         Statement of changes in equity for the period

         Statement of cash flows for the period

         Notes, comprising significant accounting policies and other explanatory information

         Comparative information in respect of the preceding period

         Other (please describe)



3. Please provide yes/no responses to the following questions:

     Does national GAAP allow entities to offset assets and liabilities or income and                                          YES
     expenses where not explicitly required or permitted by a standard?

     Does national GAAP require entities to present separately each material class                                             YES
     of similar items in the financial statements?

     Is the concept of other comprehensive income recognized in national GAAP?                                                 YES


     Where OCI is NOT recognized in national GAAP, are such items recognized                                                   YES
     directly in equity?

     Does national GAAP require entities to disclose income tax relating to each                                               YES
     component of OCI?




2
  Note that a statement of financial position is required at the beginning of the preceding period when an entity applies an
accounting policy retrospectively or makes a retrospective restatement of items.
3
  This may be a single statement (sometimes referred to as the “statement of comprehensive income”) or there may be two
statements with profit or loss and other comprehensive income presented separately.
                                                                                                                                              7
                                             ROSC Accounting & Auditing – Module A: A&A Standards – A.1 Financial Reporting Standards Analysis




4. Indicate which of the following are required in order for an entity to have achieved fair presentation in its
financial statements under national GAAP. Select all that apply.

        Fair presentation

           Selection and application of accounting policies in accordance with a hierarchy of authoritative guidance


           Presentation of information, including accounting policies, in a manner that provides relevant, credible,
           comparable and understandable information

           Provision of additional disclosures when compliance with the specific requirements in the standards
           is insufficient to enable users to understand the impact of particular transactions, other events and
           conditions on the entity’s financial position and financial performance

           If departures from compliance with standards are permitted, entities are required to disclose the
           following:
             i. That management has concluded the financial statements present fairly the entity’s financial position,
             financial performance and cash flows
             ii. That it has complied with applicable standards except that it has departed from a particular
             requirement in order to achieve fair presentation
             iii. The title of the standard from which the entity has departed, the nature of the departure (including
             the treatment that the standard would require), the reason why that treatment would be so misleading,
             and the treatment adopted
             iv. For each period presented, the financial effect of the departure on each item in the financial
             statements that would have been reported in complying with the requirement

           Other (please describe)	




5. Indicate which (if any) of the following are considered to be components of OCI under national GAAP (where
applicable). Select all that apply

        Components of OCI

           Changes in revaluation surplus of assets4


           Re-measurements of defined benefit plans5


           Exchange gains and losses from translating the financial statements of a foreign operation6


           Gains and losses from investments in equity instruments designated at fair value through OCI7



4
  Refer to IAS 16 Property, Plant and Equipment and IAS 38 Intangible Assets
5
  Refer to IAS 19 Employee Benefits
6
  Refer to IAS 21 The Effects of Changes in Foreign Exchange Rates
7
  Refer to IFRS 9 Financial Instruments
                                                                                                                                            8
                                                ROSC Accounting & Auditing – Module A: A&A Standards – A.1 Financial Reporting Standards Analysis




           Components of OCI

              Gains and losses from financial assets measured at fair value through OCI8


              The effective portion of gains and losses on hedging instruments in a cash flow hedge9


              Gains and losses on hedging instruments measured at fair value through OCI


              Change in fair value attributable to credit risk of particular liabilities designated at fair value through
              profit and loss

              Changes in the time value of options where the change is due to the designation of the hedging
              instrument as the changes in the intrinsic value of the option

              Changes in the value of forward elements of forward contracts where the change is due to the designation
              of the hedging instrument as the changes in the spot element

              Changes in the value of the foreign currency basis spread of a financial instrument when excluding it
              from the designation of that financial instrument as the hedging instrument

              The concept of “other comprehensive income” is not applicable under national GAAP



6. Indicate which (if any) of the following statements apply to the presentation of owner/non-owner information in
the financial statements under national GAAP. Select all that apply.

           Ownership information

              Entities are required to present changes in equity arising from transactions with owners separately from
              those of non-owners (such as income and expenses)

              Entities can choose to present owner and non-owner information in one statement (referred to as a
              “statement of profit and loss and other comprehensive income”) or in two statements (“a statement of
              profit and loss” and “a statement of other comprehensive income”)

             Other (please describe)	




8
    Refer to IFRS 9 Financial Instruments paragraph 4.1.2A
9
    Refer to IFRS 9 Financial Instruments chapter 6 for this and the subsequent components of OCI in the table
                                                                                                                                               9
                                 ROSC Accounting & Auditing – Module A: A&A Standards – A.1 Financial Reporting Standards Analysis




7. Indicate which (if any) of the following items are required to be presented in the statement of comprehensive
income (or equivalent) under national GAAP. Select all that apply.

      Statement of comprehensive income
      Profit or loss for the period attributable to non-controlling interests

      Profit or loss for the period attributable to owners of the parent

      Comprehensive income for the period attributable to non-controlling interests

      Comprehensive income for the period attributable to owners of the parent

      Items of OCI that will not be reclassified to profit or loss

      Items of OCI that will be reclassified subsequently to profit or loss when specific conditions are met

      Total other comprehensive income

      Comprehensive income for the period i.e. total of profit or loss and OCI

      Other (please describe)




B. ACCOUNTING POLICIES, ESTIMATES AND ERRORS


IAS 8 Accounting Policies, Changes in Accounting Estimates and Errors establishes the requirements that entities
should apply in selecting accounting policies and in accounting for changes in estimates or errors from a prior
period. The following terms are used as defined in the standard:
• A ccounting policies – the specific principles, bases, conventions, rules and practices applied by an entity in
preparing and presenting financial statements.
• A change in accounting estimate – an adjustment of the carrying amount of an asset or liability (or the amount of
the periodic consumption of an asset) that results from the assessment of the present status of, and expected future
benefits and obligations associated with assets and liabilities. Changes in accounting estimates result from new
information or new developments and, accordingly, are not corrections or errors.
• Errors – can arise in respect of the recognition, measurement, presentation or disclosure of elements of financial
statements.
• Retrospective application – applying a new accounting policy to transactions, other events and conditions as if
that policy had always been applied.
• Impracticable – applying a requirement is impracticable when the entity cannot apply it after making every
reasonable effort to do so.




                                                                                                                               10
                                   ROSC Accounting & Auditing – Module A: A&A Standards – A.1 Financial Reporting Standards Analysis




8. Please indicate if IAS 8 has been adopted in full in the jurisdiction or note the national standard on accounting
policies, estimates and errors.
IAS 8	
Adopted in full?                                                  National Standard




9. In the absence of a standard that specifically applies to a transaction or event, is management of an entity required to
apply the following criteria for developing appropriate accounting policies under national GAAP? Select all that apply.

      Criteria for applying accounting policies

         Information is relevant to the economic decision-making needs of users


         The financial statements will represent faithfully the financial position, financial performance and cash
         flows of the entity

         The financial statements will reflect the economic substance of transactions, other events and conditions
         and not merely the legal form

         The financial statements will be free from bias


         The financial statements will be prudent


         The financial statements will be complete in all material respects


         Accounting policies are applied consistently for similar transactions, other events and conditions


         Entities are not permitted to apply accounting policies other than those specifically identified under
         national GAAP

         Other (please describe)




                                                                                                                                 11
                                  ROSC Accounting & Auditing – Module A: A&A Standards – A.1 Financial Reporting Standards Analysis




10. Indicate whether entities are permitted to change accounting policies under national GAAP if the following
conditions are met. Select all that apply.

      Criteria for changing accounting policies

        The change is required by a standard


        The change will result in an entity’s financial statements providing reliable and more relevant informa-
        tion about the effects of transactions, other events or conditions on the entity’s financial position, finan-
        cial performance or cash flows

      Other (please describe)




11. Please provide a yes/no response to the following question:

  Is an entity making a retrospective change to its accounting policies required to adjust the                     YES
  opening balance of each affected component of equity and the comparative amounts for the
  earliest prior period presented as if the new accounting policy had always been applied?


12. Indicate which of the following disclosures (if any) are required for a change in the accounting policies of an entity
under national GAAP? Select all that apply.

      Disclosures – Change in accounting policies

        The nature of the change in accounting policy


        When applicable, that the change is made in accordance with the transitional provisions of a new
        standard, a description of the transitional provisions, and the effect on future reporting periods


        For the current period and each prior period presented to the extent practicable, the amount of the
        adjustment for each financial statement line item affected


        The amount of the adjustment relating to periods before those presented to the extent practicable


        If retrospective application is impracticable for a particular prior period, or for periods before those
        presented, the circumstances that led to the existence of that condition and a description of how and from
        when the change in accounting policy has been applied

        Other (please describe)




                                                                                                                                12
                                  ROSC Accounting & Auditing – Module A: A&A Standards – A.1 Financial Reporting Standards Analysis




13. Indicate whether the following criteria apply for changes in the accounting estimates used in an entity’s financial
statements. Select all that apply.

      Changes in accounting estimates

        An estimate may need revision if changes occur in the circumstances on which the estimate was based or
        as a result of new information or more experience

        The effect of a change in accounting estimate is recognized prospectively in profit or loss in the period of
        the change and also in future periods, where applicable

        To the extent that a change in an accounting estimate gives rise to changes in assets and liabilities or
        relates to an item of equity, it is recognized by adjusting the carrying amount of the related asset, liability
        or equity in the period of the change

        Disclosure of the nature and amount of a change that has an effect in the current period or in future
        periods is required, except when it is impracticable to estimate the effect on future periods

        If the amount of the effect in future periods is not disclosed because estimating it is impracticable, an
        entity is required to state this in the financial statements.

        Other (please describe)




14. Indicate the criteria under national GAAP for correcting material prior period errors. Select all that apply.
      Disclosures – prior period errors

        Material prior period errors are corrected retrospectively in the first set of financial statements autho-
        rized following the discovery of the error

        The comparative amounts for the prior period(s) presented in which the error occurred are restated


        The nature of the prior period error is disclosed


        For each prior period presented, to the extent practicable, the amount of the correction for each financial
        line item affected

        Other (please describe)




                                                                                                                                13
                                              ROSC Accounting & Auditing – Module A: A&A Standards – A.1 Financial Reporting Standards Analysis




C. REVENUE RECOGNITION

IFRS 15 Revenue from contracts with customers provides a framework for a company to recognize revenue, defined
as the consideration it expects to be entitled to for the transfer of goods or services to its customers. The effective
date of the standard is currently January 1, 2018. IFRS 15 applies under the following conditions:
• There is a contract in place (in writing, orally, or in accordance with customary business practices) and the parties
are committed to performing their obligations
• The rights of each party to the contract regarding the goods or services to be transferred can be identified
• The payment terms for the transfer of goods and services can be identified
• The contract has commercial substance (i.e. the amount of the entity’s future cash flows are expected to change as
a result of the contract)
• It is probable that the entity will receive consideration in exchange for the goods or services to be transferred to
the customer
Separate IFRS apply for leases (IFRS 16), insurance contracts (IFRS 4) and contractual rights or obligations for
financial instruments (IFRS 9) and joint arrangements (IFRS 10, 11 and 12).

15. Please indicate if IFRS 15 has been adopted in full in the jurisdiction10 or note the national standard for revenue
recognition.

 IFRS 15
Adopted in full?                                                                     National Standard




16. The following statements underpin the core principle of revenue recognition according to IFRS 15. Please
indicate which statements align with the concept of revenue recognition in national GAAP. Select all that apply.

	          Concept 			                                             Definition
           Contract                                                An agreement between two or more parties that creates rights and
                                                                   obligations which can be enforced in law.

           Performance obligations                                 Distinct promises to transfer goods or services to a customer which
                                                                   are separately identifiable from other promises in a contract11.
                                                                   These promises are accounted for separately.

           Transaction price                                       Amount of consideration in a contract to which a company is
                                                                   entitled for the transfer of promised goods or services. This
                                                                   consideration can be fixed, variable, cash or non-cash.

           Other (please describe)



           Concepts not defined (indicate
           which)

10
   If completing this assessment prior to the implementation date of January 1, 2018, teams should ask counterparts at the
national standard-setting body if the intention is to adopt IFRS 15 in full
11
   Paragraph 26 of IFRS 15 (IFRS Standards 2016 handbook) provides examples of distinct goods or services.
                                                                                                                                            14
                                  ROSC Accounting & Auditing – Module A: A&A Standards – A.1 Financial Reporting Standards Analysis




17. Please provide yes/no responses to the following questions:

  Are entities allowed to recognize the costs of obtaining a customer contract as an asset                         YES
  under national GAAP if the entity expects to recover the costs and the costs are not within
  the scope of another standard?

  Under national GAAP, does an entity recognize revenue when a performance obligation                              YES
  (as defined above) has been satisfied i.e. the goods or services have been transferred to the
  customer?


18. Indicate whether any of the following criteria are required to be met for costs incurred to obtain a contract to be
recognized as an asset according to national GAAP. Select all that apply.

      Criteria to recognize costs incurred

        Costs relate directly to an identifiable contract/anticipated contract


        Costs incurred generate or enhance the resources of the entity in satisfying future performance
        obligations

        Costs incurred in obtaining a contract are not recognized under national GAAP


        Other (please describe)




19. Indicate whether any of the following criteria are required to be met for a performance obligation under a contract
to be realized according to national GAAP. Select all that apply.

      Criteria for performance obligations
      The entity has a right to receive payment from the customer

      The customer has legal title of the goods or services

      The entity has transferred physical possession of the goods or services to the customer

      The risks and rewards of ownership of the goods or services has been transferred to the customer

      The customer has accepted the goods or services

      Not applicable under national GAAP

      Other (please describe)




                                                                                                                                15
                                             ROSC Accounting & Auditing – Module A: A&A Standards – A.1 Financial Reporting Standards Analysis




20. Indicate whether any of the following criteria are required to be considered under national GAAP when
determining the transaction price. Select all that apply.

         Criteria for determining the transaction price
         Variable consideration

         Existence of a significant financing component in the contract

         Non-cash consideration

         Consideration payable to a customer

         Not applicable under national GAAP

         Other (please describe)




21. Indicate whether the following methods an entity may use to determine variable consideration for a contract apply
under national GAAP12. Select all that apply.

         Methods for calculating variable consideration
         Expected value – the sum of probability-weighted amounts in a range of possible consideration amounts.

         The most likely amount –in a range of possible consideration amounts

         Variable consideration is not applicable under national GAAP

         Other (please describe)




22. Please provide yes/no responses to the following questions:

     Are entities required to adjust the consideration to be received if the timing of the payments                           YES
     results in the customer or the entities themselves receiving a significant benefit of financing?

     If adjustments are required to the consideration, does revenue recognized reflect the cash                               YES
     price the customer would have paid?

     Under national GAAP, does an entity measure non-cash consideration from customers at                                     YES
     fair value, or, if fair value cannot be estimated, by the stand-alone selling price of the goods
     or services?

     Under national GAAP, does an entity measure consideration payable to a customer as a                                     YES
     reduction of the transaction price?




12
  According to IFRS 15, an entity should use one of the following methods and apply the same method consistently
throughout the contract
                                                                                                                                           16
                                  ROSC Accounting & Auditing – Module A: A&A Standards – A.1 Financial Reporting Standards Analysis




  When either or both parties have performed their obligations, are entities required to                           YES
  present the contract as either a contract asset or contract liability in the statement of
  financial position, with any unconditional rights the entity has to receive consideration from
  the customer recognized as a receivable?

  Under national GAAP, are entities required to apply the standard on revenue recognition on                       YES
  a consistent basis for contracts with similar characteristics?


23. Indicate whether an entity’s financial statements are required to include the following disclosures under national
GAAP (such disclosures are required under IFRS 15). Select all that apply.

      Disclosures

        Revenue recognized from contracts with customers; disaggregated into appropriate categories and
        separate from other sources of revenue

        Contract balances; including the opening and closing balances of receivables, contract assets and
        contract liabilities

        Performance obligations; including when the entity typically satisfies its performance obligations
        and the transaction price allocated to any remaining performance obligations in the contract

        Significant judgements, and changes in judgements made in applying the requirements to the
        contracts

        Assets recognized from the costs incurred to obtain or fulfil a contract


        Not applicable under national GAAP


        Other (please describe)




                                                                                                                                17
                                               ROSC Accounting & Auditing – Module A: A&A Standards – A.1 Financial Reporting Standards Analysis




D. IMPAIRMENT OF ASSETS


IAS 36 Impairment of Assets prescribes the procedures that entities should follow to ensure that the carrying value
of its assets do not exceed their recoverable amount through use or sale. If its carrying value is greater than the
recoverable amount, an asset is impaired and an impairment loss should be recognized. This standard applies to the
impairment of non-financial assets other than those accounted for under other standards13. The following terms are
used as defined in the standard:
• Carrying value/amount – the amount at which an asset is recognized after depreciation (amortization) or
impairment losses are deducted.
• Cash generating unit (CGU) - the smallest identifiable group of assets that generate largely independent cash
inflows.
• Fair value – the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction
between market participants on the measurement date
• Value in use – present value of the future cash flows expected to be derived from an asset or CGU
• Recoverable amount – higher of the fair value (less costs of disposal) and value in use of an asset or CGU
• Impairment loss – the amount by which the carrying amount of an asset or CGU exceeds its recoverable amount

24. Please indicate if IAS 36 has been adopted in full in the jurisdiction or note the national standard which
addresses the impairment of assets.

 IAS 36
Adopted in full?                                                                       National Standard




25. Indicate whether the following concepts as defined in IAS 36 are recognized under national GAAP. Select all that
apply or provide the definitions under national GAAP.

         Concept
         Cash generating unit

         Recoverable amount

         Value in use

        Other definition/concept (please describe)




13
  For example IAS 2 Inventories, IAS 12 Income Taxes (deferred tax assets), IFRS 9 Financial Instruments (financial
assets) etc. Refer to the scope section of IAS 36 in the IFRS Handbook for a complete list of the other relevant standards
                                                                                                                                             18
                                                ROSC Accounting & Auditing – Module A: A&A Standards – A.1 Financial Reporting Standards Analysis




26. Indicate whether the following assets are required to be reviewed for impairment on an annual basis. Select all that
apply.

           Annual impairment reviews
           Intangible assets with an indefinite useful life

           Intangible assets not yet available for use

           Acquired goodwill

           Annual impairment reviews are not applicable under national GAAP

           Goodwill is amortized under national GAAP

           Other definition/concept (please describe)




27. Indicate whether the following external sources are required to be considered under national GAAP when an
entity is determining impairment of an asset. Select all that apply14.

           External indicators of impairment

              Observable indications that the asset’s value has declined during the period significantly more than
              would be expected from normal use or as a result of time

              Significant adverse changes have taken place or will take place in the near future in the technological,
              market, economic or legal environment in which the entity operates or in the dedicated market of
              the asset.

              Increases in the market interest rate or other market rates of return during the period that are likely
              to affect the discount rate used in calculating an asset’s value in use and materially decrease the
              recoverable amount of an asset.

              Carrying amount of the net assets of the entity is greater than its market capitalization


              Other (please describe)




14
     Note that under IAS 36, these indicators are not exhaustive but are the minimum required under the standard.
                                                                                                                                              19
                                               ROSC Accounting & Auditing – Module A: A&A Standards – A.1 Financial Reporting Standards Analysis




28. Indicate whether the following internal sources are required to be considered under national GAAP when an
entity is determining impairment of an asset. Select all that apply15.

        Internal indicators of impairment

           Evidence of obsolescence or physical damage of an asset


           Significant adverse changes have taken place or will take place in the near future in the extent to which,
           or the manner in which, an asset is used

           Internal reporting indicates that the economic performance of the asset is, or will be, worse than
           expected

           Other (please describe)




29. Indicate whether the following elements which are required to be considered in the calculation of value in use of
cash generating units under IAS 36 are also required under national GAAP. Select all that apply.

        Value in use

           Estimate of the future cash flows16 the entity expects to derive from the asset based on reasonable and
           supportable assumptions

           Expectations about possible variations in the amount or timing of those future cash flows

           Time value of money represented by the current market risk-free rate of interest

           Price for bearing the uncertainty inherent in the asset

           Other factors that market participants would reflect in the pricing of future cash flows the entity
           expects to derive from the asset e.g., illiquidity

           Other (please describe)




30. Indicate whether the following elements are required for recognizing and measuring an impairment loss of an asset
under national GAAP. Select all that apply.

        Impairment loss - Assets

           Only if the recoverable amount of an asset is less than its carrying amount, the carrying amount will be
           reduced to the recoverable amount and the reduction is an impairment loss

           Impairment losses are recognized immediately in profit or loss (unless the asset is carried at revalued
           amount in line with another standard)

15
  Ibid
16
  Note that IAS 36 does not permit cash inflows/outflows from financing activities, income tax receipts or payments or outflows
related to improving or enhancing the performance of the asset or the estimate of net cash inflows from the disposal of the asset to be
included in the estimates of future cash flows. Refer to the text of the standard for further information.
                                                                                                                                             20
                                              ROSC Accounting & Auditing – Module A: A&A Standards – A.1 Financial Reporting Standards Analysis




         Impairment loss - Assets

           Impairment losses on a revalued asset is recognized in other comprehensive income (and reduces the
           revaluation surplus of the asset)

           If the amount estimated for an impairment loss is greater than the carrying amount of the asset, an entity
           should recognize a liability only if required by another standard

           Following the recognition of an impairment loss, the depreciation (amortization) charge for the asset
           should be adjusted in future periods to allocate the asset’s revised carrying amount less its residual value
           on a systematic basis over its remaining useful life

           Other (please describe)




31. Please provide yes/no responses to the following questions:

     Does the carrying amount of a CGU under national GAAP include the carrying amount of                                               YES
     the assets within the CGU that will generate the future cash flows?

     Is the recoverable amount of a CGU defined in national GAAP as the higher of the CGU’s                                             YES
     fair value less cost of disposal and value in use?

     Is goodwill acquired in a business combination allocated to CGUs17 based on the expected                                           YES
     benefits from the synergies of the combination and tested for impairment annually?


32. Indicate whether the following elements are required for recognizing and measuring an impairment loss of a
cash-generating unit under national GAAP. Select all that apply.

         Impairment loss – Cash generating units

           Only if the recoverable amount of the CGU is less than the carrying amount of the assets within the CGU

           Impairment losses are allocated to reduce the carrying amount of the assets in the CGU in the
           following order:
             i. firstly to reduce the carrying amount of any goodwill allocated to the CGU
             ii. then to other assets of the group on a pro rata basis based on the carrying amount of each
             asset in the CGU

           Reductions in carrying amounts are treated as impairment losses on individual assets

           In allocating impairment losses to assets, the carrying amount of an asset is not reduced below the
           highest of:
             i. fair value less costs of disposal
             ii. value in use
             iii. zero




17
  Each unit is the lowest level within the entity at which goodwill is managed for internal purposes and not larger than an operating
segment (as defined in the corresponding section of this questionnaire)
                                                                                                                                              21
                                   ROSC Accounting & Auditing – Module A: A&A Standards – A.1 Financial Reporting Standards Analysis




      Impairment loss – Cash generating units

        An entity should recognize a liability for any remaining impairment loss of a CGU only if required by
        another standard
        Other (please describe)	




33. Indicate whether the following elements are applicable if an impairment loss is to be reversed. Select all that apply.
      Impairment loss – Reversals

        An assessment is carried out at the end of each reporting period to determine whether impairment losses
        recognized in prior periods may no longer exist or may have decreased

        The entity considers external and internal sources of information to determine in the assessment

        Impairment loss recognized for goodwill is not permitted to be reversed in subsequent periods

        Impairment loss previously recognized can only be reversed if there is a change in the estimates used
        to determine the asset’s recoverable amounts since the impairment loss was recognized. The carrying
        amount of the asset is increased to its recoverable amount

        The increased carrying amount of an asset attributable to a reversal should not exceed the carrying
        amount had no impairment loss been recognized for the asset in prior years

        A reversal of an impairment loss of an asset should be recognized immediately in profit or loss (unless
        the asset is carried at revalued amount in which case it is a revaluation increase)

        Following the reversal of an impairment loss, the depreciation (amortization) charge for the asset should
        be adjusted in future periods to allocate the asset’s revised carrying amount less its residual value on a
        systematic basis over its remaining useful life

        The reversal of an impairment loss for a cash-generating unit is allocated to the assets of the unit pro
        rata according the carrying amount of those assets and treated as reversals for impairment losses of
        individual assets

        Carrying amount of an asset in a CGU with the reversal of an impairment loss should not be increased
        above the lower of:
          i. Its recoverable amount
          ii. Carrying amount that would have been determined (net of amortization or depreciation) if an
          impairment loss had not been recognized in prior periods

        Reversals of impairment losses recognized are not permitted

        Other (please describe)	




                                                                                                                                 22
                                                   ROSC Accounting & Auditing – Module A: A&A Standards – A.1 Financial Reporting Standards Analysis




34. Indicate whether the following disclosures are applicable under national GAAP for assets, operating segments and
cash-generating units as appropriate. Select all that apply18.

           Disclosures

              The amount of impairment losses recognized in profit or loss during the period and the line item in the
              statement of comprehensive income in which the impairment losses are included

              The amount of reversals of impairment losses recognized in profit or loss during the period and the line
              item in the statement of comprehensive income in which the impairment losses are reversed

              The amount of impairment losses on revalued assets recognized in other comprehensive income during
              the period

              The amount of reversals on impairment losses on revalued assets recognized in other comprehensive
              income during the period

              Events and circumstances which led to the recognition or reversal of the impairment loss

              Description of the cash generating unit

              Recoverable amount of the asset or cash generating unit

              Other (please describe)	




18
     Note that this list is not exhaustive. Refer to the text of the standard for a detailed list including appropriate estimates for measurement

                                                                                                                                                    23
                                               ROSC Accounting & Auditing – Module A: A&A Standards – A.1 Financial Reporting Standards Analysis




E. LEASES


The IASB recently issued IFRS 16 Leases which takes effect from January 1, 2019. The new standard prescribes the
accounting treatment for leases to ensure that financial information presented from the perspective of both the
lessor and the lessee reflects the substance of the transactions. As defined in the standard, a contract contains a lease
if it conveys the right to control the use of an identified asset for a period of time in exchange for consideration.

Lessors can classify leases as either a finance lease – where the entity transfers substantially all of the risks and
rewards incidental to ownership of the underlying asset – or an operating lease (leases that are not a finance lease).

Indicators of a finance lease may include the following:
• where ownership of the asset is transferred to the lessee at the end of the lease term;
• the lessee has the option to purchase the asset at a price sufficiently lower than the fair value; or
• the lease term is for the major part of the useful economic life of the asset19.

Lessees are required to treat all leases over 12 months as a finance lease (i.e. recognition of a ‘right-of-use’ asset and
lease liability) unless the lease is of low value.

35. Please indicate if IFRS 16 has been adopted in full in the jurisdiction or note the national standard which
addresses the accounting treatment of leases.

 IFRS 16
Adopted in full?                                                                       National Standard




36. Please provide a yes/no response to the following questions:

     Is the concept of a finance lease (as defined in IFRS 16) recognized under national GAAP for                               YES
     lessees?


37. What are the requirements applicable to lessees under national GAAP? Indicate which (if any) of the following
criteria are applicable.
         Lessee accounting
           Recognition

           Payments on a short-term lease are recognized on a straight-line basis over the period of the lease term

           Assets and liabilities associated with leases with a term of 12 months or more are to be recognized unless
           the value of the underlying asset is low

           An asset reflecting the entity’s right of use is recognized



19
  Refer to the text of the standard for more examples of indicators of finance leases.
20
  If completing this assessment prior to the effective date of January 1, 2019, teams should ask counterparts at the national
standard-setting body if the intention is to adopt IFRS 16 in full.
                                                                                                                                             24
                                               ROSC Accounting & Auditing – Module A: A&A Standards – A.1 Financial Reporting Standards Analysis




           Recognition

           A lease liability reflecting the obligation to make lease payments is recognized

           Lease payments are treated as an expense and not recognized in the balance sheet

           Measurement

           Lease assets are measured similarly to non-financial assets (e.g., property, plant and equipment or “fixed
           assets”) and subject to depreciation over the useful life of the asset or end of the lease term

           The right of use asset from a lease is initially measured at cost21

           Right of use assets are subsequently measured at cost less accumulated depreciation or impairment losses22

           Lease liabilities are measured similarly to other financial liabilities and interest is recognized

           Liabilities from a lease are initially measured on a present value basis of the lease payments not paid at
           that date23, using the interest rate implicit in the lease (or the lessee’s incremental borrowing rate if the
           interest rate cannot be readily determined)

           The lease liability is subsequently measured by reducing the carrying amount reflecting lease payments
           made, re-measuring the carrying amount based on modifications to the lease and reflecting amounts of
           interest payable

           Measurement of the lease assets and liabilities include non-cancellable payments and options to extend
           or terminate the lease

           Presentation

           Right-of-use assets and lease liabilities are presented separately in the statement of financial position or
           disclosed in the notes

           Cash repayments on the lease liability is classified into a principal portion and an interest portion and
           reflected in the statement of cash flows

           Other (please describe)	




21
   The cost of the right of use asset comprises the initial measurement amount of the lease liability; any lease payments made
net of incentives received; initial direct costs incurred and estimate of the costs to be incurred in dismantling and removing the
underlying asset in line with the terms and conditions of the lease.
22
   Entities may also apply the fair value model under IAS 40 Investment Property or revaluation model under IAS 16 Property,
Plant and Equipment
23
   These lease payments can include fixed or variable lease payments; exercise price of a purchase option; payments or penalties
for terminating the lease
                                                                                                                                             25
                                 ROSC Accounting & Auditing – Module A: A&A Standards – A.1 Financial Reporting Standards Analysis




38. What are the disclosure requirements applicable to lessees under national GAAP? Indicate which (if any) of the
following are applicable.

      Lessee accounting - disclosures
      Depreciation charge for right-of-use assets by class of underlying asset

      Interest expense on lease liabilities

      Expense relating to short-term leases

      Expense relating to low-value assets

      Expense relating to variable-lease payments not included in the measurement of lease liabilities

      Income from sub-leasing right-of-use assets

      Total cash outflow for leases

      Additions to right-of-use assets

      Gains or losses from sale and leaseback transactions

      Carrying amount of right-off-use assets at the end of the reporting period by class of underlying asset


39. What are the requirements applicable to lessors of finance leases under national GAAP? Indicate which (if any) of
the following statements are applicable.
      Lessor accounting – Finance leases
        Recognition

        Assets are recognized in the statement of financial position as a receivable at an amount equal to the net
        investment in the lease using the interest rate implicit in the lease

        Finance income is recognized over the lease term based on the periodic rate of return of the net
        investment in the lease

        Lessors that are manufacturers or dealers should recognize revenue as the fair value of the asset or if
        lower, at the present value of the lease payments accruing to the lessor, discounted at a market rate

        Lessors that are manufacturers or dealers should recognize cost of sale of the asset at the cost or carrying
        amount of the asset less the present value of the unguaranteed residual value

        Lessors that are manufacturers or dealers should recognize selling point or loss (i.e. the difference
        between revenue and the cost of sale)

        Disclosure

        Selling profit or loss

        Finance income on the net investment in the lease

        Income relating to variable lease payments not included in the measurement of the net investment
        in the lease


                                                                                                                               26
                                  ROSC Accounting & Auditing – Module A: A&A Standards – A.1 Financial Reporting Standards Analysis




        Disclosure

        Qualitative and quantitative explanation of the significant changes in the carrying amount of the
        net investment

        Maturity analysis of the lease payments receivable

       Other (please describe)	




40. What are the requirements applicable to lessors of operating leases under national GAAP? Indicate which (if any)
of the following statements are applicable.
      Lessor accounting – Operating leases
        Recognition

        Lease payments are recognized as income on a straight-line basis (or other systematic basis if more
        appropriate)

        Costs including depreciation are recognized as an expense

        Initial director costs incurred are added to the carrying amount of the underlying asset and are
        recognized as an expense over the lease term (on the same basis as the lease income)

        Depreciation policy is the same as that applied to other similar assets

        Lessors that are manufacturers or dealers are not permitted to recognize selling profit as the operating
        lease is not the equivalent of a sale

        Presentation

        Underlying assets of operating leases are presented in the statement of financial position

        Disclosure

        Lease income, separately disclosing income relating to variable lease payments that do not depend on an
        index or a rate

        Nature of the leasing activities

        Risk management strategy for the rights retained to the underlying assets

        Maturity analysis of lease payments showing the undiscounted lease payments to be received on an
        annual basis or a minimum of each of the first five years and a total of the amounts for the remaining
        years




                                                                                                                                27
                                  ROSC Accounting & Auditing – Module A: A&A Standards – A.1 Financial Reporting Standards Analysis




F. PROVISIONS AND CONTINGENT LIABILITIES


IAS 37 Provisions, contingent liabilities and contingent assets prescribes the accounting treatment to ensure that
sufficient information is provided in the financial statements on the nature, timing and amount of these items. The
following terms are used as defined in the standard:
• Provision – a liability of uncertain timing or amount
• Legal obligation – an obligation arising from a contract, legislation or other instrument
• Constructive obligation – an obligation arising from an established pattern of past practice, published policies
or a specific current statement which creates an expectation from other parties that an entity will accept certain
responsibilities
• Present obligation – an obligation arising from a past event which exists at the end of the reporting period
• Contingent liability – a possible obligation arising from past events but whose existence relies on uncertain future
event(s) outside the complete control of an entity or a present obligation from past events which is not recognized
because it is not probable that there will be an outflow of economic benefits or the amount of the obligation cannot
be measured reliably
• Contingent asset - a possible asset that arises from past events but whose existence relies on uncertain future
event(s) outside the complete control of an entity which could result in an inflow of economic benefits

41. Please indicate if IAS 37 has been adopted in full in the jurisdiction or note the national standard which
addresses provisions, contingent liabilities and contingent assets.

IAS 37
Adopted in full?                                                 National Standard




42. Are provisions recognized under national GAAP? If so, please indicate if any of the following criteria are required
to be met. Select all that apply.

      Criteria for recognizing provisions
      An entity has a present legal or constructive obligation as a result of a past event

      It is probable that an outflow of economic benefits will be required to settle the obligation

      The amount of the obligation can be reliably measured

      Provisions are not applicable under national GAAP

      Other (please describe)	




                                                                                                                                28
                                   ROSC Accounting & Auditing – Module A: A&A Standards – A.1 Financial Reporting Standards Analysis




43. If provisions are recognized, what are the measurement criteria? Indicate which (if any) of the following criteria
need to be met. Select all that apply.
      Measurement criteria
        Best estimate of the expected expenditure to settle the obligation at the end of the reporting period

        Provisions are reviewed at the end of each reporting period and adjusted to the current best estimate

        Risks and uncertainties have been taken into consideration when arriving at the best estimate

        When the effect of the time value of money is material, this is used to determine the amount of the
        provision; discount rate(s) applied are pre-tax current market rates

        Where there is sufficient evidence that future events that may affect the settlement amount will occur, the
        provision amount reflects this

        Other (please describe)	




44. Please provide yes/no responses to the following questions:

  Are expected gains from the disposal of assets taken into account when measuring a                                YES
  provision? This is not permitted under IAS 37.

  Are contingent liabilities required to be disclosed in the notes to the financial statements                      YES
  unless the possibility of an outflow of economic benefits is remote?

  Are contingent assets permitted to be disclosed in the notes to the financial statements if an                    YES
  inflow of economic benefits is probable?


45. Are the following allowed as provisions under national GAAP? These are not permitted under IAS 37. Select all
that apply

      Accounting treatments not permitted for provisions
      Provisions used for expenditures other than those for which they were originally recognized

      Future operating losses are recognized as provisions




                                                                                                                                 29
                                   ROSC Accounting & Auditing – Module A: A&A Standards – A.1 Financial Reporting Standards Analysis




46. Indicate which of the following disclosures (if any) are required for provisions. Select all that apply. IAS 37 requires
these disclosures for each class of provision.
      Disclosures - Provisions
        A brief description of the nature of the obligation and the expected timing of any outflows of economic
        benefits

        Indication of the uncertainties about the amount or timing of the economic outflows including
        assumptions made about future events

        Amount of any expected reimbursement and the amount of the asset recognized for the expected
        reimbursement

        The carrying amount at the beginning and end of the reporting period

        Additional provisions and increases to existing provisions made

        Amounts incurred and charged against the provision during the period

        Unused amounts reversed during the period

        The increase during the period in the discounted amount as a result of time and the effect of any change
        in the discount rate

        Other (please describe)	




47. Indicate which of the following disclosures (if any) are required for contingent liabilities. Select all that apply. IAS
37 requires these disclosures for each class of contingent liability.

      Disclosures – Contingent liabilities
      Estimate of the financial effect

      Indication of uncertainties relating to the amount or timing of any outflow

      Possibility of any reimbursement

      Other (please describe)	




                                                                                                                                 30
                                 ROSC Accounting & Auditing – Module A: A&A Standards – A.1 Financial Reporting Standards Analysis




G. EMPLOYEE BENEFITS


IAS 19 Employee benefits establishes the accounting treatment and disclosure of employee benefits by employers,
with the exception of share-based payments which is handled under IFRS 2.
Employee benefits are defined in the standard as all forms of consideration an entity gives to its employees in
exchange for services provided or at termination of employment including:
• Short-term benefits which are expected to be settled in full within twelve months of the reporting period in which
current employees have provided services e.g., wages, salaries, social security contributions, paid annual leave,
bonuses, non-monetary benefits (medical care, housing, cars)
• Post-employment benefits, such as pensions and lump sum payments on retirement, life insurance and post-
employment medical care, are classified as
   ▶ defined contribution plans (entity pays fixed contributions into a separate fund and will have no legal or
   constructive obligations to pay further contributions if the fund does not have sufficient assets to pay all benefits
   relating to employee service in the current and prior periods)
   ▶ defined benefit plans (all plans that are not defined contribution plans)
• Other long-term benefits such as long-service leave, sabbaticals, long-term disability benefits
• Termination benefits are employee benefits payable as a result of an entity’s decision to terminate an employee’s
employment before the normal retirement date or an employee’s decision to accept an offer of benefits in exchange
for the termination of employment.

48. Please indicate if IAS 19 has been adopted in full in the jurisdiction or note the national standard which
addresses the accounting treatment for employee benefits.

IAS 19
Adopted in full?                                                National Standard




49. Please provide yes/no responses to the following questions:

 Are entities expected to recognize short-term employee benefits when the employee has                            YES
 provided services in exchange for the benefits under national GAAP?

 Is the net defined benefit liability (asset) recognized in the statement of financial position?                  YES


50. How are short-term employee benefits measured under national GAAP? Indicate which (if any) of the following
criteria must be met. Select all that apply.
      Criteria for short-term employee benefits
         Undiscounted amount of short-term benefits expected for the accounting period in exchange for
         services rendered

         As a liability deducting amounts already paid (or as a prepaid expense if the amount already paid is
         greater than the undiscounted amount of the benefits)


                                                                                                                               31
                                               ROSC Accounting & Auditing – Module A: A&A Standards – A.1 Financial Reporting Standards Analysis




        Criteria for short-term employee benefits
           As an expense (unless required to be recognized as an asset due to the requirements of another standard)

           Other (please describe)	




51. Are entities required to account for post-employment benefits under national GAAP? If so, indicate which (if any)
of the following criteria must be met. Select all that apply.
        Criteria for post-employment benefits
           Account for the legal obligation but also for any constructive obligations

           Determine the present value of defined benefit obligations and the fair value of any plan assets on a
           regular basis so that the amounts recognized in the financial statements are not materially different from
           the amounts at the end of the reporting period

           Use of the project unit credit method24 to measure obligations and costs

           To attribute benefits to periods of service according to the plan’s formula unless an employee’s service in
           later years will lead to a materially higher level of benefit than in earlier years

           Use of unbiased and compatible actuarial assumptions about demographic and financial variables

           Financial assumptions should be based on market expectations at the end of the reporting period for the
           period over which the obligations are to be settled

           Discount rate determined with reference to market yields at the end of the reporting period on high
           quality corporate bonds or government bonds if there are no high quality corporate bonds in the
           currency of the jurisdiction

           Deduct the fair value of any plan assets from the carrying amount of the obligation in order to determine
           the net defined benefit liability (or asset)

           Other (please describe)	




52. How are post-employment benefits arising from defined contribution plans measured under national GAAP?
Indicate which (if any) of the following criteria must be met. Select all that apply.
        Criteria for recognizing defined contribution plans
           As a liability deducting contributions already paid (or as a prepaid expense if the amount already paid is
           greater than the contribution due at the end of the period)

           As an expense (unless required to be recognized as an asset due to the requirements of another standard)

24
  According to the projected unit credit method detailed in IAS 19, each additional period of service gives rise to an additional
unit of benefit entitlement. Each unit is measured separately to arrive at the final obligation.
                                                                                                                                             32
                                   ROSC Accounting & Auditing – Module A: A&A Standards – A.1 Financial Reporting Standards Analysis




      Criteria for recognizing defined contribution plans
        Contributions expected to be settled more than 12 months after the reporting date are discounted using
        market rates for high quality corporate bonds

        Other (please describe)	




53. Are requirements for applying actuarial assumptions prescribed under national GAAP? Indicate if the following
assumptions (if any) are to be applied by entities. Select all that apply.
      Actuarial assumptions
        Mortality assumptions are made by reference to the best estimate of the mortality of plan members
        during and after employment

        The discount rate is determined by market rates for high quality corporate bonds at the end of the
        reporting period

        Defined benefit obligations reflect the benefits set out in the terms of plan and relevant factors such as
        estimated future salary increases, contributions from employees or third parties or any limits on the
        employer’s share of the cost of future benefits

        Estimated future changes in the level of state benefits that affect the benefits playable under a defined
        benefit plan

        Requirements for applying actuarial assumptions are not prescribed under national GAAP

        Other (please describe)	




54. Indicate the required disclosures (if any) for defined benefit plans according to national GAAP. Select all that apply.

      Disclosures – defined benefit plans
        Information that explains the characteristics of the plan and associated risks

        Information that identifies and explains the amounts in an entity’s financial statements arising from its
        defined benefit plans

        Description of how the benefit plans may affect the amount, timing and uncertainty of the entity’s future
        cash flows

        Other (please describe)	




                                                                                                                                 33
                                                 ROSC Accounting & Auditing – Module A: A&A Standards – A.1 Financial Reporting Standards Analysis




H. FINANCIAL INSTRUMENTS


The IFRS prescribing the accounting treatment for financial instruments are among the most complex standards.
The recently issued IFRS 9 Financial instruments25 which takes effect from January 1, 2018, builds on the principles
established under IAS 39 Financial Instruments: Recognition and measurement, IAS 32 Financial Instruments:
Presentation and IFRS 7 Financial Instruments: Disclosure. The questions provided here are not exhaustive but
broadly cover the main aspects outlined in the introduction and scope sections of IFRS 9.

The following terms are used as defined in IAS 32 and in IFRS 9:
• Financial asset – any asset that is cash; an equity instrument of another entity; a contractual right to receive
cash/another financial asset from another entity or to exchange financial assets/financial liabilities with another
entity under potentially favorable conditions or a contract that will or may be settled in the entity’s own equity
instruments.
• Equity instrument – any contract that evidences a residual interest in the assets of an entity after deducting all of
its liabilities.
• Financial instrument – a contract that gives rise to a financial asset of one entity and a financial liability or equity
instrument of another entity.

55. Please indicate which (if any) of the following standards have been adopted in full in the jurisdiction or note the
national standard(s) in respect of financial instruments.

 IFRS 9
Adopted in full?                                                                National Standard




 IAS 39
Adopted in full?                                                                National Standard




 IAS 32
Adopted in full?                                                                National Standard




 IFRS 7
Adopted in full?                                                                National Standard




25
     IFRS 9 is effective from January 1, 2018.
                                                                                                                                               34
                                                    ROSC Accounting & Auditing – Module A: A&A Standards – A.1 Financial Reporting Standards Analysis




56. Please provide yes/no responses to the following questions:

     Are financial assets classified under national GAAP on the basis of the business model within                                   YES
     which they are held and their contractual cash flow characteristics?

     Is an entity required to recognize financial assets or liabilities in the statement of financial                                YES
     position only when the entity becomes party to the contractual provisions of the instrument?


57. Indicate whether an entity can de-recognize a financial asset if the following conditions are met. Select all that apply.

            De-recognition criteria
            Contractual rights to the cash flows from the financial asset expire

            The entity transfers the financial asset

            The obligation specified for the financial liability is discharged or cancelled or expired

           Other (please describe)	




58. Indicate which of the following measurement concepts for financial assets are applicable under national GAAP.
Select all that apply.
            Measurement – Financial assets

               Initial measurement at fair value plus or minus transaction costs directly attributable to the acquisition
               or issue of the asset

               Amortized cost if both of the following conditions are met:
                i. Financial asset is held within a business model whose objective is to hold financial assets in order to
                collect contractual cash flows and;
                ii. The contractual terms of the financial asset gives rise on specified dates to cash flows that are solely
                payments of principal26 and interest on the principal amount outstanding

               Interest revenue for financial assets under the amortized cost model is calculated using the effective
               interest method

               Fair value through other comprehensive income if both of the following conditions are met:
                 i. Financial asset is held within a business model whose objective is achieved by collecting contractual
                 cash flows and selling financial assets and;
                 ii. The contractual terms of the financial asset gives rise on specified dates to cash flows that are solely
                 payments of principal and interest on the principal amount outstanding

               Fair value through profit or loss (if none of the two other methods apply or if there is an accounting
               mismatch)

              Other (please describe)	




26
     IFRS 9 defines “principal” as the fair value of the financial asset at initial recognition
                                                                                                                                                  35
                                                  ROSC Accounting & Auditing – Module A: A&A Standards – A.1 Financial Reporting Standards Analysis




59. Indicate whether impairment of financial assets under national GAAP follows similar principles as under IFRS 9.
Select all that apply.
           Impairment – financial assets

              At each reporting date, the entity assesses whether credit risk of financial instruments has increased
              significantly since initial recognition

              The assessment of credit risk is with reference to the change in the risk of default of the financial
              instrument over its expected life by comparing the risk of default at the reporting period with that as of
              the date of initial recognition using reasonable and supported information

              Loss allowance is measured at an amount equal to the lifetime expected credit losses if the credit risk has
              increased significantly since initial recognition

              If the credit risk has not increased significantly for a financial instrument since initial recognition, the
              entity should measure the loss allowance for the financial instrument at an amount equal to expected
              credit losses for twelve months

              For loan commitments and financial guarantee contracts, the date that the entity becomes party to the
              irrevocable commitment is the date of initial recognition for applying impairment requirements

              The entity recognizes the amount of expected credit losses as an impairment gain or loss in profit or loss


              Other (please describe)	




60. Indicate whether the following qualification criteria apply to hedging instruments under national GAAP. Select
all that apply.
           Hedging instruments

              Only contracts with a party external to the reporting entity can be designated as hedging instruments

              A hedged item can be a recognized asset or liability, an unrecognized firm commitment, a forecast
              transaction or a net investment in a foreign operation

              A hedged item can be a single item, a group of items, or a component of a single item or group of items

              The hedged item must be reliably measurable

              If a hedged item is a forecast transaction, the transaction must be highly probable

              Hedge accounting can be applied to transactions between entities in the same group only in the
              individual or separate financial statements of those entities and not in the consolidated financial
              statements of the group27




27
     Unless it is the consolidated financial statements of an investment entity as defined in IFRS 10.
                                                                                                                                                36
                                   ROSC Accounting & Auditing – Module A: A&A Standards – A.1 Financial Reporting Standards Analysis




      Hedging instruments

        A hedging relationship qualifies for hedge accounting only if all of the following are met:
        i. The hedging relationship consists only of eligible hedging instruments and items
        ii. There is formal designation and documentation of the hedging relationship and the entity’s
        risk management objective and strategy for undertaking the hedge at the inception of the hedging
        relationship
        iii. The documentation includes identification of the hedging instrument, the hedged item, the nature of
        the risk being hedged and how the entity will assess whether the hedging relationship meets the hedge
        effectiveness requirements
        iv. The hedging relationship meets all of the following hedge effectiveness requirements:
             • There is an economic relationship between the hedged items and the hedging instrument
             • The effect of credit risk does not dominate the value changes that result from that economic
             relationship
             • The hedge ratio of the hedging relationship is the same as that resulting from the quantity of the
             hedged item that the entity actually hedges, and the quantity of the hedged instrument used.

        There are three types of hedging relationships
        i. Fair value hedge – a hedge of the exposure to changes in fair value of a recognized asset or liability or
        an unrecognized firm commitment or a component of an item that is attributable to a particular risk and
        could affect profit or loss. Gain or loss is recognized in profit or loss (or other comprehensive income for
        equity instruments)
        ii. Cash flow hedge – a hedge of the exposure to variability in cash flows that is attributable to a particular
        risk associated with all, or a component of a recognized asset or liability or a highly probable forecast
        transaction that could affect profit or loss
        iii. Hedge of a net investment in a foreign operation

        Other (please describe)	




61. Indicate whether the following criteria apply to cash flow hedges under national GAAP. Select all that apply.
      Cash flow hedges
        The separate component of equity associated with the hedged item is adjusted to the lower of the
        following (in absolute amounts):
          i. Cumulative gain or loss on the hedging instrument from inception; and
          ii. Cumulative change in fair value (present value) of the hedged item

        The portion of the gain or loss on the hedging instrument is recognized in other comprehensive income

        Any remaining gain or loss on the hedging instrument is considered hedge ineffectiveness and is
        recognized in profit or loss

        If a hedged forecast transaction subsequently results in the recognition of a non-financial asset or liability
        or a firm commitment, the entity should remove that amount from the cash flow hedge reserve




                                                                                                                                 37
                                   ROSC Accounting & Auditing – Module A: A&A Standards – A.1 Financial Reporting Standards Analysis


      Cash flow hedges
        If the hedged future cash flows are no longer expected to occur, that amount should be reclassified from
        the cash flow hedge to profit or loss

        Other (please describe)	




62. Indicate which of the following apply to the accounting treatment of the time value of options under national
GAAP when an entity separates the intrinsic value and the time value of an option and designates the change in the
intrinsic value as the hedging instrument. Select all that apply.

      Accounting treatment - Time value of options

        The time value of the option is transaction related or time-period related based on the type of item that
        option hedges

        The change in the fair value of the time value of the option that hedges a transaction-related item is
        recognized in other comprehensive income to the extent that it relates to the hedged item and can be
        accumulated in a separate component of equity; unless the hedged item results in a non-financial asset,
        liability or firm commitment where it is included in initial cost

        The change in fair value of the time value of an option that hedges a time-period related item is
        recognized in other comprehensive income to the extent that it relates to the hedged item and can be
        accumulated in a separate component of equity

        Other (please describe)	




63. Indicate which of the following criteria must apply in order for a group of items to be eligible as the hedged
item under national GAAP. Select all that apply.
      Eligibility criteria – Group of items as the hedged item

        The group consists of items that are individually, eligible hedged items

        The items in the group are managed together on a group basis for risk management purposes

        In the case of cash flow hedge of a group of items where the variability in cash flows are not expected to
        be approximately proportional to the overall variability in the cash flow of the group so that offsetting
        risk positions arise:
          i. it is a hedge of a foreign currency risk; and
          ii. the designation of that net position specifies the reporting period in which the forecast transactions
          are expected to affect profit or loss, as well as their nature and volume

        Other (please describe)	




                                                                                                                                 38
                                                ROSC Accounting & Auditing – Module A: A&A Standards – A.1 Financial Reporting Standards Analysis




I. BUSINESS COMBINATIONS


IFRS 3 establishes the reporting requirements for an entity after a business combination has occurred. The core
principle of the standard is that the acquirer of a business should recognize the assets acquired and liabilities
assumed at fair value as at the acquisition date and disclose information that enables users to evaluate the nature
and financial effects of the acquisition. In order for this standard to apply, the assets acquired and liabilities assumed
must constitute a business. The following terms are used as defined in the text of IFRS 3:
• Business – an integrated set of activities and assets that is capable of being conducted and managed for the
purpose of providing a return in the form of dividends, lower costs or other economic benefits directly to investors
or other owners, members or participants
• Business combination – a transaction or other event in which an acquiring entity obtains control of one or more
businesses. This definition also includes transactions sometimes referred to as ‘true mergers’
• Equity interests – ownership interest of investor-owned entities and owner, member or participant interests of
mutual entities
• Goodwill – an asset representing the future economic benefits arising from other assets acquired in a business
combination that are not individually identified and separately recognized
• An asset is identifiable if – it is separable28 or arises from contractual or other legal rights (regardless of whether
those rights are transferable or separable from the entity or from other rights and obligations)
• Intangible asset – an identifiable non-monetary asset without physical substance

64. Please indicate if IFRS 3 has been adopted in full in the jurisdiction or note the national standard(s) which
address(es) business combinations.

IFRS 3
Adopted in full?                                                                         National Standard




65. Please provide yes/no responses to the following questions:

  Are entities required to account for each business combination using the acquisition method                                           YES
  under national GAAP?

  Does the acquisition method under national GAAP require the following criteria:                                                       YES
   • Identifying the acquirer
   • Determining the acquisition date
   • Recognizing and measuring the identifiable assets acquired, the liabilities assumed, and
   any non-controlling interest in the acquiree: and
   • Recognizing and measuring goodwill or a gain from a bargain purchase

  Is the acquirer defined in national GAAP as the entity that obtains control29 of another entity?                                      YES

  Is the acquisition date defined as the date on which the acquirer obtains control of the                                              YES
  acquiree?

28
   Separable i.e. capable of being separated or divided from the entity and sold, transferred, licensed, rented or exchanged, either
individually or together with a related contract, identifiable asset or liability, regardless of whether the entity intends to do so.
29
   Refer to the definition of control in the section on Consolidation and Joint Arrangements.
                                                                                                                                              39
                                             ROSC Accounting & Auditing – Module A: A&A Standards – A.1 Financial Reporting Standards Analysis




66. Indicate whether the recognition principle as described in IFRS 3 applies under national GAAP. Select all
that apply.

        Recognition principle

           At the acquisition date, the acquirer is required to recognize the identifiable assets acquired, the
           liabilities assumed and any non-controlling interest in the acquiree

           The recognition of identifiable assets acquired and liabilities assumed is separate from goodwill

           The identifiable assets acquired and liabilities assumed are classified based on relevant conditions
           on the acquisition date (e.g., the contractual terms, economic conditions, the entity’s operating or
           accounting policies)

           Exceptions to this principle apply30 to contingent liabilities assumed in the business combination which
           are recognized31

           Other (please describe)	




67. Indicate whether the measurement principle as described in IFRS 3 applies under national GAAP. Select all
that apply.

        Measurement principle

           The acquirer is required to measure the identifiable assets acquired and the liabilities assumed at their
           fair values at the acquisition date

           Components of non-controlling interests in the acquiree that are present ownership interests and which
           entitle the holders to a proportionate share of the entity’s net assets in the event of liquidation are
           measured at either:
              (a) fair value or
              (b) proportionate share in the recognized amounts of the acquiree’s identifiable net assets

           The acquirer recognizes goodwill at the acquisition date as the excess of i) over ii) below where:
           i) The aggregate of:
               • The consideration transferred measured at fair value at the acquisition date
               • The amount of any non-controlling interest in the acquiree and
               • In a business combination achieved in stages, the acquisition date fair values of the acquirer’s
                 previously held equity interest in the acquiree32
           ii) The net of the acquisition date amounts of the identifiable assets acquired and the liabilities assumed

           In the event of a bargain purchase (i.e. where item ii) in the preceding line of this table is greater than
           the aggregate of item i)), the resulting gain in profit or loss is recognized on the acquisition date.



30
   Other exceptions also include reacquired rights, indemnification assets and contingent consideration and other components
discussed in the text of IFRS 3.
31
   Contingent liabilities are recognized as the higher of (a) the amount that would be recognized under IAS 37 and (b) the
amount initially recognized less the cumulative amount of income recognized in accordance with IFRS 15 (where appropriate).
This does not apply to contracts accounted for according to IFRS 9.
32
  Note that all three components are measured in accordance with the principles of IFRS 3
                                                                                                                                           40
                                                   ROSC Accounting & Auditing – Module A: A&A Standards – A.1 Financial Reporting Standards Analysis




            Measurement principle

              Consideration33 transferred in a business combination is measured at fair value (i.e. the sum of the
              acquisition-date fair values of the assets transferred, the liabilities incurred, and the equity interests
              issued by the acquirer)

              If the initial accounting for a business combination is incomplete by the end of the accounting period in
              which the combination occurs, the acquirer is expect to report provisional amounts for those items in
              the financial statements

              Other (please describe)	




68. Please provide yes/no responses to the following questions:

     Under national GAAP, are acquisition-related costs (e.g., advisory, legal, accounting, other                                   YES
     professional fees) accounted for as expenses in the periods in which costs are incurred and
     services received?

     Are the costs to issue debt or equity securities recognized in accordance with the standards                                   YES
     on financial instruments?


     Is the acquirer required to disclose information that enables the users of its financial                                       YES
     statements to evaluate the nature and financial effect of a business combination?


     Is the acquisition date defined as the date on which the acquirer obtains control of the                                       YES
     acquiree?




33
     This may take the form of cash, other assets, equity instruments etc. Refer to paras.37 - 45 of IFRS 3.
                                                                                                                                                 41
                                              ROSC Accounting & Auditing – Module A: A&A Standards – A.1 Financial Reporting Standards Analysis




J. CONSOLIDATION AND JOINT ARRANGEMENTS


IFRS 10 Consolidated financial statements, IFRS 11 Joint arrangements and IFRS 12 Disclosure of interests in other
entities and IAS 28 Investments in Associates and Joint Ventures establish the principles for the presentation and
preparation of financial statements where a company controls one or more subsidiaries, is party to an arrangement
with joint control, or has interests in other companies. The following terms are used as defined in the text of IFRS 1034:
• Parent – an entity that controls one or more entities
• Subsidiary – an entity that is controlled by another entity
• Control of an investee – an investor controls an investee when the investor is exposed, or has rights, to variable
returns from its involvement with the investee and has the ability to affect those returns through its power over the
investee
• Consolidated financial statements – the financial statements of a group in which the assets, liabilities, equity,
income, expenses and cash flows of the parent and its subsidiaries are presented as those of a single economic entity
• Investment entity – an entity that obtains funds from one or more investors for the purpose of providing those
investor(s) with investment management services; commits to its investor(s) that its business purpose is to invest
funds solely for returns from capital appreciation, investment income or both; and measures and evaluates the
performance of substantially of its investments on a fair value basis.
• Associate – an entity over which an investor has significant influence

69. Please indicate which (if any) of the following standards have been adopted in full in the jurisdiction or note the
national standard(s) which address(es) consolidation and joint arrangements.

 IFRS 10
Adopted in full?                                                             National Standard




 IFRS 11
Adopted in full?                                                             National Standard




 IFRS 12
Adopted in full?                                                             National Standard




 IAS 28
Adopted in full?                                                             National Standard




34
     IFRS Standards (2016), IFRS 10, Appendix A, Defined Terms.
                                                                                                                                            42
                                               ROSC Accounting & Auditing – Module A: A&A Standards – A.1 Financial Reporting Standards Analysis




70. Is the concept of ‘control’ (or ‘controlling interests’) defined in national GAAP? If so, please indicate if the following
statement (taken from the definition of “control” according to IFRS 10) align with the concept. Select all that apply.

         Definition of control over a subsidiary35
           An investor controls an investee only if the investor has all of the following:
             i.	 Power over the investee (e.g., voting rights or other rights to direct an investee’s activities)
             ii.	 Exposure or rights to variable returns from its involvement with the investee
             iii.	The ability to use its power over the investee to affect the amount of investor’s returns

           Concept(s) of control not defined under national GAAP


           Other (please describe)	




71. Please provide yes/no responses to the following questions:

     Are parent entities required to prepare consolidated financial statements?                                                  YES

     If the parent company is itself a partially-owned or wholly-owned subsidiary, is it still                                   YES
     required to prepare consolidated financial statements under national GAAP?

     Are parent entities required to prepare consolidated financial statements using the same                                    YES
     accounting policies for similar transactions?

     Are non-controlling interests in subsidiaries presented in the statement of financial position                              YES
     (or “balance sheet”), within equity, separate from the equity of the owners of the parent?

     Are parent entities which are investment entities (as defined in the introduction above)                                    YES
     required to consolidate their subsidiaries?36


72. Indicate whether the following statements in relation to consolidated financial statements apply under national
GAAP. Select all that apply.

         Consolidated financial statements

           Like items of assets, liabilities, equity, income, expenses and cash flows of the parent are combined with
           those of its subsidiaries

           The carrying amount of the parent’s investment in each subsidiary and the parent’s portion of equity of
           each subsidiary are eliminated

           Intragroup assets and liabilities, equity, income, expenses and cash flows relating to transactions
           between entities of the group are eliminated in full



35
  Refer to paragraphs 10-18 of IFRS 10 on power, returns and the link between power and returns in defining control.
36
  IFRS 10 permits parent entities that are investment entities to consolidate subsidiaries which are not themselves investment
entities, but whose purpose is to provide services to the parent’s investment activities.
                                                                                                                                             43
                                                 ROSC Accounting & Auditing – Module A: A&A Standards – A.1 Financial Reporting Standards Analysis




         Consolidated financial statements

            Profits or losses resulting from intragroup transactions that are recognized in assets such as inventory
            and fixed assets are eliminated in full

            Income and expenses of a subsidiary are included in the consolidated financial statements from the date
            the investor gains control until the date control over the subsidiary ends


73. Please provide yes/no responses to the following question:

    Is the concept of a joint arrangement i.e. an arrangement in which two or more parties have                                          YES
    joint control recognized under national GAAP?


74. Are the following concepts with respect to joint arrangements recognized and defined under national GAAP? If
so, please indicate which of the following statements align with the definition(s). Select all that apply.

	           Concept 			                                                Definition
            Joint control                                              Contractually agreed sharing of control of an arrangement in which
                                                                       decisions that significantly affect the returns of the arrangement
                                                                       require unanimous consent from the parties sharing control

            Joint operations                                           The parties with joint control have rights to the assets and
                                                                       obligations for the liabilities relating to the arrangement

            Joint venture	                                             The parties with joint control have rights to the net assets of the
                                                                       arrangement

            Other (please describe)




75. Please provide yes/no responses to the following questions:

    If national GAAP distinguishes between ‘joint operations’ and ‘joint ventures’, are investors                                        YES
    in joint ventures required to apply the equity method37 of accounting to the investment?

    Is the proportionate consolidation method applied under national GAAP?                                                               YES


76. If the joint operation is a business, indicate whether the following disclosures, required under the principles of
IFRS 3 Business Combinations, are applicable under national GAAP. Select all that apply.

         Disclosures – joint operations

            Identifiable assets and liabilities are measured at fair value

            Costs related to the acquisition are recognized as expenses in the period in which costs are incurred and
            services received

37
   According to IAS 28, under the equity method of accounting, the investment is initially recognized at cost and adjusted
thereafter for the post-acquisition change in the investor’s share of the investee’s net assets. The investor’s profit or loss and OCI
includes its share of the investee’s profit or loss and OCI
                                                                                                                                               44
                                              ROSC Accounting & Auditing – Module A: A&A Standards – A.1 Financial Reporting Standards Analysis




        Disclosures – joint operations

           Recognition of deferred tax assets and liabilities due to the initial recognition of assets or liabilities

           Recognition of goodwill

           Impairment testing of goodwill of cash-generating units at least annually

           No disclosures required for joint operations

           Other (please describe)	




77. Please provide yes/no responses to the following questions:

  Do the parties in a joint operation under national GAAP recognize and measure the assets,                                    YES
  liabilities, revenues and expenses of the arrangement according to the relevant standard
  which applies to the particular assets, liabilities, revenues and expenses?

  Are parties in a joint operation under national GAAP required to recognize impairment                                        YES
  losses of assets or reductions in the net realizable value of assets of the arrangement?

  Are joint ventures accounted for under national GAAP as an investment using the equity                                       YES
  method38?

  Is “significant influence” according to national GAAP defined as the power to participate in                                 YES
  the financial and operating policy decisions of another entity without joint control or having
  a controlling interest?


78. Indicate which of the following criteria apply for an entity to have “significant influence” over another according to
national GAAP. Select all that apply.

        Criteria for “significant influence”
        Shareholding of 20% or more of voting power

        Representation on the board of directors or equivalent governing body

        Participation in policy-making processes, including decisions about dividends

        Material transactions with the investee

        Interchange of managerial personnel

        Provision of essential technical information

        No concept of significant influence

        Other (please describe)	



38
   IAS 28 defines the equity method as a method of accounting where the investment is initially recognized at cost and then
adjusted for changes in the investor’s share of the net assets.
                                                                                                                                            45
                                                 ROSC Accounting & Auditing – Module A: A&A Standards – A.1 Financial Reporting Standards Analysis




K. OPERATING SEGMENTS


IFRS 8 Operating Segments defines operating segments as components of an entity for which separate financial
information is available, and, evaluated regularly by chief decision-makers when deciding how to allocate resources
within the business, and when evaluating performance.

79. Please indicate if IFRS 8 has been adopted in full in the jurisdiction or note the national standard which
addresses the accounting treatment for operating segments.

 IFRS 8
Adopted in full?                                                                          National Standard




80. Indicate which (if any) of the following characteristics of operating segments according to IFRS 8 also apply
under national GAAP. Select all that apply.

           Characteristics of operating segments

              Engages in business activities from which it may earn revenues and incur expenses39

              Operating results are regularly reviewed by chief decision-makers when deciding how to allocate
              resources or to assess performance

              Discrete financial information is available for the segment

              Other (please describe)	




81. Are entities permitted to aggregate two or more operating segments under national GAAP? If so, indicate which of
the following criteria must be met. Select all that apply.

           Criteria for aggregation of operating segments (where applicable)
           Similar products and services

           Similar production processes

           Similar customers for products and services

           Similar methods of distribution

           Regulatory environment

           Aggregation not permitted under national GAAP

           Other (please describe)	



39
     IFRS 8 also includes segments which may not yet be earning revenue e.g., start ups
                                                                                                                                               46
                                   ROSC Accounting & Auditing – Module A: A&A Standards – A.1 Financial Reporting Standards Analysis




82. Does national GAAP prescribe quantitative thresholds for entities to report on operating segments? The
following are the thresholds under IFRS 8.

      Thresholds for reportable segments

        Reported revenue of the segment is 10 percent or more of the combined revenue (internal and external)
        of all operating segments

        The absolute amount of the segment’s reported profit or loss is 10% or more in absolute terms of:
         (i) the combined reported profit of all operating segments that did not report a loss and
         (ii) the combined reported loss of all operating segments that reported a loss

        The segment’s assets are 10 percent or more of the combined assets of all operating segments

        Other (please describe)	




83. Are entities required to explain the measurements used in reporting financial information for operating
segments? Select all that apply.

      Measurement information

        Basis of accounting for transactions between reportable segments

        Differences between the measurements of the segments’ profits, losses, assets or liabilities and the
        corresponding measurements used by the entity

        Changes from prior periods in the measurement methods used to determine segment profit or loss and
        the effect (if any) of these changes

        Nature and effect of asymmetrical allocations e.g., if depreciation expense is allocated to a segment but
        not the related asset


84. Are entities required to report information about other business activities and operating segments that do not
meet quantitative thresholds? Under IFRS 8, these are required to be disclosed separately as ‘all other segments’.




                                                                                                                                 47
                                  ROSC Accounting & Auditing – Module A: A&A Standards – A.1 Financial Reporting Standards Analysis




85. Are entities required to disclose any of the following information for operating segments under national GAAP?
Select all that apply.

      Disclosures
      Information about reported segment profit or loss

      Revenue from external customers

      Revenue from transactions with other operating segments of the entity

      Interest revenue

      Interest expense

      Material items of income and expense

      Entity’s interest in the profit or loss of associates and joint ventures

      Depreciation and amortization

      Material non-cash items other than depreciation and amortization

      Income tax expense or income

      Segment assets and liabilities

      Factors used to identify the reportable segments (e.g., by products or services; geographical areas)

      Judgments used by management in applying aggregation criteria

      Other (please describe)	




86. Are entities required to provide any reconciliations between the information reported for operating segments
and information reported for the entity under national GAAP? Select all that apply. The following are the
disclosures required under IFRS 8.
      Reconciliations

        Total of the reportable segments’ revenue to the entity’s revenue

        Total of the reportable segment’s measure of profit or loss to the entity’s profit or loss before tax

        Total of the reportable segments’ assets to the entity’s assets

        Total of the reportable segments’ liabilities to the entity’s liabilities

        Total of the reportable segments’ amounts for every other material item of information disclosed to the
        corresponding amount for the entity

      Other (please describe)	




                                                                                                                                48
                                       ROSC Accounting & Auditing – Module A: A&A Standards – A.1 Financial Reporting Standards Analysis




L. OTHER TOPICS


Fair value measurement
IFRS 13 defines the concept of fair value and provides a framework for measurement and disclosure for standards
that require or permit its application. The following terms are used as defined in the text of the standard40.
• Fair value – the price that would be received to sell an asset or paid to transfer a liability in an orderly transaction
between market participants at the measurement date
• Active market – a market in which transactions for the asset or liability take place with sufficient frequency and
volume to provide pricing information on an ongoing basis
• Principal market – the market with the greatest volume and level of activity for the asset or liability
• Most advantageous market – the market that maximizes the amount that would be received to sell the asset or
minimizes the amount that would be paid to transfer the liability after taking into account transaction and transport
costs
• Market participants – buyers and sellers in the principal or most advantageous market for the asset or liability
that have all of the following characteristics:
       ▶ Independence i.e. not related parties
       ▶ Reasonable understanding of the asset or liability and the transaction using all available information
       ▶ Ability to enter into a transaction for the asset or liability
       ▶ Willing to enter into a transaction but not as a result of force or other compulsion
• Highest and best use – the use of a non-financial asset by market participants that would maximize the value of
the asset or the group of assets and liabilities (e.g., a business) within which the asset would be used.

87. Please indicate if IFRS 13 has been adopted in full in the jurisdiction or note the national standard which
addresses the measurement of fair value.

 IFRS 13
Adopted in full?                                                      National Standard




88. Please provide yes/no responses to the following questions:
     Fair value measurement principles

     Does the concept of fair value (as defined in the introduction above) exist in national GAAP?                      YES

     Under national GAAP, is a fair value measurement applicable to a particular asset or liability?                    YES

     When measuring fair value, are entities required to take into account the same characteristics                     YES
     of the assets or liability and the assumptions that market participants would consider when
     pricing the asset or liability?




40
     IFRS Standards handbook (2016)
                                                                                                                                     49
                                                   ROSC Accounting & Auditing – Module A: A&A Standards – A.1 Financial Reporting Standards Analysis




     Fair value measurement principles

     Are entities required to consider factors specific to all of the following when developing the                                 YES
     assumptions to measure the fair value of an asset or liability:
        (i) The asset or liability
        (ii) The principal or most advantageous market for the asset or liability
        (iii) Market participants with whom the entity would enter into a transaction in that
        market?
        (iv) For non-financial assets, a market participant’s ability to generate economic benefits
        by using the asset in its highest and best use that is physically possible, legally permissible
        and financially feasible

     Are entities required to consider at a minimum the following characteristics of an asset at the                                YES
     measurement date:
       (i) the condition and location of the asset; and
       (ii) restrictions, if any, on the sale or use of the asset? 	

     Do the following requirements apply for the fair value measurement of a liability (financial                                   YES
     and non-financial) or an entity’s own equity instrument
       (i) the assumption is that the liability or equity instrument is transferred to a market
       participant at the measurement date
       (ii) a liability would remain outstanding and the market participant transferee would be
       required to fulfil the obligation
       (iii) the entity’s own equity instrument would remain outstanding and the market
       participant transferee would take on the rights and responsibilities associated with the
       instrument?

     Is the fair value of a liability expected to reflect the effects of non-performance risk (which is                             YES
     assumed to be the same before and after the transfer of the liability)?


89. Indicate whether the following requirements apply to the valuation techniques used to measure fair value under
national GAAP. Select all that apply.

            Valuation techniques and hierarchy

              Entities are required to use valuation techniques for which sufficient data are available to measure fair
              value which maximize the use of relevant observable inputs and minimize unobservable inputs

              There is a fair value hierarchy which increases consistency and comparability in fair value
              measurements and disclosures

              The fair value hierarchy prioritizes inputs to valuation techniques in the following order:
                • quoted unadjusted prices in active markets for identical assets or liabilities (or “level 1 inputs”)
                • inputs other than quoted prices includes in level 1 that are observable for the asset or liability,
                either directly or indirectly ( or “level 2 inputs”)
                • unobservable inputs for the asset or liability (or “level 3 inputs”)41

            Other (please describe)	




41
     Refer to the text of the standard for examples of Level 2 and Level 3 inputs.
                                                                                                                                                 50
                                 ROSC Accounting & Auditing – Module A: A&A Standards – A.1 Financial Reporting Standards Analysis




90. Indicate whether the following requirements apply under national GAAP when a quoted price for a liability or
equity instrument is not available. Select all that apply.

      Fair value measurement without an available quoted price

        If an identical or similar liability or entity’s own equity instrument is held by another party as an
        asset, an entity should measure fair value from the perspective of a market participant that holds the
        identical item as an asset at the measurement date using:
           (i) The quoted price in an active market for the item held by another party as an asset
           (ii)	Other observable inputs e.g., the quoted price in an inactive market
           (iii) If observable prices are not available, valuation techniques such as an income approach (present
           value of the expected future cash flows) or the market approach (quoted price for similar liabilities
           or equity instruments held by other parties as assets)

        If an identical or similar liability or entity’s own equity instrument is not held by another party as an
        asset, an entity should measure fair value using a valuation technique from the perspective of a market
        participant that owes the liability or has issued the claim on equity.

      Other (please describe)	




91. Indicate whether the following fair value disclosure requirements apply under national GAAP. Select all that apply.

      Fair value disclosures

        The valuation techniques and inputs used to develop the fair value measurements of assets and liabilities
        in the statement of financial position (or balance sheet) after initial recognition

        The effect of fair value measurements using significant unobservable inputs (Level 3) on profit or loss
        or other comprehensive income for the period.

      Other (please describe)	




                                                                                                                               51
                                       ROSC Accounting & Auditing – Module A: A&A Standards – A.1 Financial Reporting Standards Analysis




Income taxes
IAS 12 prescribes the accounting treatment for income taxes, addressing the current and future tax consequences of
an entity’s transactions and other events in the reporting period. The following terms are used as defined in the text
of the standard42.
• Accounting profit – profit or loss for a period before deducting tax expense
• Taxable profit (loss) – the profit (loss) for a period, according to rules established by the tax authorities, on which
income taxes are payable (recoverable)
• Tax expense (income) – the aggregate amount included in the determination of profit or loss for the period in
respect of current tax and deferred tax
• Current tax – the amount of income taxes payable (recoverable) in respect of the taxable profit (tax loss) for a
period
• Tax base – the amount attributed to an asset or liability for tax purposes
• Temporary differences – differences between the carrying amount of an asset or liability in the statement of
financial position and its tax base. These differences may result in taxable amounts or deductible amounts when the
carrying amount of the asset or liability is recovered or settled
• Deferred tax assets – the amounts of income taxes recoverable in future periods in respect of deductible
temporary differences and the carry forward of unused tax losses or tax credits
• Deferred tax liabilities – the amounts of income taxes payable in future periods in respect of taxable temporary
differences

92. Please indicate if IAS 12 has been adopted in full in the jurisdiction or note the national standard which
addresses income taxes.

 IAS 12
Adopted in full?                                                      National Standard




93. Please provide yes/no responses to the following questions on the recognition of income tax:
     Income tax principles - recognition

     Does the concept of deferred tax assets (as defined in the introduction above) exist in                            YES
     national GAAP?

     Is tax for current and prior periods to the extent unpaid recognized as a liability under                          YES
     national GAAP?

     If the amount of tax already paid in respect of current and prior periods exceeds the amounts                      YES
     due, is the excess recognized as an asset?

     Is the benefit relating to a tax loss that can be carried back to recover current tax of a                         YES
     previous period recognized as an asset?




42
     IFRS Standards handbook (2016).
                                                                                                                                     52
                                                  ROSC Accounting & Auditing – Module A: A&A Standards – A.1 Financial Reporting Standards Analysis




     Income tax principles - recognition

     Is a deferred tax liability required to be recognized for all taxable temporary differences                                   YES
     except to the extent that it arises from:
        (i)	 the initial recognition of goodwill; or
        (ii)	the initial recognition of an asset or liability in a transaction which is not a business
        combination and at the time of the transaction affects neither accounting profit nor
        taxable profit (loss)?

     Is a deferred tax asset required to be recognized for all deductible temporary differences to                                 YES
     the extent that it is probable that taxable profit will be available against which the difference
     can be used unless it arises from initial recognition of an asset or liability in a transaction
     which is not a business combination and at the time of the transaction affects neither
     accounting profit nor taxable profit (loss)?

     Is a deferred tax asset recognized for the carryforward of unused tax losses and tax credits                                  YES
     to the extent that it is probable that future taxable profit will be available against which the
     unused losses or credits can be applied?

     Are entities required to recognize a deferred tax liability for all taxable temporary                                         YES
     differences associated with investments in subsidiaries, branches and associates and interest
     in joint arrangements except to the extent that both of the following conditions are satisfied?
        (i)	 The parent, investor, joint venture or operator is able to control the timing of the
        reversal or the temporary difference and
        (ii)	It is probable that the temporary difference will not reverse in the foreseeable future.

     Are entities required to recognize a deferred tax asset for all deductible temporary                                          YES
     differences associated with investments in subsidiaries, branches and associates and interest
     in joint arrangements except to the extent that it is probable that:
        (i)	 The temporary difference will reverse in the foreseeable future
        (ii)	Taxable profit will be available against which the temporary difference can be used?

     Are current tax and deferred tax recognized outside profit or loss if the tax relates to items                                YES
     that are recognized in other comprehensive income or equity?


94. Please provide yes/no responses to the following questions on the measurement of income tax:
     Income tax principles - measurement

     Are current tax liabilities (assets) for the current and prior periods measured at the amount                                 YES
     expected to be paid to (recovered from) the taxation authorities using the tax rate and laws
     enacted or substantively enacted at the end of the reporting period?

     Are deferred tax assets and liabilities measured at the tax rates that are expected to apply to                               YES
     the period when the asset is realized or the liability settled based on the tax rate and laws
     enacted or substantively enacted at the end of the reporting period?

     Are deferred tax assets and liabilities discounted?43                                                                         YES

     Is the carrying amount of a deferred tax asset required to be reviewed at the end of each                                     YES
     reporting period?

43
     Discounting is not permitted under IAS 12.
                                                                                                                                                53
                                       ROSC Accounting & Auditing – Module A: A&A Standards – A.1 Financial Reporting Standards Analysis




     Income tax principles - measurement

     Is an entity required to reduce the carrying amount of a deferred tax asset when it is no                          YES
     longer probable that sufficient taxable profit will be available to allow the benefit or part of
     the asset to be used?

     Are entities permitted to offset deferred tax assets and tax liabilities only if the following                     YES
     conditions apply?
     (i) The entity has a legally enforceable right to offset current tax assets against current tax
     liabilities
     (ii) The deferred tax asset and liabilities relate to income taxes levied by the same taxation
     authority on either
        • the same taxable entity or
        • different taxable entities which intend to settle on a net basis or realize the assets and
        settle the liabilities simultaneously in each future period where significant deferred tax
        liabilities or assets are expected to be settled or recovered


95. Indicate whether the following key disclosure requirements apply under national GAAP. Select all that apply.

           Income tax principles – key disclosures

              Major components of tax expense (income)44 are required to be disclosed separately

              Aggregate current and deferred tax relating to items that are charged or credited directly to equity are
              disclosed separately

              Amount of income tax relating to each component of other comprehensive income

              Amount (and expiry date if any) of deductible temporary differences, unused tax losses and unused tax
              credits for which no deferred tax asset is recognized in the statement of financial position

              The amount of a deferred tax asset and the nature of the evidence supporting its recognition when:
                • The use of the deferred tax asset is dependent on future taxable profits in excess of the profits
                arising from the reversal of existing taxable temporary differences
                • The entity has suffered a loss in either the current or preceding period in the tax jurisdiction to
                which the deferred tax asset relates

           Other (please describe)	




44
     As outlined in IAS 12
                                                                                                                                     54
                                       ROSC Accounting & Auditing – Module A: A&A Standards – A.1 Financial Reporting Standards Analysis




Foreign exchange
IAS 21 prescribes the accounting treatment for including foreign currency transactions and foreign operations into
an entity’s financial statements and for translating financial statements into a presentation currency. The following
terms are used as defined in the text of the standard45.
• Closing rate – spot exchange rate at the end of the reporting period
• Spot rate – exchange rate for immediate delivery
• Exchange difference – the difference resulting from translating a given number of units of one currency into
another currency at different exchange rates
• Functional currency – the currency of the primary economic environment in which the entity operates
• Foreign operation – an entity that is a subsidiary, associate, joint arrangement or branch of a reporting entity,
whose activities are based or conducted in a country or currency other than those of the reporting entity
• Presentation currency – the currency in which the financial statements are presented

96. Please indicate if IAS 21 has been adopted in full in the jurisdiction or note the national standard which
addresses the effect of changes in foreign exchange rates.

 IAS 21
Adopted in full?                                                      National Standard




97. Please provide yes/no responses to the following questions:
     Foreign currency principles

     Under national GAAP, are foreign currency transactions recorded on initial recognition                             YES
     in the functional currency by applying the spot exchange rate at the date of the transaction
     between the functional currency and the foreign currency?

     Are foreign currency monetary items translated at the end of each reporting period using the                       YES
     closing rate?

     At the end of each reporting period, are non-monetary items measured at historical cost in a                       YES
     foreign currency translated using the exchange rate at the date of the transaction?

     At the end of each reporting period, are non-monetary items measured at fair value in a                            YES
     foreign currency translated using the exchange rate at the date when fair value was measured?

     Are exchange differences arising on the settlement of monetary items or on translating                             YES
     monetary items at different rates from those of initial recognition required to be recognized
     in profit or loss?

     Are the exchange components of gains or losses recognized on non-monetary items required                           YES
     to be recognized similarly to the overall gains or losses?



45
     IFRS Standards handbook (2016).
46
     Refer to the guidance in IAS 21
                                                                                                                                     55
                                 ROSC Accounting & Auditing – Module A: A&A Standards – A.1 Financial Reporting Standards Analysis


 Foreign currency principles
 Are exchange differences arising on a monetary item that forms part of a reporting entity’s                      YES
 net investment in a foreign operation recognized in profit or loss in the separate financial
 statements of the reporting entity or the individual financial statements of the foreign
 operation if appropriate?

 On disposal of the net investment, are exchange differences recognized initially in other                        YES
 comprehensive income and reclassified from equity to profit or loss in the consolidated
 financial statements?


98. Indicate whether the following principles relating to presentation currencies apply under national GAAP.
Select all that apply.
      Presentation currency

        When there is a change in an entity’s functional currency, the entity is required to apply translation
        procedures to the new functional currency prospectively from the date of change

        The results and financial position of an entity whose functional currency is not the currency of a
        hyperinflationary economy shall be translated to a different presentation currency according to the
        following procedures:
           • Assets and liabilities for each statement of financial position presented (including comparatives)
           are translated at the closing rate at the reporting date
           • Income and expenses for each statement presenting profit or loss or OCI including comparative are
           translated at exchange rates at the date of the transactions
           • All resulting exchange differences are recognized in OCI

        Goodwill arising on the acquisition of a foreign operation and any fair value adjustments to the
        carrying amounts of assets and liabilities shall be treated as assets and liabilities of the foreign
        operation and translated at the closing rate

      Other (please describe)	




99. Indicate whether the following key disclosure requirements apply under national GAAP. Select all that apply.

      Foreign currency – key disclosures

        The amount of exchange differences recognized in profit or loss (except for those arising on financial
        instruments measured at fair value through profit or loss)

        Net exchange differences recognized in other comprehensive income and a reconciliation of the
        amount of these differences at the beginning and end of the period

        Changes in the functional currency of either the reporting entity or a significant foreign operation and
        the reason for the change
      Other (please describe)	




                                                                                                                               56
                                               ROSC Accounting & Auditing – Module A: A&A Standards – A.1 Financial Reporting Standards Analysis




ANNEX: REPORTING OF KEY DIFFERENCES BETWEEN NATIONAL GAAP AND IFRS


After completing the questionnaires, ROSC A&A teams should:
• Prepare a schedule of the key areas of divergence between national GAAP and IFRS based on the responses to
the checklist. Key differences are broadly defined as those that could result in financial statements being less useful,
informative or reliable than if they had been prepared under IFRS. Teams should therefore apply professional
judgement and take into consideration the characteristics of the country when determining what is “key”. For
example, in a country with an established capital market and sophisticated users of financial statements, lack of
disclosure requirements for earnings per share may be a key difference.
• Provide a description of each key difference identified and then outline the potential impact of the difference to a
user’s understanding of the general purpose financial statements. If no differences have been identified, this can be
stated in the table.
• Discuss the key differences identified with the national standard-setter and other recognized local experts in
financial reporting for corroboration and validation.
• Summarize the key differences in the ROSC A&A report (see Table 1 below). If a number of issues have been
identified, teams should consider including a detailed table in an annex to the report. The narrative in the report
should include comments from the national standard-setter with the rationale for the difference.

Schedule of key areas of divergence between national GAAP and IFRS for inclusion in the ROSC A&A report
1. Presentation of financial statements – IAS 1
Description of key difference(s) national GAAP v. IFRS (*)                            Significance/potential impact on financial statements (*)




2. Accounting policies and estimates – IAS 8
Description of key difference(s) national GAAP v. IFRS (*)                            Significance/potential impact on financial statements (*)




3. Revenue recognition – IFRS 15
Description of key difference(s) national GAAP v. IFRS (*)                            Significance/potential impact on financial statements (*)




4. Impairment of assets – IAS 36
Description of key difference(s) national GAAP v. IFRS (*)                            Significance/potential impact on financial statements (*)




* Should be drafted succinctly, bearing in mind readers of the report will include individuals with limited expertise in IFRS.
                                                                                                                                                  57
                                               ROSC Accounting & Auditing – Module A: A&A Standards – A.1 Financial Reporting Standards Analysis




5. Leases – IFRS 16
Description of key difference(s) national GAAP v. IFRS (*)                            Significance/potential impact on financial statements (*)




6. Provisions and contingent liabilities – IAS 37
Description of key difference(s) national GAAP v. IFRS (*)                            Significance/potential impact on financial statements (*)




7. Employee benefits – IAS 19
Description of key difference(s) national GAAP v. IFRS (*)                            Significance/potential impact on financial statements (*)




8. Financial instruments – IFRS 9
Description of key difference(s) national GAAP v. IFRS (*)                            Significance/potential impact on financial statements (*)




9. Consolidation and joint arrangements – IFRS 10
Description of key difference(s) national GAAP v. IFRS (*)                            Significance/potential impact on financial statements (*)




10. Operating segments – IFRS 8
Description of key difference(s) national GAAP v. IFRS (*)                            Significance/potential impact on financial statements (*)




* Should be drafted succinctly, bearing in mind readers of the report will include individuals with limited expertise in IFRS.
                                                                                                                                                  58
