Report on the Observance of
Standards & Codes (ROSC)
Accounting & Auditing (A&A)
MODULE B: INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK
FOR CORPORATE FINANCIAL REPORTING

B.2 LISTED COMPANIES
TABLE OF CONTENTS

INTRODUCTION TO THE QUESTIONNAIRE								3
A. OVERVIEW OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE(S) AND MARKET					                                                             4
B. SECURITIES MARKET REGULATION								5
C. FINANCIAL REPORTING REQUIREMENTS FOR LISTED COMPANIES				                                                          6
D. STATUTORY AUDIT AND OTHER FORMS OF INDEPENDENT ASSURANCE			                                                        7
E. AUDIT COMMITTEES										9
F. FILING/PUBLICATION OF FINANCIAL STATEMENTS						10
G. MONITORING AND ENFORCEMENT – FINANCIAL REPORTING					                                                              11
H. CORPORATE GOVERNANCE									13
Additional information										14




© 2017 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank
1818 H Street NW
Washington DC 20433
Telephone: 202-473-1000
Internet: www.worldbank.org

This work is a product of the staff of The World Bank with external contributions. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions
expressed in this work do not necessarily reflect the views of The World Bank, its Board of Executive Directors, or the
governments they represent.
The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries, colors, denominations, and
other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning the
legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

Rights and Permissions
The material in this work is subject to copyright. Because The World Bank encourages dissemination of its knowledge, this work
may be reproduced, in whole or in part, for noncommercial purposes as long as full attribution to this work is given.
Any queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to World Bank Publications, The World
Bank Group, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA; fax: 202-522-2625; e-mail: pubrights@worldbank.org

                                                                                                                                2
                                                              ROSC Accounting & Auditing Module B: Institutional Framework – B.2 Listed companies




INTRODUCTION TO THE QUESTIONNAIRE



The purpose of this questionnaire is to gain an understanding of the financial reporting requirements for companies
whose equity or debt securities are listed for trading on a regulated market in a jurisdiction in addition to or
instead of the requirements for commercial enterprises1 in general.

There are also questions in relation to the monitoring and enforcement capacity of the local securities market
regulator in respect of financial reporting of listed companies specifically.

Questions are based on international good practice for listed companies such as the Objectives and Principles of
Securities Regulation (2010) issued by the International Organization of Securities Commissions (IOSCO). The
questionnaire is structured as follows:


     A. Overview of the securities exchange
     and market

     B. Securities market regulation


     C. Financial reporting requirements for
     listed companies

     D. Statutory audit and other forms of
     independent assurance

     E. Audit committees


     F. Filing/publication of financial
     statements

     G. Monitoring and enforcement - financial
     reporting

     H. Corporate governance




How should the questionnaire be completed?

• The questionnaire should be completed by counterparts from the securities market regulator (or equivalent).
• Where the response to a question is the same for listed companies as for commercial enterprises in general,
  please state this.
• If there are additional requirements or expected good practice for listed companies specifically, state the legal
  instrument or code that establishes a requirement and the date of enactment.




1
    Refer to responses provided in Module B Institutional Framework – B.1 Commercial Enterprises including SMEs
                                                                                                                                               3
                                            ROSC Accounting & Auditing Module B: Institutional Framework – B.2 Listed companies




Please provide the following information when completing this questionnaire.

Country                                                      Organization



Date of preparation                                          Telephone number



Individual(s) responsible for preparation                    Address




Job Title(s)                                                 Email




A. OVERVIEW OF THE SECURITIES EXCHANGE(S) AND MARKET


1. Please provide the following information regarding the stock exchange(s).
                                                                Comments
 a. Is there one or more stock exchanges in the
 jurisdiction? If so, please provide the name(s) and
 website addresses.

 b. Is the stock exchange part of a network with other
 exchanges?

 c. Are there different listing segments on the
 exchange(s)? If yes, please state the listing segments
 and briefly describe them.

 d. Number of initial public offerings (IPOs) within
 the last three years.

 e. Number of additional public offerings in the last
 three years.

 f. Trading volume for the previous three years

 g. Is there a secondary market for securities?


2. Indicate the number of listed companies and market capitalization of the stock exchange(s).
                                                              Number of listed companies        Market capitalization
 a. Domestic companies

 – Listed companies owned/ controlled by the state

 b. Subsidiaries of companies registered overseas but
 listed locally
                                                                                                                             4
                                              ROSC Accounting & Auditing Module B: Institutional Framework – B.2 Listed companies




3. Indicate the number of bonds in issue of the stock exchange(s).
                                                                Number of bonds in issue          Market capitalization
  Total bonds in issue, of which:

  a. Corporate bonds

  b. Government bonds


4. Describe the principal institutional investors in the domestic stock exchange(s) (e.g., pension funds, banks etc.)




B. SECURITIES MARKET REGULATION


5. Name the securities market regulator and describe its authority (e.g., comprehensive inspection, compliance and
enforcement powers), indicating whether this is established by law or other instrument.




6. Briefly describe the key responsibilities of the securities market regulator in respect of financial reporting for
listed companies (e.g., development of or contribution to prudential standards, audit oversight etc.).




7. Please indicate the source(s) of funding of the securities market regulator, noting the percentage contribution
from each source.




8. Is the securities market regulator required to report on its activities (e.g., issue an annual report)? If so, please
indicate the law or other instrument which establishes the requirement and whether this report is made available to
the public. Provide a copy of the report or link to the website if the report is available online.




                                                                                                                               5
                                                               ROSC Accounting & Auditing Module B: Institutional Framework – B.2 Listed companies




C. FINANCIAL REPORTING REQUIREMENTS FOR LISTED COMPANIES


9. Please describe the specific financial reporting requirements for listed companies in addition to, and/or in lieu
of, those applicable to commercial enterprises. If there is more than one listing segment and/or exchange, please
provide a response for each segment and/or exchange (use the ‘Additional Information’ page at the end of this
questionnaire if necessary). In all instances, please indicate the law or regulation that establishes a requirement.

    a. Are IFRS required for the general purpose2 consolidated financial statements of listed companies?
    If not, please indicate:
    	      i. Which accounting standards are required
    	      ii. If IFRS is permitted




    b. Are IFRS required for the legal entity financial statements of listed companies? If not, please indicate:
      	   i. Which accounting standards are required
      	   ii. If IFRS is permitted




    c. Where IFRS are required, please indicate whether it is the full and current version of the standards as issued
    by the IASB or indicate the version and year.




    d. Are the financial statements required to follow a specific presentation (e.g., standardized format, chart of
    accounts)? If yes, please explain.




    e. Please indicate the deadline for submitting annual financial statements and indicate to whom they are
    submitted.




    f. Are listed companies required to prepare a management report/ management discussion and analysis in the
    annual report? If so, please describe briefly the requirements.




2
  General purpose financial statements are those prepared to meet the needs of a variety of users of financial statements as opposed to those
prepared for regulatory or other purposes.
                                                                                                                                                6
                                             ROSC Accounting & Auditing Module B: Institutional Framework – B.2 Listed companies




  g. Are interim or other periodic financial statements required? If so, please describe:
  	     i. the requirements (for both legal entity and consolidated statements where applicable)
  	     ii. the filing/publishing deadlines
  	     iii. whether an audit or limited review must be conducted.




10. Describe the regulations issued by the securities market regulator pertaining to financial reporting for listed
companies.




11. Are there any inconsistencies between securities market regulations covering financial reporting and the
provisions of other laws and regulations? If so, please briefly describe the inconsistencies and indicate which
regulation(s) or requirement(s) take precedence.




D. STATUTORY AUDIT AND OTHER FORMS OF INDEPENDENT ASSURANCE


Note that throughout the assessment the term “audit” refers to a statutory audit of financial statements which is
defined here as an independent audit of general purpose financial statements mandated by law, or by regulations
issued by an institution with the legal authority to establish such requirements. In this regard, “auditors” are
individuals or firms which are licensed or certified to perform statutory audits.


12. Are the financial statements of listed companies subject to an annual statutory audit? If so, please indicate the
legal instrument or regulation that establishes this requirement.




13. Please indicate which body sets the auditing standards used in the audits of listed companies.




                                                                                                                              7
                                              ROSC Accounting & Auditing Module B: Institutional Framework – B.2 Listed companies




14. Are full and current International Standards on Auditing (ISA) as issued by the International Auditing and
Assurance Standards Board (IAASB) adopted in the jurisdiction and required to be followed for the audits of listed
companies? If not, please indicate which auditing standards are used.




15. Please complete the following table, in respect of requirements regarding the tenure of auditors of listed
companies. For each requirement, state the applicable/law regulation which establishes the requirement.
                                                                  Requirements
  a. Is rotation of the audit partner required? If so,
  state the frequency of rotation.

  b. Is rotation of the audit firm required? If so, state
  the frequency of rotation.

  c. Is a ‘cooling-off ’ period for the auditor (partner or
  firm) required? If so, state the length of time.

  d. Describe any other requirements in respect of the
  tenure of auditors of listed companies.


16. Further to the requirements for auditing commercial enterprises in general, are there additional requirements/
conditions from the securities market regulator or per the stock exchange listing rules to audit a listed company? If
so, please describe.




17. Is there a list of approved auditors of listed companies?




18. Do auditors face any restrictions on providing non-audit services to listed companies they audit?




                                                                                                                               8
                                             ROSC Accounting & Auditing Module B: Institutional Framework – B.2 Listed companies




19. Indicate the powers of the following with regard to auditor appointments and terminations.
                                                                 Requirements
 Annual general meeting of shareholders


 Audit committee


 Board of directors


 Other (please explain)


20. Does legislation or other instrument require the auditor of listed companies to attend the annual general meeting
of shareholders?




21. Does the resignation/termination of the auditor need to be reported to the securities market regulator? If so,
please describe the procedure.




E. AUDIT COMMITTEES


22. Please describe the requirements for listed companies, indicating the applicable law or regulation which
establishes the requirement.

 a. Is there a requirement to have an audit committee?




 b. Does the law, other regulation or code prescribe requirements for the composition of the audit committee
 (e.g., number of independent directors etc.)? Please briefly describe.




 c. Please briefly describe the key responsibilities of the audit committee in respect of financial reporting.




                                                                                                                              9
                                             ROSC Accounting & Auditing Module B: Institutional Framework – B.2 Listed companies




 d. Please describe the competences required in order to serve as an audit committee member
 (e.g., experience/knowledge of financial reporting)




 e. Is the audit committee required to report to the shareholders on an annual basis?




F. FILING/PUBLICATION OF FINANCIAL STATEMENTS


23. Are listed companies required to make their financial statements and other relevant reports available to the
public? If yes, please indicate what is made publicly available from the list below. Select all that apply.

      Statement of Financial Position (or balance sheet)             Statement of changes in equity

      Statement of cash flows                                        Auditor’s report

      Notes and disclosures                                          Management discussion and analysis
                                                                     (or management report)
      Income statement (or profit and loss statement)

Other (please explain)




Exemptions (please explain)




Deadline for publication




24. Are listed companies required to disclose material information relating to financial reporting and A&A (e.g.,
change in accounting policies, change in auditor, etc.) on an ongoing and non-selective basis? If so, please explain
briefly the requirement(s) and deadline for the public announcement.




                                                                                                                             10
                                              ROSC Accounting & Auditing Module B: Institutional Framework – B.2 Listed companies




25. Please indicate where financial statements can be accessed by the public. Select all that apply. If there is a cost for
accessing financial statements, please indicate the cost.

        Internet (please indicate where, e.g., listed
        company’s website, securities market
        regulator website)

        In person at the companies’ registry (please
        explain)

        Newspaper

        Official gazette

        Other (please explain)




G. MONITORING AND ENFORCEMENT – FINANCIAL REPORTING


26. Does the securities market regulator review financial statements of listed companies? If so, please complete the
following table:
                                                               Comments
  a. Is there a dedicated unit with responsibility for
  reviewing the financial statements (e.g., checking if
  financial reporting and disclosure requirements are
  met, reviewing auditor’s reports, etc.)?

  b. Name of the monitoring unit(s)


  c. The number of staff dedicated to the monitoring
  activities and the required competences (e.g.,
  financial reporting expertise)

  d. A brief description of the monitoring mechanisms




27. Besides the securities market regulator, are there any other institutions responsible for monitoring compliance
with financial reporting requirements for listed companies (e.g., stock exchange)? If yes, please list below and briefly
explain their duties.




                                                                                                                              11
                                              ROSC Accounting & Auditing Module B: Institutional Framework – B.2 Listed companies




28. Does the securities market regulator play a role in the oversight of auditors of listed companies? If so, please
firstly describe its role in this regard, and secondly, indicate whether there are other institutions with oversight
responsibilities for the auditors of listed companies.




29. If the securities market regulator performs a review of financial statements of listed companies, describe the
supervisory measures and sanctions where violations of financial reporting requirements occur. Please indicate all
possible sanctions (administrative, civil and criminal), as they may relate to the listed company itself, its directors,
managers, and auditors.




30. Please list major cases where an enforcement action has been taken over the past five years, if any, for breaches of
financial reporting requirements.




31. What supervisory measures, if any, are triggered on the part of the securities market regulator if a listed company
receives anything other than an unqualified audit opinion (e.g., qualified audit opinion, disclaimer, adverse opinion,
matter of emphasis etc.)?




                                                                                                                              12
                                             ROSC Accounting & Auditing Module B: Institutional Framework – B.2 Listed companies




32. Please complete the following table in relation to the interaction between the securities market regulator and the
auditors of listed companies:
                                                                 Comments
 a. Are there protocols in place for the securities
 market regulator to engage with auditors of listed
 companies, either directly or indirectly?

 b. How often does the regulator meet with the
 auditors?

 c. Are auditors required to report on matters which
 they believe may be of material significance to the
 functions of the securities market regulator (e.g.,
 breaches of securities or other laws)?

 d. Does the securities market regulator have the
 power to approve and/or dismiss auditors of listed
 companies?

 e. Does the securities market regulator have the
 power to require production of any documents from
 the auditor?




H. CORPORATE GOVERNANCE


33. Is there a code of corporate governance or similar for listed companies ? If so, is compliance with the code
voluntary or on a “comply or explain” basis?




34. In addition to the financial reporting requirements established by law or regulation described in the previous
sections, does the code of corporate governance require or encourage further/different financial reporting practices
(including audit requirements) for listed companies? If so, briefly describe.




35. What are the consequences (if any) for non-compliance with the code of corporate governance by listed
companies?




                                                                                                                             13
                                           ROSC Accounting & Auditing Module B: Institutional Framework – B.2 Listed companies




Additional information


Please indicate the corresponding section and question number if using this page to provide additional information.




                                                                                                                           14
