Report on the Observance of
Standards & Codes (ROSC)
Accounting & Auditing (A&A)
MODULE B: INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK
FOR CORPORATE FINANCIAL REPORTING

B.5 ACCOUNTANCY PROFESSION
TABLE OF CONTENTS

INTRODUCTION TO THE QUESTIONNAIRE								3
A. ENTRY REQUIREMENTS TO THE ACCOUNTANCY PROFESSION					                                                              4
B. CONTINUING PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT							13
C. PROFESSIONAL ACCOUNTANCY ORGANIZATION(S)						14
Additional information										17




© 2017 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank
1818 H Street NW
Washington DC 20433
Telephone: 202-473-1000
Internet: www.worldbank.org

This work is a product of the staff of The World Bank with external contributions. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions
expressed in this work do not necessarily reflect the views of The World Bank, its Board of Executive Directors, or the
governments they represent.
The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries, colors, denominations, and
other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning the
legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

Rights and Permissions
The material in this work is subject to copyright. Because The World Bank encourages dissemination of its knowledge, this work
may be reproduced, in whole or in part, for noncommercial purposes as long as full attribution to this work is given.
Any queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to World Bank Publications, The World
Bank Group, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA; fax: 202-522-2625; e-mail: pubrights@worldbank.org

                                                                                                                                2
                                                     ROSC Accounting & Auditing Module B: Institutional Framework – B.5 Accountancy Profession




INTRODUCTION TO THE QUESTIONNAIRE



The purpose of this questionnaire is to gain an understanding of the accountancy profession in the jurisdiction;
from pathways for aspiring accounting professionals and auditors1 to enter the profession, through to maintaining
professional competence, and the roles and responsibilities of professional accountancy organizations (PAOs).

Questions are based on international good practice in respect of the expected professional skills, education and
competences for the accountancy profession such as the International Education Standards (IES) issued by the
International Accounting Education Standards Board (IAESB). The questionnaire is structured as follows:


    A. Entry requirements to the accountancy
    profession

    B. Continuing professional development


    C. Professional accountancy organizations




How should the questionnaire be completed?

•	 Sections A and B should be completed by the regulatory body for the accountancy profession2.
•	 Section C should be completed by the local professional accountancy organization(s).
•	 Where applicable, state the legal instrument or code that establishes a requirement and the date of enactment.




1
 Refer to Section A for the definitions of “accounting professionals” and “auditors” as used in the questionnaire.
2
 In jurisdictions where professional accountancy organizations self-regulate the profession, these sections may be
completed by the local PAO(s).
                                                                                                                                            3
                                                   ROSC Accounting & Auditing Module B: Institutional Framework – B.5 Accountancy Profession




[For completion by the regulatory body for the accountancy profession]


Please provide the following information when completing this questionnaire.

Country                                                                     Organization



Date of preparation                                                         Telephone number



Individual(s) responsible for preparation                                   Address




Job Title(s)                                                                Email




A. ENTRY REQUIREMENTS TO THE ACCOUNTANCY PROFESSION

The International Accounting Education Standards Board (IAESB) defines a professional accountant as “an individual
who achieves, demonstrates, and further develops professional competence to perform a role in the accountancy
profession and who is required to comply with a code of ethics as directed by a professional accountancy organization
or a licensing authority”3. This definition includes individuals with the authority to sign the audit opinion/auditor’s
report (referred to in some jurisdictions as a ‘statutory auditor’ or ‘engagement partner’). However, recognizing that
there may be additional/different requirements for an individual to have the authority to sign the audit opinion/
auditor’s report, such individuals are referred to as “auditors” throughout the diagnostic tool. Individuals who meet the
definition of a professional accountant but who do not have this authority are referred to as “accounting professionals”.

1. Are there minimum entry requirements to the accountancy profession? If so, please select all that apply from the
following list specifically for aspiring accounting professionals and auditors:
     Requirements                                                                                            Accounting         Auditors
                                                                                                             professionals

     University-level education or equivalent

     Practical experience

     Completion of a professional examination

     Other (please explain)




3
    Handbook of International Education Pronouncements (2015).
                                                                                                                                           4
                                       ROSC Accounting & Auditing Module B: Institutional Framework – B.5 Accountancy Profession




2. If education to at least university-level or equivalent is required to enter the accountancy profession, please briefly
describe any specific requirements (e.g., undergraduate degree in accountancy or related discipline) for the following:
  Accounting professionals                                        Auditors




3. If there is a practical experience requirement to enter the accountancy profession, please complete the following
table in respect of aspiring accounting professionals and auditors (where different):

  a. Is it a legal requirement to complete a period of practical experience? If so, please state the law or statute
  which establishes the requirement.
  Accounting professionals                                        Auditors




  b. Briefly describe the types of activity that qualify as practical experience.
  Accounting professionals                                        Auditors




  c. Indicate the length of the practical experience requirement.
  Accounting professionals                                        Auditors




  d. Indicate who can act as a practical experience provider.
  Accounting professionals                                        Auditors




                                                                                                                              5
                                                        ROSC Accounting & Auditing Module B: Institutional Framework – B.5 Accountancy Profession




     e. Describe how the practical experience requirement is assessed and by whom.
     Accounting professionals                                                               Auditors




     f. Does the practical experience provider need to be accredited4? If so, please indicate which body provides the
     accreditation and briefly describe the requirements and any guidance provided.
     Accounting professionals                                                               Auditors




     g. Is compliance with the practical experience requirements monitored? If so, please indicate which body is
     responsible for monitoring and briefly describe how monitoring activities are performed.
     Accounting professionals                                                               Auditors




4. Are aspiring accounting professionals required to complete initial professional development as defined in the
International Education Standards (IES 2-6)? If so, please indicate briefly how compliance with the applicable IES is
achieved. If not, please provide examples of the types of activity/assessments that must be completed (if applicable).




5. Are aspiring auditors required to comply with the requirements of IES 8, Professional Competence for Engagement
Partners responsible for audits of financial statements? If so, please indicate briefly how compliance with IES 8 is
achieved. If not, please provide examples of the types of activity/assessments that must be completed (if applicable).




4
    Describe any accreditation requirements specifically for supervising practical experience.
                                                                                                                                               6
                                                      ROSC Accounting & Auditing Module B: Institutional Framework – B.5 Accountancy Profession




6. If there is a professional examination requirement to enter the accountancy profession, please complete the
following table, indicating the technical competence areas and learning outcomes5 which are covered in the
examination(s) for aspiring accounting professionals and auditors (where different). Select all that apply.

    Competence area/                                                                                                              Accounting      Auditors
    Learning outcomes                                                                                                             professionals

    Financial accounting and reporting
    i. Apply accounting principles to transactions and other events.


    ii. Apply International Financial Reporting Standards (IFRSs) or other relevant
    standards to transactions and other events.

    iii. Evaluate the appropriateness of accounting policies used to prepare financial
    statements.

    iv. Prepare financial statements, including consolidated financial statements, in
    accordance with IFRSs or other relevant standards.

    v. Interpret financial statements and related disclosures.


    vi. Interpret reports that include non-financial data, for example


    Management accounting
    i. Apply techniques to support management decision making, including product
    costing, variance analysis, inventory management, and budgeting and forecasting.

    ii. Apply appropriate quantitative techniques to analyze cost behavior and the
    drivers of costs.

    iii. Analyze financial and non-financial data to provide relevant information for
    management decision-making

    iv. Prepare reports to support management decision making, including reports that
    focus on planning and budgeting, cost management, quality control, performance
    measurement, and benchmarking.

    v. Evaluate the performance of products and business segments.


    Finance and financial management
    i. Compare the various sources of financing available to an organization, including
    bank financing, financial instruments, and bond, equity and treasury markets.

    ii. Analyze an organization’s cash flow and working capital requirements.


    iii. Analyze the current and future financial position of an organization, using
    techniques including ratio analysis, trend analysis, and cash flow analysis.

5
 According to IES 2, Initial Professional Development – Technical Competence, the content of professional accountancy education
should cover these areas. Students should attain ‘intermediate’ level proficiency (as defined by the IAESB) for all areas except for
Economics where ‘foundation’ level of proficiency is sufficient.                                                                                             7
                                    ROSC Accounting & Auditing Module B: Institutional Framework – B.5 Accountancy Profession




Competence area/                                                                              Accounting         Auditors
Learning outcomes                                                                             professionals


iv. Evaluate the appropriateness of the components used to calculate an
organization’s cost of capital.

v. Apply capital budgeting techniques in the evaluation of capital investment
decisions.

vi. Explain income, asset-based, and market valuation approaches used for
investment decisions, business planning, and long-term financial management.

Taxation
i. Explain national taxation compliance and filing requirements.


ii. Prepare direct and indirect tax calculations for individuals and organizations.


iii. Analyze the taxation issues associated with non-complex international
transactions

iv. Explain the differences between tax planning, tax avoidance, and tax evasion.


Audit and assurance
i. Describe the objectives and stages involved in performing an audit of financial
statements.

ii. Apply relevant auditing standards (for example, International Standards on
Auditing), and applicable laws and regulations to an audit of financial statements.

iii. Assess the risks of material misstatement in the financial statements and
consider the impact on the audit strategy.

iv. Apply quantitative methods that are used in audit engagements. Explain the key
elements of assurance engagements and applicable standards that are relevant to
such engagements.

Governance, risk management and internal control
i. Explain the principles of good governance, including the rights and responsibilities
of owners, investors, and those charged with governance; and explain the role of
stakeholders in governance, disclosure, and transparency requirements.

ii. Analyze the components of an organization’s governance framework.


iii. Analyze an organization’s risks and opportunities using a risk management
framework.

iv. Analyze the components of internal control related to financial reporting.



                                                                                                                            8
                                     ROSC Accounting & Auditing Module B: Institutional Framework – B.5 Accountancy Profession




Business laws and regulations
i. Explain the laws and regulations that govern the different forms of legal entities.


ii. Explain the laws and regulations applicable to the environment in which
professional accountants operate.

Information technology
i. Analyze the adequacy of general information technology controls and relevant
application controls

ii. Explain how information technology contributes to data analysis and decision
making.

iii. Use information technology to support decision making through business
analytics.

Business and organizational environment
i. Describe the environment in which an organization operates, including the main
economic, legal, political, social, technical, international, and cultural forces.

ii. Analyze aspects of the global environment that affect international trade and
finance.

iii. Identify the features of globalization, including the role of multinationals


Economics
i. Describe the fundamental principles of microeconomics and macroeconomics.


ii. Describe the effect of changes in macroeconomic indicators on business activity.


iii. Explain the different types of market structures, including perfect competition,
monopolistic competition, monopoly, and oligopoly.

Business strategy and management
i. Explain the various ways that organizations may be designed and structured.


ii. Explain the purpose and importance of different types of functional and
operational areas within organizations.

iii. Analyze the external and internal factors that may influence the strategy of an
organization.

iv. Explain the processes that may be used to implement the strategy of an
organization.

v. Explain how theories of organizational behavior may be used to enhance the
performance of the individual, teams, and the organization.

                                                                                                                            9
                                      ROSC Accounting & Auditing Module B: Institutional Framework – B.5 Accountancy Profession




7. Please indicate the business language for the professional examination(s) and course materials.




8. Please indicate the following for the professional examination (if there are multiple papers, please only respond
for the final examination):

 a. Briefly describe the methods of assessment (e.g., case studies, multiple choice examinations, open ended
 questions, oral examinations etc.)




 b. Who administers the examination(s)/assessments?




 c. Is there any institution that offers support/ preparation for the examination?




 d. Are there any exemptions permitted to the examination? If so, please describe.




 e. Are there any restrictions on the number of examination/assessment attempts?




 f. Is there a maximum time period for completing all of the assessments/examinations?




 g. Provide the overall number of candidates who were enrolled in the final examination in the last three years
 and include a breakdown by male/female candidates where available:




                                                                                                                            10
                                                      ROSC Accounting & Auditing Module B: Institutional Framework – B.5 Accountancy Profession




     h. Percentage of students who passed the final examination in the last three years and include a breakdown by
     male/female candidates where available.




9. Is there a code of ethics with which auditors are required to comply? If so, please provide yes/no responses to
the following:

     Has the Code of Ethics for Professional Accountants as issued by the                                        YES
     International Ethics Standards Board for Accountants (IESBA) been adopted
     without modifications?

     Has a locally-developed code of ethics been adopted?                                                        YES



     Does the code of ethics (IESBA Code of Ethics or local code) have legal                                     YES
     backing in the jurisdiction (e.g., are auditors required by law or other statute
     to comply?)


10. Which body is responsible for setting ethical standards in the jurisdiction?




11. Briefly describe the process for developing the code of ethics (if there is a local code) or for adopting the IESBA
Code (e.g. by reference, reissuance as the national Code or convergence).




12. If a local code of ethics has been developed, describe how the code is aligned with the IESBA Code of Ethics for
Professional Accountants in the following areas (if applicable). Select all areas that apply and briefly describe the
requirements.

              a. Integrity6


              b. Objectivity


              c. Professional Competence and Due Care


              d. Confidentiality



6
    Refer to Part A General Application of the Code and the Fundamental Principles
                                                                                                                                            11
                                          ROSC Accounting & Auditing Module B: Institutional Framework – B.5 Accountancy Profession




              e. Professional Behavior


              f. Independence - Audit and Review
              Engagements7

              g. Independence - Other Assurance
              Engagements8

              h. Other (please explain)



13. Are accounting professionals required to comply with a code of ethics? If so, please indicate (by selecting
all that apply) whether the requirements for this code is aligned to the IESBA Code of Ethics for Professional
Accountants, in particular the requirements of:

              Part A, General Application of the Code

              Part B, Professional Accountants in Public Practice

              Part C, Professional Accountants in Business.


14. If the IESBA Code of Ethics for Professional Accountants has not been adopted or adopted with modifications, is
there an ongoing process for full adoption?




15. Describe any challenges with respect to compliance with the code of ethics in the jurisdiction.




7
    Refer to Section 290 of the Code
8
    Refer to Section 291 of the Code
                                                                                                                                12
                                                   ROSC Accounting & Auditing Module B: Institutional Framework – B.5 Accountancy Profession




B. CONTINUING PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT

16. Describe the requirements for continuing professional development (CPD) for (i) accounting professionals9 and
(ii) auditors10 in the jurisdiction, indicating whether these requirements are compulsory.




17. Indicate the major providers of CPD in the jurisdiction, stating whether these providers are required to be
accredited and name the body which provides accreditation.




18. Is there a systematic process in place to monitor and enforce compliance with CPD requirements? If so, please
briefly describe.




9
    As recommended in IES 7, Continuing Professional Development.
10
    As recommended in IES 8, Professional Competence for Engagement Partners
                                                                                                                                         13
                                      ROSC Accounting & Auditing Module B: Institutional Framework – B.5 Accountancy Profession




[For completion by the local professional accountancy organization(s)]


Please provide the following information when completing this questionnaire.

Country                                                        Organization



Date of preparation                                            Telephone number



Individual(s) responsible for preparation                      Address




Job Title(s)                                                   Email




C. PROFESSIONAL ACCOUNTANCY ORGANIZATION(S)

19. Please provide the following information on the professional accountancy organization(s) (PAOs) that are
active in the jurisdiction (If there are multiple PAOs, use the additional information page at the end of the
questionnaire if necessary):
 a. Name                                                         b. Date of establishment




 c. Is the PAO governed by a leadership team or governing committee? If so, please describe:
 	       i. The role of the leadership team/governing committee (e.g., President, Chief Executive, General Secretary etc.)
 	       ii. Whether the leadership is elected and the elected term if applicable.
 	       iii. If the PAO is run by full-time staff or on a voluntary basis.




 d. Composition of the leadership team or governing committee.




                                                                                                                            14
                                    ROSC Accounting & Auditing Module B: Institutional Framework – B.5 Accountancy Profession




e. Official title(s) of members (if applicable)




f. Briefly describe the membership requirements (including recognition of foreign qualifications
where applicable)




g. Total number of registered members including a breakdown by male/female if data is available (please
indicate the date and separate by membership tier if applicable: student, associate, full member etc.):




h. Total number of registered members in public practice (please indicate the date and include a breakdown by
male/female if data is available):	




i. Number of new members in the last three years (please provide numbers for each year and include a
breakdown by male/female if data is available):	




j. Status of membership of the International Federation of Accountants (IFAC) (e.g., affiliate, associate, full)
and date of accession.




k. Status of membership of regional or other international professional groupings or organizations (if applicable).




l. Source(s) of funding (including percentages)




                                                                                                                          15
                                                      ROSC Accounting & Auditing Module B: Institutional Framework – B.5 Accountancy Profession




20. Please briefly describe the statutory powers (if any) of PAOs in the jurisdiction (e.g., issuing of licenses or
certifications, standard-setting, monitoring, and investigation and discipline of members)




21. Does the PAO investigate cases of potential misconduct or disciplinary infractions by its members11?
  i) If so, please complete the following:

     a. Briefly describe the monitoring, investigation and enforcement mechanism(s).




     b. Describe the powers the body has in conducting its investigations (e.g., can it require production of relevant
     documentation?)




     c. Describe the range of sanctions available to the body (e.g., exclusion from the professional body, civil or
     criminal penalties or referrals)




     d. Provide examples of major enforcement actions in the last five years, describing the nature of the offence and
     the sanction imposed.




     ii) If not, please indicate whether investigation is conducted by another body (such as the body responsible for
     audit quality assurance) or not at all.




10
     As required for compliance with SMO 6 Investigation and Discipline.
                                                                                                                                            16
                                    ROSC Accounting & Auditing Module B: Institutional Framework – B.5 Accountancy Profession




Additional information


Please indicate the corresponding section and question number if using this page to provide additional information.




                                                                                                                          17
