     “THE MAP AND THE COMPASS”


            STRATEGIC DIRECTIONS
          FOR HIGHER EDUCATION
IN THE TURKISH CYPRIOT COMMUNITY (TCc)




                                                                         Nina Arnhold
                                                                    Hans Vossensteyn
                                                                       Andree Sursock
                                                                          Frank Ziegele
                                                                            Andy Gibbs
                                                                     Melita Kovacevic
                                                                       Vitus Puttmann




     This work is part of the Economic Analysis Programme for Growth and Sustainable
     Development which is funded through the European Union’s aid regulation “Council
     Regulation (EC) No. 389/2006” of 27 February 2006. The opinions expressed in this
     study do not reflect any official opinion by the European Commission and the World
     Bank’s Board of Executive Directors, nor do they in any way constitute recognition of
     boundaries or territories.
                                                                Contents


Abbreviations .................................................................................................................................. 4
Acknowledgments........................................................................................................................... 5
Executive Summary ........................................................................................................................ 7
Introduction .................................................................................................................................... 9
Strategic Directions for Higher Education in the Turkish Cypriot Community (TCc) ................. 11
   1. Higher education and its contribution to economic and social development .................. 11
   2. Governance and quality assurance .................................................................................... 14
   3. Financing of higher education ........................................................................................... 16
   4. Teaching and learning ........................................................................................................ 17
   5. Research and development ............................................................................................... 19
Annex 1: Expert Observations ..................................................................................................... 23
   Annex 1-A: The economic and regional impact of universities—implications for the Turkish
   Cypriot Community (TCc) .......................................................................................................... 23
   Annex 1-B: Governance and quality assurance in the TCc ....................................................... 29
   Annex 1-C: Status quo and perspectives for higher education financing in the TCc ............... 40
   Annex 1-D: Teaching, learning, recognition—options for the TCc ........................................... 46
   Annex 1-E: Research and Development ................................................................................... 53
Annex 2: Background Information—Higher Education in the TCc ............................................. 61
   Main features of the system ..................................................................................................... 61
   Teaching and learning ............................................................................................................... 72
   Research .................................................................................................................................... 78
   Governance ............................................................................................................................... 80
   Quality assurance ...................................................................................................................... 83
   Financing ................................................................................................................................... 86
References .................................................................................................................................... 89
Annex 3: Agenda Workshop on Strategic Directions for the TCc ............................................... 92
Annex 4: Bios of Authors and Workshop Contributors .............................................................. 94
Annex 5: List of Workshop Participants ...................................................................................... 98


                                                                                                                                                 2
Boxes
Box A2.1 Characteristics of the TCc Labor Market                                      74
Box A2.2 The State of the TCc Economy                                                 79
Box A2.3 Funding from the Higher Education Budget                                     87

Figures
Figure A1-B.1 Governance at the system level: A power balance through well-distributed
responsibilities                                                                       33
Figure A2.1 Total Enrolment in the TCc by Origin of Students, 1988/89–2014/15          68
Figure A2.2 Share of Students by Origin, 2014/15                                       69
Figure A2.3 Share of Students by Degree Level, 2014/15                                 70
Figure A2.4 Employment by Economic Sector, 2014                                        74
Figure A2.5 Labor Force Participation Rate by Education and Gender, 2014               75
Figure A2.6 Employment Rate by Education and Gender, 2014                              75
Figure A2.7 Employment in the Public and the Private Sector by Level of Education,
2014 (in percent)                                                                      76
Figure A2.8 Unemployment Rate by Education and Gender, 2014                            77
Figure A2.9 Unemployed by Level of Education, 2014                                     78

Tables
Table 1 Key recommendations for higher education in the TCc                           22
Table A2.1 Universities in the Turkish Cypriot Community                              64
Table A2.2 Higher Education Budget, 2014                                              87




                                                                                            3
                                  Abbreviations

ABET      Accreditation Board for Engineering and Technology
AQAAIW    Association of Quality Assurance Agencies of the Islamic World
CEENQA    Central and Eastern European Network of Quality Assurance Agencies in Higher
          Education
CHEA      U.S. Council on Higher Education Accreditation
CIU       Cyprus International University
ECTS      European Credit Transfer and Accumulation System
EMU       Eastern Mediterranean University
ENQA      European Association for Quality Assurance in Higher Education
ESG       Standards and Guidelines for Quality Assurance in the European Higher Education Area
EQA       external quality assurance
EQAR      European Quality Assurance Register
EU        European Union
EUA       European University Association
EUL       European University of Lefke
FIBA      Foundation for International Business Administration Accreditation
GAU       Girne American University
GCc       Greek Cypriot community
HEMIS     higher education management and information system
IEP       Institutional Evaluation Programme
INQAAHE   International Network for Quality Assurance Agencies in Higher Education
IQA       internal quality assurance
ITU       Istanbul Technical University
IUC       Inter-University Council
LoHE      Law on Higher Education
METU      Middle East Technical University
MONE      “Ministry” of National Education
NCC       Northern Cyprus Campus
NEU       Near East University
OECD      Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
ÖSYM      Student Selection and Placement Center
PR        public relations
QA        quality assurance
R&D       research and development
SME       small and medium-sized enterprises
SWOT      strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, threats
TCc       Turkish Cypriot community
TÜBİTAK   Scientific and Technological Research Council of Turkey
UK        University of Kyrenia
UMK       University of Mediterranean Karpasia
VET       vocational education and training
YÖDAK     Higher Education Planning, Evaluation, Accreditation and Coordination Council
YÖK       Turkish Council of Higher Education



                                                                                                 4
                                    Acknowledgments


This report was prepared by a team of World Bank staff and higher education experts under the
European Commission’s “Supporting Economic Convergence of the Turkish Cypriot Community
with the EU” Trust Fund’s Component 4: “Supporting Private Sector Development and Social
Inclusion in the TCc.” The work under this component includes activities related to higher
education, including structured interviews and a workshop with stakeholders, which have
resulted in the recommendations summarized in this document.
The preparation of the report was coordinated by Nina Arnhold, Senior Education Specialist at
the World Bank, who also prepared the main recommendations based on various input. Dr.
Arnhold was supported by Mr. Vitus Puttmann, World Bank Consultant, who prepared the
background section in Annex 2. A team of higher education specialists provided their expertise
on selected topics following their participation in the workshop, “Strategic Directions for Higher
Education in the Turkish Cypriot Community (TCc),” that was held in Nicosia (Annex 3 contains
the workshop agenda and Annex 5 the list of participants). Observations from the experts are
summarized in Annex 1. The experts include Professor Hans Vossensteyn, University of Twente,
Netherlands; Dr. Andrée Sursock, Senior Adviser at the European University Association, Belgium
and France; Professor Frank Ziegele, University of Osnabrück, Germany; Andy Gibbs, Glasgow
Caledonian University, United Kingdom; and Professor Melita Kovačević, University of Zagreb,
Croatia; all World Bank Consultants. The CVs of all team members can be found in Annex 4.
The authors are grateful for the support received from Alessandra Marini and Michele Zini, who
jointly led the work under Component 4 of the abovementioned Trust Fund, as well as from
Cristian Aedo, Education Manager; Andrew Mason, Social Protection Manager; Arup Banerji,
Country Director; Dirk Reinermann, Program Manager Southern Europe; Markus Heinz, Senior
Operations Officer from the Country Management Unit; and Anil Onal, all of the World Bank. The
authors are furthermore grateful for the support received from the EC’s Directorate-General for
Employment, which funded the preparation of the report. Peer reviewers were Francisco
Marmolejo and Toby Linden, both of the World Bank. Diane Stamm edited the report.
The preparation of the report would not have been possible without the strong support and input
from experts and stakeholders in the TCc. The EU Coordination Center and, in particular, İzge
Arısal, Tuğyan Atıfsoy, and Damla Onurhan, supported this undertaking throughout its different
phases. The team received much appreciated input from university leaders, staff, and students;
employers’ organization representatives; the TCc administration, including the leadership of the
Higher Education Planning, Evaluation, Accreditation and Coordination Council (YÖDAK); and
representatives from the labor market policy sector, all of whom participated in interviews
conducted in April and June 2016; and input from participants in the “Strategic Directions”
workshop on 14 June 2016. The authors are particularly grateful to Professor Necdet Osam,
Rector of the Eastern Mediterranean University (EMU); Professor Turgut Tümer, at the time

                                                                                                5
President of the Northern Cyprus Campus of the Middle East Technical University (METU), and
Professor Olgun Çiçek, YÖDAK Board Member, for their significant contributions to the June
workshop.



                                         Disclaimer
The contents of this document are the sole responsibility of its authors and should in no way be
taken to reflect the official views of the World Bank or the European Commission financing this
report. The Republic of Cyprus covers the entire territory of the island of Cyprus. The term
“Turkish Cypriot community” refers, solely for the purposes of this study, to the areas in which
the Government of the Republic of Cyprus does not exercise effective control. If reference is
made in the report to any “ministries”, “departments”, “services”, “bodies”, “organizations”,
“institutions”, and “authorities” in the areas not under the effective control of the Government
of the Republic of Cyprus, or respective acronyms or abbreviations are used, this is done to allow
a clear factual understanding of the administrative structures in the Turkish Cypriot community
without intention to support any claims based on international law. Similarly, comparisons
between the areas where the Government of the Republic of Cyprus exercises effective control
and those areas where it does not are factual only.




                                                                                                6
                                  Executive Summary
This report, “Strategic Directions for Higher Education in the Turkish Cypriot Community (TCc) ,”
was prepared upon request of the TCc Administration and was supported by the European
Commission Trust Fund “Supporting Economic Convergence of the Turkish Cypriot Community
with the EU.” The document was prepared by a team of World Bank staff and higher education
experts in 2016, taking into account prior work on the TCc higher education sector, expert
opinion, and stakeholder feedback, particularly that received during a workshop on 14 June 2016,
and during interviews with sector representatives.
The document includes recommendations on key features of the TCc higher education system.
The specific topics covered are the higher education system’s contribution to economic and social
development, teaching, and learning, and research and development as key outputs of the higher
education sector on the one hand, and governance and quality assurance as well as financing
mechanisms, a major steering instrument for the sector and its institutions, on the other.
At the time of writing, discussions were ongoing between the TCc and the Greek Cypriot
community (GCc) with a view to potential alternative political scenarios for the future. For the
team this meant that recommendations related to future directions for the higher education
sector should be able to both provide guidance within the current political and administrative
framework of the TCc, and support the sector in preparing for potential alternative political
scenarios.
The report argues that to become a motor of future growth, the focus of higher education in
the TCc needs to shift from rapid quantitative expansion toward an increased focus on the
quality of institutions’ activities. To achieve this, the approach to higher education in the TCc
needs to be reconsidered, with more attention devoted to research and development and the
quality of the student experience, while building on existing positive features of the system and
its institutions.
Universities are encouraged to gear their operations more closely to provisions of the Bologna
Process, link their programs increasingly to labor market demands, emphasize
entrepreneurship training and transferable skills, and undertake initial steps toward
strengthening research and development capacities by developing initial research strategies and
identifying areas for smart specialization.
Key recommendations include:

      Building on the “Strategic Directions,” developing a concise sector strategy in a
       transparent and inclusive manner—culminating in a broad endorsement by higher
       education stakeholders
      Disentangling responsibilities for policy formulation and financing from responsibilities
       for independent external quality assurance processes

                                                                                               7
   Building on the sector strategy and the new division of governance roles, and establishing
    a mechanism for well-grounded and transparent decision making concerning the
    establishment of new institutions
   Strengthening internal quality assurance at universities
   Fostering collaboration and knowledge exchange among universities, with a view to
    joint growth opportunities and quality enhancement of higher education provision.




                                                                                            8
                                             Introduction


This report, “Strategic Directions for Higher Education in the Turkish Cypriot Community (TCc),”
was prepared by a team of World Bank staff and higher education experts in 2016. The team
started by reviewing literature, including a “rapid assessment” (World Bank 2016) of the sector
conducted by the World Bank in 2015/16. Data on the TCc higher education sector are, however,
scarce. To date, there is no higher education management and information system (HEMIS) or
other systematic approaches to collecting and processing data. Information on the sector is
mainly provided by universities for marketing purposes. The team thus set out to collect
information during site visits, and to complement the visits with interviews with university
leaders, staff, students, stakeholders, and the TCc administration. Initial considerations
concerning the future of the sector based on the aforementioned data and information sources
were presented at a workshop on strategic directions for the higher education sector on 14 June
2016 (Annex 3–5), and were later compiled in this document. The main recommendations (p. 11–
22) were based on all the input the team received.
The TCc higher education system has several characteristics that set it apart from other European
higher education systems, particularly the high degree of internationalization1; only 16 percent
of students come from the TCc itself. Among the other students, the majority come from
Turkey—a neighboring system with which the TCc higher education system shows a certain
degree of integration, primarily via student placements. Further, the sector has seen a massive
expansion in terms of number of both students and higher education institutions (for details, see
Annex 2). Other distinct features of the TCc higher education sector include the low spending on
higher education (including on public universities), the large number of students compared to
the overall population, and factors determined by its specific political situation.
At the time of writing, discussions were ongoing between the TCc and the Greek Cypriot
Community (GCc), with a view to potential alternative political scenarios for the future. For the
team this meant that recommendations related to future directions for the higher education
sector should be able to both (a) provide guidance within the current political and administrative
framework of the TCc, and (b) support the sector in preparing for potential alternative political
options.
Determining the direction for the future development of a higher education system and
promoting the implementation of objectives require a clear and agreed strategy based on an in-
depth analysis of current circumstances and potential future developments. Such a strategy also
needs to be developed and endorsed by the sector itself. This report represents a preparatory


1
  The term is used here with regard to the fact that a large percentage of students comes from abroad; however,
“internationalization” covers a wider range of aspects of higher education systems and institutions, as will be
discussed later.

                                                                                                             9
step in that direction by outlining key issues of a potential strategy that can serve as the basis for
a future strategy development process of the sector. This approach also appeared to be more
suitable due to the uncertainties related to future political developments.
The report is expected to provide a good starting point for the development of the strategy,
because it maps out some of the key challenges the sector faces and how they could potentially
be tackled in the short to medium term. The future higher education strategy:

      should aim at covering medium-term issues
      will need to be conceived through a process that creates buy-in and ensures ownership
       by relevant stakeholders
      will subsequently need to be endorsed by the sector through a formal process.
Further, the strategy will need to be geared toward an agreed vision, and ideally be based on a
clear future (political) roadmap.
The report is structured as follows. The introduction is followed by the main section, which
includes recommendations on five major topics. This is followed by five annexes, including
observations by European experts taking into account stakeholder feedback collected during the
14 June 2016 workshop (Annex 1), detailed background information (Annex 2), and further
information on the workshop (Annex 3–5).
The five major topics covered in the recommendations are:

      Higher education and its contribution to economic and social development
      Governance and quality assurance
      Higher education financing
      Teaching and learning
      Research and development.
The first section explores major aspects of the contribution of higher education to economic and
social development. Universities contribute to society in two main ways: by preparing highly
skilled graduates, and through research-and-development-related activities. How this is done is
explored in more detail in the sections on teaching and learning, and on research and
development. However, to fulfill these functions, higher education systems and institutions need
appropriate governance structures, quality assurance arrangements, and effective financing
mechanisms. Therefore, these areas are discussed and covered by the recommendations.
A summary of the recommendations, including prioritization for implementation, can be found
in table 1 on pp. 21–22.




                                                                                                   10
                        Strategic Directions for Higher Education
                         in the Turkish Cypriot Community (TCc)


1. Higher education and its contribution to economic and social development
Over the last several decades, higher education has been a key economic factor in the Turkish
Cypriot community (TCc), and it has the potential to develop into a main driver of growth under
alternative future political scenarios. With a view to the size of the student population vis-à-vis
the overall TCc population (exceeding 85,000 students compared to an overall population of
about 300,000), as well as percentage of nonlocal students, the TCc higher education system can
be considered the largest and most internationalized2 higher education system in the world. This
can be seen as an advantage: higher education systems across the world strive for
internationalization, not least with a view to diversification of their income sources through
private funding. Universities in the TCc have successfully tapped into this funding source and
thereby contributed to the TCc economy in past years. Universities are major employers in the
TCc and students have significantly contributed to the TCc economy. The emphasis of the sector
has been mainly on quantitative expansion coupled with the advancement of student services.
However, much less emphasis has been put on ensuring quality of provision, and underpinning
higher education with research and development, including an alignment of both areas of activity
with the demands of the domestic society and economy. Overall it seems that the expansion was
not supported by an adequate increase in resources, making quality of provision increasingly a
concern.
To become a motor of future growth, the focus of higher education in the TCc needs to move
from rapid quantitative expansion toward an increased focus on quality of provision, with a
view to both retaining the current number of students and attracting new “clients” for the sector
from both the local economy and outside. Further unregulated growth, and growth that does not
receive sufficient resources, can endanger the reputation of the TCc as an academic destination,
and thus hamper future growth and contributions of higher education to the TCc’s development.
Higher education systems across Europe profit from public funding; in exchange, they are
expected to contribute to economic growth and social cohesion. The TCc exhibits distinct
features, with a largely privately funded higher education system being a key pillar of the
economy through a large number of nonlocal students who not only pay fees, but also purchase
goods and services on the island. While this can be explained by the specific political situation of

2
  As mentioned in footnote 1, the term is used here with regard to the fact that a large percentage of students come
from abroad; however, “internationalization” covers a wider range of aspects of higher education systems and
institutions, as will be discussed later.

                                                                                                                 11
the TCc (that is, the absence of the possibility of exporting goods other than education to most
countries), it now seems to be an appropriate moment to reconsider the “business model” for
higher education in the TCc, with a view to future options of political and economic
development, while keeping its positive features. The great number of foreign students within
the system (in particular via students coming from “friendly countries”) can be largely explained
by the political situation of the TCc, and especially by the inflow of Turkish students because of a
shortage of domestic capacity in Turkey. Therefore, policy makers and stakeholders in the TCc
are well advised to inquire whether the same drivers of sectoral growth would still be at work
under alternative future scenarios.
Higher education in the TCc has much to offer, such as its attractive location and environment,
well-developed campuses, student services, the use of English as a language of instruction, the
presence on campus of students from many countries, an entrepreneurial spirit, and
sophisticated marketing approaches.
These positive features will need to be coupled with quality of provision —to retain current
students and attract new ones—and smart investments in higher education and research,
strengthening potential priority areas that can fuel the development of an emerging service
sector, particularly in areas like tourism (including health tourism), but also potentially areas like
sustainable energy and maritime research. This can build on existing strengths and specialization
of institutions, which could potentially develop into local centers of excellence in a few, well-
selected areas.
While the current higher education system should already be gearing skills development more
strongly toward the needs of the labor market, the future higher education system will need
to serve as well as stimulate the development of a labor market, the shape of which will only
emerge in the future. An important aspect of the contribution of higher education to economic
growth concerns skills supply through education and training in accordance with skills demands
expressed by the private and public sector.3 However, the TCc labor market is severely
constrained due to the current political circumstances, and there is a range of imponderables
with a view to future developments and, subsequently, skills demand. Adding to this is a general
lack of information and data on labor market demand and supply. It is thus difficult to make
further-reaching statements about a potential skills mismatch, especially with a view to potential
future developments.
In this context, a stronger focus on quality of education and entrepreneurship training will be
critical, as will be an integrated and flexible education system with strong links to the labor
market. For example, clear connections are needed between vocational education and training
(VET) and higher education, in the context of a modular system geared toward lifelong learning.
This is in contrast to the current system of channeling young people into one form of post-


3
    See also Zini, Marini, and Kan 2016.

                                                                                                   12
secondary education that might currently appear more useful (for example, VET and associate
degrees vs. graduate degrees).
Many young people have the ambition to enroll in higher education, even though there are
indications of graduate unemployment and of a lack of advanced technical skills (which would
need to be investigated in more detail). These ambitions are further supported by external
factors, such as conditions for suspension of military training, which are likely to impact the
choice of young people.
Policy makers might thus want to consider alternatives to the current practice of linking
suspension of military training to one particular type of post-secondary education and training,
namely graduate education within tertiary education—a practice that is likely to lead to
distortions in student demand.
In addition, the TCc should carefully study practices and policies of successful lifelong learning
systems in which VET and higher education are more modularized, possibly linked through
bridging courses, in which VET does not appear as a one-way street curtailing future career and
learning options and which, overall, strongly emphasizes generic skills. In a well-developed
lifelong learning system, and especially in the TCc environment, associate degrees can become a
useful link between more practically oriented training and higher education, and shorter courses
for individuals who have already joined the labor force could lead to a continuous upskilling in
line with changing requirements in the world of work. Possibilities for a comprehensive
recognition of prior learning when enrolling in higher education (for example, by giving credits
for previous work experience)—which appears to be underdeveloped in the TCc—could further
contribute to the permeability4 of the education system and, hence, to the emergence of a
lifelong learning system.
Another crucial approach in this respect is the guidance of individuals through the education
system that starts early on, that is, already before channeling students to one of the secondary
education tracks.
Creating transparency about different learning options and (possibly) their outcomes—for
example, through labor market information systems—allows individuals to choose those
educational careers that best fit their competences and ambitions. Another way of bringing the
private sector and higher education closer together could be through “knowledge vouchers”
allowing local enterprises to “purchase” tailor-made applied research from local institutions (for
details see Annex 2-C).
In the medium term, TCc policy makers might include the status of higher education institutions
in these considerations, because instead of considering all tertiary education institutions as


4
 That is, flexible access and progression through the system based on achieved learning outcomes. Permeability is
achieved by reducing barriers at access and throughout a period of learning, and also by increasing opportunities for
nontraditional learners.

                                                                                                                  13
universities, some might excel in the future as polytechnic-type institutions with advanced
vocational missions. A stronger mission differentiation also seems warranted for universities
under this scenario, particularly with a view to future research orientation building on existing
specializations and strengths.


2. Governance and quality assurance
For a ship to arrive at its destination it needs to be navigated with the help of a map, a compass,
and skilled personnel. This picture has sometimes been used to also describe the steering needs
of higher education systems—with a higher education strategy as a map; sound quality assurance
provision as a compass, which allows for course corrections; and policy makers able and willing
to take strategic decisions based on sound information as navigators. In addition, higher
education systems need quality data and platforms for cooperation, as provided by data
warehouses and well-connected Rectors Conferences.
Despite the crucial importance of strategic steering for modern higher education systems, the
strategic steering of the sector can be considered as one of the most underdeveloped aspects
of the TCc higher education system. It lacks a higher education strategy (anchored in a
development strategy—which is also currently missing), suitable legislation based on such a
strategy, a functioning and comprehensive quality assurance system, and central actors in a
position to move the sector forward in accordance with agreed strategic goals. The consequences
of the lack of steering capacity and tools are most visible when it comes to the seemingly
unregulated expansion of the sector which, as a process, lacks transparency, priorities, and
strategic orientation.
The preparation of a higher education strategy is thus of the utmost importance, and this
report aims at providing useful input for that undertaking. During the process of strategy
development, strategies for other sectors such as the labor market will need to be taken into
account. Given the relevance of higher education for societal and economic development, there
is a more general need for policy coordination among relevant sectors.
Higher education systems across Europe and the world rely on different types of higher education
steering bodies, including more comprehensive Ministries of Education, Ministries of Higher
Education (with or without science integrated), and intermediary bodies. Turkey—as an
important comparator country—has developed its own way of sector steering, with a powerful
higher education board called the Turkish Council of Higher Education (YÖK), the president of
which has the status of a minister within the Turkish government. YÖK covers a broad scope of
activities within the higher education sector and is well endowed with resources, while the
Ministry of National Education plays a less prominent role with regard to higher education.
There seems to be a parallel arrangement in the TCc, in which there is a “Ministry,” which appears
to be comparatively little involved, and a Higher Education Planning, Evaluation, Accreditation

                                                                                                14
and Coordination Council (YÖDAK) with, at least in theory, comprehensive responsibilities for
higher education sector steering and quality assurance. However, YÖDAK has significantly fewer
resources and scope than YÖK, irrespective of differences in size. And, contrary to reports, no
higher education strategy has been developed and consulted with the sector in a comprehensive
manner. While institutions are considered “accredited,” they are merely licensed (as a basic legal
step allowing new institutions to operate). Institutional and program accreditation that meets
European standards is absent (with the exception of international program accreditation,
initiated by universities for certain areas like engineering or business education).
The steering vacuum becomes obvious with regard to the approval of new institutions. While the
technical process seems to be split between the administration (“Ministry”) and YÖDAK, nobody
seems to have clear responsibility (in legal or factual terms) for deciding whether opening a new
institution is worthwhile and supportable from a strategic point of view.
A key future step enabling sound development of the TCc higher education sector is thus to
locate, support, and endow a well-informed and potent state agent that can steer the sector
for its overall benefit. This will need to be accompanied by the redistribution of key functions in
the sector, some of which are currently completely absent, and significant capacity building.
Sector steering (and public financing) and quality assurance should be separate, independent
functions—a common and well-grounded practice in most European higher education systems.
In addition, in the view of the authors of this report, the higher education sector in the TCc needs
a potent voice (Rectors Conference) that goes beyond the current, more formal role of the Inter-
University Council, particularly if the sector moves toward a new shared vision of enhanced
quality. And it needs a data warehouse to provide decision makers with data and evidence
enabling sound steering of the sector.
Especially in the context of sector governance, cooperation among higher education providers
based on intense interaction is needed to complement the “external” influences on the sector ,
and to enable sound strategy implementation. In the case of the TCc, this implies overcoming
the increasing competition between institutions for foreign students in order to work together
for the overall benefit of the sector. As will also become clear below, there are various assets in
terms of knowledge and approaches scattered over different institutions that could be made
available more broadly via closer exchanges among institutions. This is particularly true for
institutions such as Middle East Technical University (METU) NCC.
Not only governance on the system level is important in shaping the future higher education
landscape. Governance arrangements on the institutional level also need to be geared toward
putting in place an increasing variety of institutional missions.
Governance on the institutional level will need to ensure a stronger link to external
stakeholders, including the private sector. The current model in which boards are comprised of
political appointees opens the process to politically motivated micromanagement of the public
institutions, and creates a missed opportunity to link universities more closely with the private
                                                                                                 15
sector. The current practice is not only counterproductive in terms of suitable strategic
management; it is also out of step with good European practice.
The TCc diaspora is another external stakeholder that could prove to be a great asset to
universities. To harness the benefits of this group, links would have to be built to them (including,
for example, via institutional outreach to alumni).
Establishment of suitable internal and external quality assurance mechanisms will be key to
ensuring quality of provision and the sector’s sound reputation. Building on initial approaches
in this regard, internal quality assurance needs to be driven by institutions themselves, to take
stakeholder (including student) perspectives into account, be geared toward enhancement
rather than just compliance, and should not lead to an extreme administrative burden on
academics. External quality assurance will need to be developed independently from other parts
of the administration and in accordance with established European practice, which is guided by
Standards and Guidelines for Quality Assurance in the European Higher Education Area (ESG).
The demand for independence also extends to program evaluation and accreditation, which
poses a challenge in small systems. It would thus be worth considering to what extent
international, and particularly European, Quality Assurance Agencies, or at least international
reviewers, can become involved, especially if the opportunity arises in the future to join the
European Higher Education Area. The current practice of international program accreditation in
some fields would be a useful experience with international quality assurance to build on.
An important first step will be the establishment of data collection and compilation
mechanisms on the system and institutional level as a basis for future evidence-based policy
making. Without sound and comprehensive data, all attempts at orientation will take place in
complete darkness, even if a map and a compass were available. This not only applies to the
system level, but also to institutions that will need sound and useful data to revamp their
processes.


3. Financing of higher education
The current state of higher education in the TCc is closely linked to its funding model, especially
for semipublic foundation universities compared to private universities. While there are
different income streams including student fees and allocations from the Republic of Turkey’s aid
budget, public funding as a budget line in the “Ministry” of Finance budget goes exclusively to
the two semipublic universities (EMU, Lefke), and primarily covers study places for local
students.5 There is thus, in the traditional European sense, no public institutional funding and no
distinct funding for research. In the absence of local industry, universities rely on fees as their
main source of income.


5
    There are also some funds to support outgoing student mobility, that is, students studying abroad.

                                                                                                         16
Universities normally have three missions: teaching and learning, research and development, and
a “third mission” broadly defined as contributions to the development of the regions in which
they operate. The current funding model is one central factor leading to a heavy emphasis on
teaching in TCc universities.
The current business model of TCc higher education thus has some distinct disadvantages.6 In
addition, as discussed, there is no guarantee that the current business model is sustainable.7
The TCc higher education sector would thus be well advised to reach out to other potential
students8 and to prepare to compete for funding opportunities that might become available
under alternative political scenarios. In this context—and possibly connected to the
development of the higher education strategy—a rebranding of the sector (moving away from a
perceived “low-cost, easy graduation” stigma) should be considered, including means that would
help achieve the related change.
This is especially important with regard to research funding. If European funds were to become
available in the future, institutions would not be ready to compete for these funds. The related
infrastructure, mechanisms, and know-how would need to be developed in advance.
In addition to the level of funding, the structure of public funding for higher education needs
to be reconsidered. European and international systems are increasingly gearing funding systems
toward performance, making funding another important steering tool for the sector. This is in
some cases done via three-pillar models with elements of basic funding providing stability,
performance funding (rewarding past performance), and innovation funding (stimulating future
performance). Even within the very constrained TCc system, initial steps can be taken to
stimulate performance (Annex 2-C provides some suggestions in this regard) and to pilot the
introduction of more innovative instruments in the TCc context, such as lump-sum allocations
giving institutions more flexibility, and target agreements (underpinning priority areas identified
in research and institutional strategies), to the extent that funds can be made available to
underpin these changes. An agreed sector strategy would provide a suitable basis for any further
considerations on performance, and on how it can be translated into individual institutional
missions and measured and monitored.


4. Teaching and learning
Teaching and learning (and relatedly, the development of highly skilled graduates) are two of
the key functions of higher education institutions. To achieve teaching excellence, institutions

6
  Disadvantages triggered, to some extent, by the political framework within which it operates.
7
  For example, since the capacity of the higher education sector in Turkey is increasing, this could lead to a decrease
of the inflow of Turkish students into the TCc.
8
  For example, in terms of geographic scope, by increasingly competing on quality and by becoming a lifelong learning
provider.

                                                                                                                   17
need a suitable infrastructure; good student support systems; and well-trained, research-
informed academics who are willing and able to interact with their students for mutual benefit.
Students play a crucial role in this process. The Bologna Process9 places strong emphasis on the
move from a teacher-centered to a learner-centered system. Related instruments and
approaches are the development of learning outcomes (knowledge, skills, and competences) for
units of learning and enshrined in qualifications frameworks, the European Credit Transfer and
Accumulation System (ECTS), and a comprehensive tool set related to mobility and recognition,
including the Diploma Supplement.
While the TCc is not a member of the Bologna Process, universities in the TCc are interested in
the process and have to some extent geared their operations toward Bologna. This is also
because important reference systems in the neighborhood, such as Turkey, have joined the
Process, and Bologna thus plays an important role for TCc academics and students.
In this context, while the formal act of joining the Bologna Process is regulated,10 other
countries can—and in many cases are well advised to—profit from the achievements and
instruments of the Bologna Process. Lebanon, for example, while not a Bologna signatory, has a
highly active and well-informed network of Bologna experts that supports related institution-
level reforms. Aspects of the Bologna Process are well known by some local experts and partially
implemented in the TCc.
In the future, more emphasis could be put on bringing together Bologna-related expertise that
exists in the TCc (for example, on the proper implementation of ECTS) and from which the sector
overall could profit, independent of future scenarios. Here, as in other areas, the sector would
greatly benefit from interinstitutional collaboration and knowledge sharing, which currently
hardly exists. Further, international academics and students bring important experience and
expertise to the TCc, and ways to exploit this experience for TCc reforms should be explored,
moving away from a more narrow understanding of internationalization as attracting foreign
students. Finally, TCc institutions could consider how they could profit in the short to medium
term from the ties with the Turkish higher education system. With Turkey being a Bologna
signatory, a significant amount of experience has been accumulated concerning the Bologna tool
set, and seasoned Turkish (and other) Bologna enthusiasts might be more than willing to share
their knowledge with TCc institutions.
Related capacity-building and knowledge-sharing initiatives should, among other things, lead
to a stronger focus on learning outcomes and employability, how this can guide future
curriculum reforms, (better) implementation of ECTS, improving the student experience at all
levels, options for work-based learning and internships that enable students to grow and that
enrich their study experience, more comprehensive considerations concerning

9
   The Bologna Process is a voluntary higher education reform process that aims to harmonize European higher
education within the framework of a European Higher Education Area. It commenced in 1998/99 and to date has 48
signatory countries.
10
   For example, “Bologna countries” need to be signatories to the Council of Europe’s Cultural Convention.

                                                                                                           18
internationalization11 and its value for the TCc higher education sector, and a more
comprehensive understanding of student and staff mobility (even under the current constraints).
As mentioned, Bologna provides a useful frame for many of these points. However, here as in
other areas, benefits would not occur automatically under alternative political scenarios, and
institutions would be well advised to accelerate reforms to position themselves to reap the
benefits of potential access to the European Higher Education Area in future.


5. Research and development
As mentioned, higher education in the TCc is currently primarily focused on academic teaching,
at the expense of the other two missions of universities.12 There is no distinct research funding
for universities by the TCc administration—either in the form of investments in research
infrastructure or in the form of research grants (with the exception of allocations by the Scientific
and Technological Research Council of Turkey [TÜBİTAK] in the past). Moreover, professors seem
to be primarily expected to teach, leaving little time for other activities. This can be a source of
frustration, especially because original research and publishing of papers in international journals
is a requirement for academic careers.
Other European higher education systems have been in the position to supplement constrained
budgets for research with European funds, including Structural Funds. This option is currently
not available for the TCc, however. Thus, in the short term, funding for research would either
need to come from public authorities, possibly via the private sector (for example, via
“knowledge vouchers”) or by redistributing income from fees—which might lead to a more
challenging situation with regard to funding of teaching and learning.
While pondering the costs of potential investments in research, TCc policy makers might refer to
Donald Kennedy who, in his monograph on academic duty, reminds the reader that [research]
“costs are often justified on the ground that better scholars are better teachers, and that those
who leave original investigation behind quickly become teachers of the obsolete” (Kennedy
1999, 147). Not least with a view to the future competitiveness of the higher education sector
in the TCc, this will need to be avoided.
Independent from the financial situation, some steps can be taken immediately. As mentioned,
TCc universities at this stage primarily see each other as competitors. But the sector would
greatly benefit from strategic alliances that could in the medium term foster a move toward
strategic specialization within the sector and build on existing strengths and infrastructure (for
example, university hospitals). Within their own scope of activities, institutions can do more to

11
   That is, internationalization dimensions beyond foreign students studying in the TCc, such as the outgoing mobility
of TCc students, internationalization of curricula and of academics and administrative staff, and making better use
of the cultural diversity in TCc universities for educational purposes within the framework of a “comprehensive
internationalization.”
12
   That is, research and the “third mission,” development activities in a regional context.

                                                                                                                  19
identify and develop their strength and anchor related future developments in institutional
research strategies.13 They can reach out to employers in the service sector and with a
collaborative approach identify potential opportunities for (applied) research, for example, in the
tourism sector (including health tourism). They can also trigger capacity-building activities, for
example, with regard to entrepreneurship and options for technology transfer. As in other areas,
strategic considerations with regard to research will need to be based on sound data, including
on publications, relevant projects, and technological innovations, but also on time available for
academics to fulfill different forms of academic duty.
Particular attention should be paid to the doctorate level, especially with regard to giving
doctoral students the opportunity to do original research and participate in research projects,
and to develop strong, labor-market-relevant skills. With a view to the future, universities would
be encouraged to make increasing use of the possibility of offering joint programs, involving
universities in the TCc and beyond.
With regard to these mechanisms, institutional capacity (such as units able to support academics
in grant applications), and potential access to future funding, institutions should not wait for
outside developments to trigger change. Any future change in the political environment could
happen quickly, as experience with transitions elsewhere has shown, giving a huge advantage to
those who are well prepared to enter transition processes.
In conclusion, the higher education sector in the TCc exhibits some positive features worth
building on. Specific recommendations have been given on how to gear the sector toward quality
of provision and labor-market relevance of teaching and learning, and to put more emphasis on
research and development. For this to happen, the sector will need to successively revamp its
governance, quality assurance, and financing arrangements. In all of these areas, knowledge
sharing and capacity building will be essential for the success of future reform efforts.




13
  As mentioned above, the sector would benefit from moving toward mission differentiation with some polytechnic-
type institutions on the one hand, and universities on the other. Within the group of universities —in this future
understanding—some institutions might develop a more comprehensive approach toward research, while others
might rather move toward a stronger research profile in certain, well-selected areas.

                                                                                                               20
                                Table 1 Key recommendations for higher education in the TCc
    Recommendation                                                   Priority     Timeline     Assumed level    Dependency         Detailed
                                                                                                of difficulty    on political   discussion in:
                                                                                                                 framework
1. 1Refocus sector from quantitative expansion toward quality      high         Long term      medium           no              All annexes
2. 2Identify priority areas in higher education for development    high         short     to   medium           no              Annex 1-A
    of service sector                                                           medium term
3. Review curricula with a view to labor-market-relevant skills    high         short     to   low to medium    no              Annex    1-A
    and entrepreneurship                                                        medium term                                     and D
4. Ensure flexible pathways between vocational and higher          medium       medium         medium           no              Annex    1-A
    education                                                                                                                   and D
5. Reconsider link between (levels of) higher education and        medium       medium         high             presumably      Annex 1-A
    military service                                                                                            yes
6. Strengthen student guidance and counselling with a view to      high         medium         low to medium    no              Annex    1-A
    labor market integration                                                                                                    and D
7. Explore possibilities and potentially pilot labor market        high         medium         medium           no              Annex 1-A
    information systems
8. Consider binary option for the system with university and       medium       medium         medium to high no                Annex 1-A
    polytechnic types of institutions
9. Develop a higher education strategy in a consultative and       high short        to        medium           no              Annex 1-B et
    inclusive process—ideally as part of a development strategy         medium term                                             al.
10. Review legislation following strategy development         medium    medium                 medium           no              Annex 1-B
                                                              high
11. Review and adjust steering functions in the system (division        short        to        high             no              Annex 1-B
    policy setting/financing vs. quality assurance)                     medium term
12. Capacity building for new allocation of tasks             high      long      term         low to medium    no              Annex 1-B
                                                                        (continuous)
13. Design and implement an external quality assurance system high      medium       to        high             no/it           Annex 1-B
    in accordance with European Standards and Guidelines                long term                               depends
14. Strengthen university internal quality assurance          high      Short        to        low to medium    no              Annex 1-B
                                                                        medium term
15. Significantly strengthen cooperation among universities   medium to short        to        low              no              Annex 1-B
                                                              high      medium term
    Recommendation                                                Priority       Timeline    Assumed levelDependency         Detailed
                                                                                              of difficultyon political   discussion in:
                                                                                                           framework
16. Involve employers in university boards                     high            medium       medium (legal no              Annex 1-B
                                                                                            revisions)
17. Design and implement standardized method of data high                      short     to medium        no              Annex 1-B
    collection and processing                                                  medium term
18. Diversify offers with a view to attracting new groups of medium            medium       low to medium no/it           Annex 1-C
    students (geographic scope, lifelong learning)                                                        depends
19. Prepare for European Union funding options               medium            short     to medium        yes             Annex 1-C
                                                                               medium term
20. Review structure of public funding—consider lump-sum       medium          medium       medium        no              Annex 1-C
    funding and piloting of target agreements
21. Strengthen learning outcomes approach and application of   high            medium term   medium           no          Annex 1-D
    the European Credit Transfer and Accumulation System
    (ECTS)
22. Share Bologna-related knowledge and invite external        medium          short     to low               no          Annex 1-D
    expertise                                                                  medium term
23. Review curricula with a focus on employability             high            short     to medium            no          Annex     1-D
                                                                               medium term                                and A
24. Explore options for research funding involving both the medium             short     to medium            no          Annex 1-E
    public and private sector (e.g., through “knowledge                        medium term
    vouchers”)
25. Universities to develop research strategies             high               short     to medium            no          Annex 1-E
                                                                               medium term
26. Consider strategic specialization in R&D, building on existing medium      medium       medium            no          Annex 1-E
    strengths and infrastructure
27. Involve doctoral students in research projects                 medium to   medium        medium           no          Annex 1-E
                                                                   high
28. Increasingly explore options and implement joint and double medium         medium        medium           no/it       Annex 1-E
    degrees                                                                                                   depends
29. Improve institutional capacity including for R&D (technology medium        short     to medium            no/it       Annex 1-E
    transfer, funding expertise, commercialization)                            medium term                    depends


                                                                                                                             22
                                   Annex 1: Expert Observations
Annex 1-A: The economic and regional impact of universities —implications for the Turkish
Cypriot Community (TCc)14
The economic impact of universities

There is a wide literature on the relationships between higher education and the economy. Though in
general the relationships between knowledge institutions—such as universities—is complex and
multifaceted, the general idea is that universities have a positive impact on their city-regions. Not only do
universities generate a substantial number of knowledge-intensive jobs, they also attract economic
activity to their regions. One can think of businesses that are established near universities to take
advantage of specific laboratory infrastructures or the availability of graduates, or spin off companies
established by academics and/or students. Higher education institutions can engage with their
environment in several other ways, such as through exhibitions, cultural activities, language training, and
sports activities.


Relationship between higher education and the economy in the TCc
The TCc economy is heavily impacted by the political and economic embargo, which strongly limits the
economic ties between the TCc and most nations, including the European Union (EU). While most
countries in the region have access to several EU subsidy programs, the TCc does not. This also restricts
the potential for connections between higher education institutions and the private sector, since many
EU programs stimulate university-industry collaborations. Many economic activities are hampered by high
import costs for materials and components due to the embargo. This leaves wage levels as the main factor
behind companies’ competitiveness in many areas, which many employers consider too high for domestic
laborers.
The TCc’s economy is dominated by the service sector, including the public sector, trade, tourism, and
education. According to estimates for 2012, the service sector accounted for 58.7 percent of gross
domestic product, compared to 6.2 percent for the agricultural sector and 35.1 percent for the industrial
sector (CIA 2016). The shares of the three sectors among the labor force exhibit a similar structure.
Another feature of the private sector is the dominance of small, often family-owned businesses. Given
the comparably good working conditions in the public sector, there seems to be a segmented labor market
within which most individuals strive for public sector employment. Seen together, these characteristics
suggest that the scope for cooperation between universities and companies in the form of third-mission
activities is limited and unbalanced.
The rest of this annex will address the economic and regional relationships of universities in the TCc. Most
of the issues addressed are based on the informed discussions on these issues among various stakeholders
in the TCc higher education systems during the Workshop on the Strategic Direction for the TCc Higher
Education Sector initiated by the TCc administration and the World Bank in Nicosia on 14 June 2016. The



14
     This annex was written by Professor Hans Vossensteyn, CHEPS, University of Twente, the Netherlands.
analysis is also based on the preparations by the TCc administration and World Bank teams, and the
author’s knowledge of several higher education systems in various regions of the world.


The economic potential and limitation of higher education in the TCc
This section analyzes the TCc higher education system using a partial SWOT analysis by identifying its
major strengths, weaknesses, and opportunities. This will help to explore ideas for the future strategic
direction of the TCc higher education system.


Strengths of TCc higher education
A large and diversified internationalized higher education system. Even though the Turkish Cypriot
Community has only around 300,000 inhabitants, it has a relatively large higher education sector, with 14
universities and about 85,000 students. As such, relatively it is one of the largest and most international
higher education systems in the world. Over 80 percent of the students are from abroad, and almost 60
percent of the entire student population are Turkish. Clearly, TCc universities are an attractive study
destination for large numbers of students. The size of the higher education system compared to the total
TCc population suggests an enormous potential of highly skilled graduates that can feed into the TCc
economy, even if one assumes most of the foreign students sooner or later will return to their home
countries. The beautiful and relaxed environment of the TCc and its touristic opportunities could motivate
a substantial proportion of (foreign) graduates to stay in the TCc labor market, resulting in a highly skilled
labor force. Due to the limited size of the TCc, this can easily generate a big impact on the economy.
Having a highly skilled labor force in most parts of the world is regarded as one of the major prerequisites
of an innovative economy, as suggested by the Europe 2020 strategy of the EU.
An interesting phenomenon of the TCc higher education system is the existence of associate degree
programs. These vocationally oriented programs can fulfill an important role in local economies by
educating highly skilled vocational professionals. Associate degrees also form a good transition between
vocational secondary education and tertiary education.
Existence of knowledge-intensive economic potential. The public sector is the main employment sector in
the TCc, followed by small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs). This offers a good business climate and
various opportunities for higher education graduates who enter the labor market. In general, higher
education students and young graduates can be relatively easily stimulated to develop their creative and
entrepreneurial ideas into business opportunities. The technoparks established by some universities can
be regarded as an important hub for such private initiatives. In addition, the universities themselves are
relatively large employers and an important part of the economy. These developments call for a positive
approach of the administration to develop the full potential of the overall economy. Higher education
appears to be a major asset to the Turkish Cypriot society. This could be further stimulated by better
integrating modern skills such as entrepreneurship, innovativeness, and creativity into curricula.
A well-developed public relations infrastructure. TCc universities appear to be very good at attracting full-
fee-paying foreign students. They have developed relatively strong marketing and public relations
strategies, instruments, and departments compared to higher education institutions in many countries.
The growing number of private institutions also demonstrates this. In addition to attracting many foreign
students, TCc universities could use their public relations potential in other areas, as well.

                                                                                                           24
Infrastructure funding from the Turkish government. As TCc universities in some way appear to “be a part”
of the Turkish higher education system as well,15 they have also attracted Turkish funding for
infrastructure projects. This is evidence of the interest of Turkish authorities in a well-functioning TCc
higher education system, which both benefits the TCc system and can be regarded as a way of resource
diversification.


Challenges for and weaknesses of TCc higher education
The participants in the 14 June workshop identified a range of challenges for and weaknesses of the TCc
higher education system. These primarily have to do with the small size and relative isolation of the TCc,
the lack of steering capacity in the system, limited resources, and a mismatch with the labor market.
Small size of TCc. The higher education system in the TCc can draw upon a limited number of potential
students from the Turkish Cypriot community with about 300,000 inhabitants. Not only is the resource
base for students relatively small, but the absorptive capacity of the labor market is limited. The latter
also relates to the structure of the economy that is predominantly a service-oriented economy that does
not have a large industrial sector or infrastructure. Also, the health and transportation sectors are
described as underdeveloped. These factors result in a limited capacity of the economy to absorb
graduates into the labor market.
Limited resources and public investments. Though the higher education sector is among the largest
sectors of the TCc economy, the public investments made are perceived to be very limited. While the
administration substantially subsidizes the tourism sector with fixed subsidies per tourist, higher
education is lacking such stimulations, for example, in the form of tax concessions per foreign student.
The higher education sector therefore perceives there is low political recognition of the importance of
foreign students in the system and national economy. However, foreign students in private higher
education do not only pay tuition fees, but also heavily support the local economy by their expenditures
on accommodations, day-to-day living expenses, and leisure activities.
In addition, the TCc and its higher education system suffer from political and economic isolation, economic
embargos, and political instability, which result in various bureaucratic problems and limited access to
resources. The administration and higher education institutions cannot profit from European Structural
Funds, like many European countries do, and TCc academics cannot participate in large European funding
programs such as Erasmus+ or Horizon2020 to support their research capacity. This not only deprives
them of other revenue sources, but also of state-of-the art research capacities and networks to advance
the knowledge and innovation capacity of the higher education system and economy.
Lack of central system steering. Various stakeholders in the TCc higher education system identify not only
a lack of resources, but also of central planning and steering, of the system. This means that the system is
not only underfunded in efforts to achieve its major objectives, but evokes the question of whether
available resources are directed at the right activities and ambitions, as indicated by the following:
        the rapid growth in the number of universities (or licenses to establish new for-profit universities)
        the perceived lack of a central strategy for the higher education sector


15
   For example, by being integrated into the admission system for Turkish students, that is, the system which
allocates students to certain higher education institutions.

                                                                                                           25
       the reported heavy bureaucracy in the system and at some universities
       the lack of basic statistical data and common definitions within the higher education system
       the numbers of unfilled student places and staff positions
       the limited integration of various student groups into many study programs, resulting in limited
        identification of students with the program and increased vulnerability to dropping out
       the perceived low quality of education
       the perceived labor market mismatches, with high numbers of unemployed graduates and
        relatively low salaries of graduates, while it seems that foreign students fill local jobs
       the perception that some universities are mini-economies that operate in isolation from their
        local environment.
Labor market mismatch. As a result of many of the above issues there appears to be a labor market
mismatch. For example, the labor market does not have a strong focus on technological innovations,
which implies that it cannot easily accommodate many science and engineering students or graduates.
Thus, graduates particularly have to seek employment in SMEs. However, sector representatives point
out major skills shortages related to midlevel skilled workers trained in vocationally oriented upper
secondary education and associate degree programs. The atypical labor market structure requires a
higher education system that prepares many students and graduates for more vocationally oriented jobs.
However, like in many countries where the private higher education sector flourishes, study programs
that are relatively easy and cheap to offer dominate the system, such as law and economics, which leads
to an oversupply of such graduates. Regardless of the high demand for such programs, only a limited
number of graduates in such studies find employment in the TCc economy.


Opportunities for TCc higher education and the contribution of higher education institutions to
economic development
There appear to be several opportunities to tackle some of the weaknesses of the higher education sector
while building on the strengths of the system. A number of opportunities were identified during
stakeholder discussions.
Stronger focus on higher vocational education. One opportunity revolves around placing greater attention
on technology-based and vocational programs, and linking them to the needs and opportunities in the
labor market, particularly those offered by the many SMEs in the TCc economy. A strengthened focus on
vocational programs can address several of the mismatches in the TCc labor market. This would probably
require a different role for the Associate Degree programs. The development of Associate Degree
programs would need to be done in close consultation with representatives of companies and employer
organizations. Issues related to military training will need to be resolved, that is, the unfavorable
treatment of Associate Degree programs (compared to other types of programs) when it comes to the
suspension of military training needs to be addressed.
Focus on strengths of the local economy. The dominant economic sectors in the TCc revolve around
tourism and public sector services. The TCc also has a number of natural resources, including a warm
climate and rich coastal areas. This presents opportunities for research and education in areas like public
management, tourism, climate effects, sustainable engineering, solar energy and, potentially, maritime
research. It also presents opportunities to not only attract foreign students to study such subjects in a
very pleasant environment, but may also attract foreign academics to teach and research in these areas.
                                                                                                        26
Focus on institutional strengths. The stakeholder consultations clearly identified that individual higher
education institutions all have one or more areas in which they are relatively strong, such as software
development, nursing, social care, physiotherapy, and language training. Individual higher education
institutions could build on these strengths, develop centers of excellence, and become renowned in these
areas, attracting students and academics to further specialize in these fields.
Develop an entrepreneurial spirit. The TCc higher education sector has proven to be very entrepreneurial.
The rise of many private universities is an example of this. Developing such an entrepreneurial spirit
throughout the higher education system could potentially benefit all institutions. While the focus
currently is on attracting foreign students at the first degree level, this could be expanded in areas such
as short-term courses, for example summer schools, seminars, or part-time programs in a range of areas
and levels. These could include language courses and more executive programs such as MBAs, and
combining an academic focus with tourism. This would require higher education institutions to collaborate
more among themselves and with local entrepreneurs, such as from the tourist industry. Most universities
already have strong marketing and communication facilities, and these could be further exploited and
extended. Stimulating entrepreneurship education itself could boost the establishment of more SMEs as
an answer to the employability of graduates.


Strategic options for the further development of TCc higher education
During the 14 June workshop it became clear that there is a need for an overarching vision and strategy
for the TCc higher education sector. Currently, the development of the sector appears to be
predominantly driven by market forces to attract as many foreign students as possible. The result has
been a rapid expansion of the system, particularly by establishing many new private universities, but this
has raised questions about the overall quality of the services delivered, the international reputation of
TCc higher education and, thus, its sustainable future development.
To ameliorate these concerns, the administration (and/or the Higher Education Planning, Evaluation,
Accreditation and Coordination Council [YÖDAK]) needs to address the following:
       The importance of higher education to the TCc economy. The administration needs to
        acknowledge and communicate how the higher education sector contributes to the economy and
        how this role needs to be stimulated. This may require further data and statistics, including
        student statistics, dropout and completion rates, labor market data, and satisfaction surveys.
       As part of the overall vision and strategy for the further development of the higher education
        sector, the optimal number and type of higher education institutions need to be determined. Does
        the TCc need so many universities if so many students are enrolled in vocational programs, given
        that there is a limited budget for research and most graduates will have to find employment in
        the SME sector in the TCc? Perhaps a dual higher education system with universities and
        universities of applied sciences would better fit the needs of the labor market, the economy, and
        the TCc, and might better address the expectations of students and staff. One option might be for
        public universities to offer separate publicly funded study programs as well as programs that rely
        only on private tuition fees. While the administration can set limits on the number of institutions
        it is willing to subsidize or allow, higher education institutions should be encouraged to
        collaborate on addressing the needs of the TCc.


                                                                                                        27
       There needs to be a clear and sustainable vision on the role of foreign students in the system.
        How should they be integrated into the public sector institutions?
       The role and quality of various programs being offered in the system needs to be reassessed. For
        example, while associate degrees are offered by some institutions, there appears to be greater
        demand in the labor market for workers with associate degrees than are currently graduating.
        Better labor market statistics and TCc administration interventions could better stimulate the role
        of such programs and thus the employability of graduates.
       The quality of education is a major concern. With the rise of private higher education, it seems
        that there is no central steering and coordination regarding a minimum level of quality of
        programs. The system needs to ensure that the strong growth of the sector does not negatively
        impact the quality, and thus the long-term reputation, of the TCc higher education system.
       A firm and fair regulatory framework is needed—one that defines the roles, levels, quality
        standards, and learning outcomes of the various higher education institutions and degrees, such
        as aligning with the European Qualifications Framework.
       The types of institutions and degrees offered should be linked to the needs of the TCc labor
        market and economic development of the TCc to some extent. Identifying the strategic needs and
        priorities of the TCc is crucial in the negotiations among the “ministry,” YÖDAK, and individual
        higher education institutions on the types of activities that will be publicly subsidized and those
        that will not.
       Higher education institutions need to be stimulated to collaborate with stakeholders from the
        business community to ensure that they offer study programs, research, and services that the
        regional economy needs. For example, dual learning and lifelong-learning opportunities need to
        be strengthened to address the need for vocational education and skills and to close the gaps with
        the labor market.


Potential preparation for reunification
Although the workshop was not particularly focused on the issue of reunification of the Cypriot
communities, the political negotiations at some point could lead to such a scenario. The TCc higher
education system needs to preposition itself so that if reunification did become a reality, it would be able
to address the opportunities and challenges of reunification. Reunification would make the TCc eligible
for European subsidies like structural funds and large EU academic subsidy programs. To link the TCc
higher education system to that of the GCc system and to other European education systems requires
strong higher education institutions that can collaborate and compete with their new potential partner
institutions. Thus, TCc universities need to have strong identities, roles, and strategies to collaborate with
the right partner institutions. The TCc higher education system needs a strong, clear future vision to wisely
invest potential new funds and to prepare its universities to be successful. The current liberal approach
toward new and private universities could make current TCc institutions vulnerable to foreign institutions
that might offer similar services backed by larger institutional resources.




                                                                                                           28
Annex 1-B: Governance and quality assurance in the TCc16
This annex focuses on governance and quality assurance. It is largely based on the discussions that took
place during the workshop on “Strategic Directions for the TCc Higher Education Sector” held in Nicosia
on 14 June 2016. TCc participants expressed their views openly during both the plenary and breakout
sessions. These are reflected in the discussion below.

The note presents general observations on governance and quality assurance, and several
recommendations and possible scenarios for the future.



1. General observations

1.1 About the context

The TCc higher education system is focused on teaching and learning; activities in this area are reported
to be traditional in both content and delivery. There is very little research capacity due to both the heavy
teaching loads (20 hours per week) and lack of access to sources of research funding. The role of
universities in regional development and the universities’ societal role needs to be developed and
bolstered.

The inflow of international students into the TCc is viewed as an economic opportunity by the TCc
authorities, because the higher education sector represents a significant share of the economy. There is
currently an overreliance on students from Turkey, who represent around 55 percent of the student
intake. Their number (by discipline of choice) is set by the Turkish Council of Higher Education (YÖK) in
Ankara. It is reported that the TCc has little say in the matter, which means that YÖK can reduce or increase
the flow unexpectedly.

It seems to be relatively easy to establish new institutions in the TCc. This is viewed as a threat by the
established institutions, because of the perceived poor quality of the newcomers, which could potentially
erode the overall reputation of the TCc higher education sector. Workshop participants expressed concern
about the lack of clarity related to the motivation of private institutions seeking to be established in the
TCc.

Quality and effective system governance structures are seen by the university leadership as essential to
ensure the international attractiveness of the TCc higher education sector. Workshop participants
expressed clear commitment to these two aspects, but were unclear as to the path forward.

It is reported that YÖDAK has developed a higher education strategy. However, the World Bank team was
unable to obtain information on the details of this strategy, because nobody among the workshop
participants, including the two YÖDAK board members in attendance, could provide details on the content



16
     This annex was written by Dr. Andrée Sursock, European University Association.

                                                                                                          29
of this strategy. The TCc has no overall development strategy that could inform its higher education
strategy.

Against this backdrop, formulating an overall development strategy is urgent. This would allow the
development of an appropriate higher education strategy, which would result in new legislation,
governance and funding reforms, and the development of a quality assurance approach that would
support implementation of the higher education strategy.

1.2 Governance at the system level

There are questions concerning the steering capacity of both the TCc authorities and YÖDAK. Particular
challenges identified by workshop participants included frequent changes in the administration and
current operations of YÖDAK, including weak cooperation between the YÖDAK president and his board
and the YÖDAK stakeholders. Participants noted that both the higher education “department” of the
Education “Ministry” of the TCc Authority and YÖDAK are thinly staffed. YÖDAK, for instance, does not
seem to employ a sufficient number of permanent staff.

The scope of the remits of both the TCc Authority and YÖDAK is questioned. For instance, a workshop
participant criticized the TCc Authority for wishing to set the maximum number of students who could be
enrolled in TCc institutions or the number of universities that could be created. Given the economic
importance of higher education in relation to other economic sectors, these types of decisions are
attributed to economic rather than academic concerns. In addition, these decisions are criticized for being
made without consulting the university leadership, who would like to be asked how many students each
institution can enrol.

In addition, there are many functions missing in the governance of the system, most notably:

       The capacity to collect and analyze data. It has been reported that a higher education
        management information system is in place at the TCc Authority but is no longer being used in
        response to the lobbying of certain universities. As a result, concerns were expressed that
        statistics about students are inaccurate and do not reflect the current situation. The capacity to
        generate accurate data is essential, notably if the World Bank is to recommend the introduction
        of performance-based funding.

       There is no independent “think tank” to analyze the current situation, develop policy proposals,
        and conduct foresight analyses.

       The higher education sector is represented by the Inter-University Council, but this body does not
        appear to be in a position to promote coordination among the universities, to express the
        common views of the university leadership, and to negotiate with the TCc Authority. Instead, the
        sector seems to suffer from competition and factionalism, which may be resulting in an inefficient
        and ineffective use of resources. Even in countries where the higher education sector is in a
        competitive market (such as the United States and the United Kingdom), the institutions



                                                                                                        30
          cooperate a great deal, and the most research-productive institutions are located in countries
          characterized by their dense national and international research networks.

In general, cooperation among higher education institutions in the TCc should be bolstered through
incentives mechanisms. This could start with joint delivery of some teaching provision and moving to
applied research projects.

1.3 Governance at the university level

The governance of institutions is weakened by two characteristics:

         In the public universities, trustees are reported to be political appointees, and concerns were
          expressed about a tendency of trustees to micromanage the institutions.

         The private universities are run by their owners.

A comparative study of autonomy in Europe that ranked 28 higher education systems17 showed that most
countries include external stakeholders in university governance structures. Dual structures
(board/senate) are a privileged framework for this. According to this study:

         Among the top tier (that is, among the most autonomous institutions), all universities include
          external members in their governing bodies, and universities may freely appoint the external
          members of these bodies.

         Among the middle tier, external stakeholders are jointly appointed by the university and a higher
          authority (for example, the Ministry of Higher Education).

         Among the bottom tier, the universities are not allowed to include external members, or the
          ministry picks these members without input from the universities.

In many parts of the world, external stakeholders are also involved in other ways. It is now a frequent
expectation that universities consult their alumni and their external stakeholders on a range of activities
where their views might be useful. They are included in committees that are designing curricula, on
advisory boards to bolster engagement with society, and in other ways.

The involvement of external stakeholders in the TCc needs to be bolstered to help ensure that universities
are responsive to societal needs. They should be represented at the central level of universities and at the
faculty and departmental levels, as required.




17
     Estermann, Nokkala, and Steinel 2011.
                                                                                                         31
1.4 Quality assurance

Systematic internal quality assurance does not seem to be sufficiently developed in TCc institutions. For
instance, student feedback on teaching does not seem to be the norm, and academic staff development
is nonexistent.

External quality assurance is one of YÖDAK’s responsibilities. It should be noted, however, that YÖDAK
has an unusually wide set of competences—coordination of the sector, planning and policy setting, and
licensing and accrediting institutions—but that YÖDAK is not fulfilling its wide regulatory role, and its
competences have not been used yet.

It is highly unusual for a quality assurance agency to also have both a policy and coordination role, as is
the case with YÖDAK. These are conflicting competences to the extent that quality assurance functions
require keeping the institutions at arm’s length, while the coordination and policy role means exactly the
opposite.

Furthermore, YÖDAK does not conform with many of the Standards and Guidelines for Quality Assurance
in the European Higher Education Area (ESG) (2015).18 It has neither the required independence from the
TCc administration, nor from higher education institutions. It does not have sufficient staff or resources
to fulfil its regulatory mission. As long as this situation continues, YÖDAK will not be able to be accepted
as a full member of ENQA or to be listed on EQAR. This is reflected in its current status as an associate
member of ENQA rather than a full member. Moreover, YÖK has de facto power since it needs to approve
the TCc programs that will enrol students from Turkey.

Some of the TCc university leaders would like to see YÖDAK assume its regulatory responsibility, provided
some aspects of its operation are improved (leadership and staffing). They do not recognize, however,
that its competing responsibilities are an issue.

Given the regulatory vacuum, some institutions turn to international agencies such as the Accreditation
Board for Engineering and Technology (ABET) and the Foundation for International Business
Administration Accreditation (FIBA), or the Institutional Evaluation Programme (IEP) of the European
University Association (EUA) to seek accreditation or evaluation. They fear, however, that the lack of local
external quality assurance is allowing the establishment of “grey institutions” that provide easy access
and easy graduation to students, and that this might be endangering the reputation of the whole system,
including of the legitimate universities, and might in the future lead to overregulation of all institutions.




18
   Compliance with the ESG is a requirement of being a full member of the European Association for Quality
Assurance in Higher Education (ENQA) and to be listed on the European Quality Assurance Register (EQAR).
http://www.eua.be/Libraries/QA_Connect/Revised_ESG_approved_May_2015.sflb.ashx.

                                                                                                          32
When an external quality assurance system comes into effect, it might put the viability of some of the
private institutions into question. It is urgent that all institutions develop teach-out plans19 to provide
security to the students and to provide guidance to institutions on how to set them up.20



2.      Possible paths forward

2.1 Governance

Figure 1 provides an outline of the functions that need to be carried out to steer a higher education system
and how they are distributed across different, autonomous bodies.

Figure A1-B.1 Governance at the system level: A power balance through well-distributed responsibilities

       Set priorities                                                                Cooperation
       Decide shape & size                                                           Expressing a common
       Legislation                                                                    vision
       Funding                                                                       Negotiating with TCc
       Accountability other                                                           administration
       than QA


                                   TCc                                 Rectors’
                               administration                         Conference




                    QA
                                                                                             HEI
                  AGENCY




                                 Think tank                            Databank



      Analysis of current
       situation
                                                                                      Data collection
      Policy development
      Foresight studies                                                              Data analysis


Note: HEI = higher education institution.


19
   Teach-out plans determine how continuity of learning can be ensured for students of an institution that has closed
(or is not operational for another reason at a certain time), that is, how students can continue and complete their
studies, probably at a different institution.
20
   For an example, see HEFCE (2015).

                                                                                                                  33
A body such as YÖDAK, with is its multiple competences, is highly unusual and not included in figure A1-
B.1.

The proposal is that YÖDAK’s responsibilities be redistributed in accordance with international best
practice, while all bodies in the system engage in a multilateral dialogue and commit to serve the system
overall. This does not mean that YÖDAK should disappear, but that it should not be given competing
competences. It could act as the Rectors’ Conference (in this case, only include rectors) or as a quality
assurance agency (in this case, only responsible for quality assurance).

For effective governance of the TCc system, there should be a distribution of functions across different
bodies to ensure that they are carried out in the best possible way and that the system has functioning
checks and balances. Moreover, some functions should be attributed to autonomous bodies that should
be insulated from political pressures. This includes the databank and the think tank (see section 2.2 for a
discussion on the independence of the quality assurance agency).

2.2 Quality assurance

Internal and external quality assurance (QA) processes must be viewed together to ensure true
accountability and improvement, and to avoid duplication of evaluations and QA fatigue. This section
looks at internal and external QA mechanisms (whatever the political future of the TCc) and then proposes
several scenarios, taking into account the current situation as well as the possibility of a future settlement.

2.2.1      Internal quality assurance

Internal quality assurance (IQA) processes must be developed by each institution; these processes are
essential components of institutional autonomy, responsibility, and accountability as reflected by the fact
that IQA has been a major development in Europe. Only 1 percent of the 451 institutions that responded
to the Trends 2015 questionnaire stated that they had neither a QA policy nor QA processes.21 It would
not be good for the TCc if its institutions stayed behind this trend.

These processes will also be important if the World Bank were to recommend that performance-based
funding be introduced. This type of funding mechanism would be a sham without good data management
at the university level.

TCc institutions could turn to Part 1 of the Standards and Guidelines in the European Higher Education
Area to find guidance in setting up their internal quality processes22:

           1.1     Policy for quality assurance
           1.2     Design and approval of programs
           1.3     Student-centred learning, teaching, and assessment
           1.4     Student admission, progression, recognition and certification
           1.5     Teaching staff
           1.6     Learning resources and student support


21
     Sursock 2015, 40.
22
     ESG 2015; Gover, Loukkola, and Sursock 2015.

                                                                                                            34
           1.7     Information management
           1.8     Public information
           1.9     Ongoing monitoring and periodic review of programs
           1.10    Cyclical external quality assurance

2.2.2      External quality assurance: key options and principles

Developing an external quality assurance (EQA) entails making choices about different aspects as follows:

       1. Which definition(s) of quality to adopt? Exceptional; perfection or consistency; fitness for
          purpose; value for money; transformation?23

       2. What should be the primary purposes of quality? Checking; assuring; improving?

       3. What should be the focus of the EQA process? The program level; the institutional level; thematic
          approaches (for example, internationalization, human resources, and so forth); only teaching and
          learning or also research?

       4. What mechanisms to put in place? Licensing; accreditation; evaluation; quality audits?

These options are not always mutually exclusive. For instance, an EQA system might include all purposes
listed in item number 2 (but to varying degrees) or all the mechanisms listed in item number 4. It all
depends on the maturity of the sector. A sector that has been allowed to operate with little control and
with few internal quality mechanisms might benefit from the accreditation of all its study programs and
institutions, because accreditation offers the possibility of closing the unsatisfactory ones.

In addition, when developing the criteria by which to evaluate the institutions, it is important that they
reflect TCc strategic priorities and that they balance:

          The European QA framework (ESG) and the TCc system’s priorities (provided integration into the
           European Higher Education Area is viewed as a strategic priority)
          The TCc system’s priorities and the distinctive characteristics of each institution.

The options regarding quality assurance should be weighed against the needs of the sector and the
national higher education strategy. This implies that a needs analysis be conducted first and that a higher
education strategy is developed.

The independence of the quality assurance agency from the TCc administration and institutions must be
a foremost goal while it engages in a dialogue with everyone when it is developing its procedures. ESG 3.3
explains how QA agencies can demonstrate their independence; it is a crucial standard that determines
whether the agency will be accepted as a full ENQA member and listed on EQAR. ESG 3.3 provides detailed
guidance on the concept of independence, which it defines in the following way and is worth quoting in
full:


23
     Harvey and Green 2006.

                                                                                                        35
           “In considering the independence of an agency the following are important:

               Organisational independence, demonstrated by official documentation (for example,
                instruments of government, legislative acts or statutes of the organisation) that
                stipulates the independence of the agency’s work from third parties, such as higher
                education institutions, governments and other stakeholder organisations;

               Operational independence: the definition and operation of the agency’s procedures
                and methods as well as the nomination and appointment of external experts are
                undertaken independently from third parties such as higher education institutions,
                governments and other stakeholders;

               Independence of formal outcomes: while experts from relevant stakeholder
                backgrounds, particularly students, take part in quality assurance processes, the final
                outcomes of the quality assurance processes remain the responsibility of the agency.

           Anyone contributing to external quality assurance activities of an agency (for example, as
           expert) is informed that while they may be nominated by a third party, they are acting in
           a personal capacity and not representing their constituent organisations when working
           for the agency. Independence is important to ensure that any procedures and decisions
           are solely based on expertise.” (ESG 2015, 22–23)

In brief, the QA agency should have as a focus quality assurance and no other functions. It should be
independent of the TCc administration and institutions.

2.2.3      The link between EQA and IQA

The whole approach should also balance internal quality assurance (IQA) and external quality assurance
(EQA) in order to ensure that the institutions feel ownership of the quality assurance process and
contribute to raising quality and standards:

               This requires that each institution develop IQA in line with its strategic orientation.

               The internal quality assurance processes should seek to embed a quality culture in the
                institution and to promote improvement.24

               The external quality assurance processes should support the development of internal quality
                by respecting the universities’ autonomy in developing their own approaches to this area.

The ideal EQA/IQA articulation includes the following aspects:

               The agency consults the higher education institutions during the development of the
                guidelines and any subsequent changes (ESG 2.2) but remains independent (ESG 3.3).


24
     For a discussion on quality culture, see Sursock 2011.

                                                                                                          36
            The agency examines the IQA processes (ESG 2.1).

            The agency is focused on promoting internal quality culture in the institutions – this is the key
             pillar of a good EQA system.

            This implies preserving a space for each institution to develop its own IQA processes. In other
             words:

                  The agency does not prescribe how IQA is done

                  The agency does not evaluate everything and leaves room for IQA.

2.2.4    Possible scenarios for EQA

Three aspects are discussed below: (1) licensing new institutions, (2) accrediting or evaluating existing
institutions, and (3) two possible scenarios for the future.

(1) In the current situation, it is essential that licensing be done rigorously. The main question is who
should be responsible for carrying out this function. There are two possibilities:

        The TCc Authority could set up an international quality assurance board that would organize the
         licensing processes independently. This is the model followed in the Dubai free zones. The
         Knowledge and Human Development Authority provides authorization to establish branch
         campuses in the Free Zones, based on the analysis and recommendation of the independent
         University Quality Assurance International Board (UQAIB). This board develops its own processes
         and criteria independently.25

        YÖDAK could be given this responsibility, provided it is stripped of all its other missions, that it is
         staffed and resourced properly, and that its independence is enshrined in legislation. It would be
         useful in this case to consider strengthening the current licensing process; it should not be a
         simple desk-based scrutiny. A hearing of the owners and of the academic leadership must be held
         and questions about their resources and governance answered.

(2) For the evaluation or accreditation of institutions that are in operation, two options are possible:

        Provide legislation that would grant institutions the possibility of turning to any agency listed on
         the European Quality Assurance Register (EQAR)26 or on the U.S. Council on Higher Education
         Accreditation (CHEA).27 Some QA agencies require that the TCc Authority have licensed their
         institutions; therefore, this option requires a credible licensing process.




25
   https://www.khda.gov.ae/en/FZQA?i=4.
26
   https://www.eqar.eu.
27
   http://www.chea.org.

                                                                                                             37
          Set up an independent, international QA board responsible for the evaluation or accreditation of
           the sector in total independence, as is the case in Iceland28 and in the Dubai Free Zones.

(3) In the future, two scenarios are possible:

          When Turkey has a fully operating QA agency, recognized by ENQA and EQAR, it could be allowed
           to extend its scope to the TCc.

          If settlement is successful and if the Greek Cypriot Community’s QA agency is operational and
           recognized by ENQA and EQAR, it could extend its scope to the whole island.



3. Conclusions

First, the TCc must develop a national development strategy, including a higher education strand of this
strategy.

Second, the TCc higher education sector needs to develop three functions at the system governance level:
a data management system, the capacity to do research, and quality assurance.

Third, three dimensions of quality assurance require attention: the development of an internal quality
process, strengthening of the licensing process, and the evaluation/accreditation of existing provisions.
Because of the small size of the system, it is recommended that the system outsources
evaluation/accreditation to an independent international board while providing a way of linking it with
the TCc authorities. This might well be the quickest path to respond to current regulatory needs.



4.         10 recommendations for governance and quality assurance

1. It is urgent to develop an overall development strategy. This would allow the development of an
   appropriate higher education strategy, which would result in new legislation, governance and funding
   reforms, and the development of a quality assurance approach that would support the
   implementation of the higher education strategy.

2. Cooperation among higher education institutions should be bolstered through incentives
   mechanisms. This could start with joint delivery of some teaching provision and move to applied
   research projects.

3. The involvement of external stakeholders in the TCc needs to be bolstered to ensure that universities
   are responsive to societal needs. They should be represented at both the central level of universities
   and at the faculty and departmental levels, as required.



28
     https://en.rannis.is/activities/quality-enhancement-framework/.

                                                                                                        38
4. It is a matter of some urgency to provide guidance to institutions on teach-out plans and to require
   that all of them have such a plan in place to provide security to the students.

5. For the effective governance of the system, there should be a distribution of functions across different
   bodies in order to ensure that they are carried out in the best possible way and that the system has
   functioning checks and balances.

6. Some functions should be attributed to autonomous bodies that should be insulated from political
   pressures. This includes the databank and the think tank.

7. The options regarding quality assurance should be weighed against the needs of the sector and the
   central-level higher education strategy. This implies that a needs analysis be conducted first and that
   a higher education strategy is developed on that basis.

8. The QA agency should have as a focus quality assurance and no other functions. It should be
   independent of the TCc administration and institutions in order to conform to the ESG.

9. The internal quality assurance (IQA) and external quality assurance (EQA) must be balanced. This
   requires:

       That each institution develop IQA in line with its strategic orientation

       That the internal quality assurance processes should seek to embed a quality culture in the
        institution and to promote improvement

       That the external quality assurance processes should support the development of internal quality
        by respecting the universities’ autonomy in developing their own approaches to this area.

10. The ideal EQA/IQA articulation includes the following aspects:

       The agency consults the higher education institutions during the development of the guidelines
        and any subsequent changes (ESG 2.2) but remains independent (ESG 3.3).

       The agency examines the IQA processes (ESG 2.1).

       The agency is focused on promoting an internal quality culture in the institutions—this is the key
        pillar of a good EQA system.

       This implies preserving a space for each institution to develop its own IQA processes. In other
        words:

             The agency does not prescribe how IQA is done
             The agency does not evaluate everything and leaves room for IQA.




                                                                                                        39
Annex 1-C: Status quo and perspectives for higher education financing in the TCc29


Assessment of the current situation

Higher education in the TCc is mainly run like a business. Funding largely relies on tuition fee revenues,
with an outstanding large percentage of students coming either from Turkey or from other foreign
countries. This indicates a clear strength in market orientation and marketing of study programs—
attracting so many foreign students could be seen as a major achievement.

For three main reasons, universities in the TCc cannot take it for granted that the student stream and the
related income stream are reliable assets in the future. First, the competition from European countries is
increasing, as more and more countries in Europe start to charge tuition fees for non-EU students and
increasingly enter the market for international mobile fee-paying students. (Recently, for instance, even
countries like Finland, which have strictly opposed tuition payment for many years, introduced tuition
fees for non-EU students). Second, Turkey increasingly has enough student places to accommodate those
students who want to enter university, thus decreasing the need to go out of country to pursue study
opportunities. Third, some students go to the TCc because they think there is an “easy access/easy
graduation” policy. This might work in the short run but severely endangers the employability of the
graduates and, hence, the reputation of the TCc as a place for good-quality higher education. This is
important because the reputation of the TCc higher education system as a whole reflects on its institutions
and the individuals associated with it, whether deservedly or not.

In this context, it is questionable whether a further expansion in the number of universities without
corresponding mechanisms and requirements of quality assurance is desirable. The risks of a short-sighted
strategy of maximization of student numbers will increase.

There are hardly any chances to acquire research funding. The potential to cross-subsidize research from
tuition fees is limited, and there is almost no access to international research funds (either to EU funds or
substantial access to Turkish research funds). This lack of funding makes it difficult or even impossible to
engage substantially in research activities.

Public funding of universities is very low. Universities complain that there is more willingness to subsidize
tourism than higher education. This is even more astonishing in light of the impact universities have on
the economy. Higher education is at least of equal importance as tourism for the TCc’s economy. The
current share of public funding of the Eastern Mediterranean University as part of its total budget is
around 12 percent, an extremely low percentage compared with European public universities.30 It is clear
that the TCc’s difficult political situation limits the potential to increase public funding of universities.
Therefore, if additional public resources could be mobilized, they could not be spread over the whole
system; an impact only seems to be possible if public resources are focused and clearly related to specific
targets.




29
  This annex was written by Professor Frank Ziegele, CHE Centre for Higher Education, Germany.
30
  In Europe as a whole, in 2011, on average more than 70 percent of public universities’ budgets came from public
sources.

                                                                                                              40
Public funding is not only low, but also has a problematic structure. European experience shows that good
practice in public funding leads to a “three-pillar model” with an element of stable basic funding, a
component of performance rewards and sanctions (to stimulate performance), and a component to
prefund innovative future developments. Such a model creates balanced funding in several ways. There
is a balance between stability and ability to plan on the one hand, and incentive orientation and
competition on the other hand. Performance is stimulated ex post with indicator-based funding, and ex
ante with competitive funds investing in future performance. None of these three components really
exists in the TCc. In fact:

           There is no remarkable basic public funding. The TCc administration covers tuition fees and
            accommodation costs for a certain number of students—this only replaces tuition fees; it is
            an instrument of student funding and not of institutional funding. Funding from the Turkish
            government is based on singular, discretionary decisions on specific investments and also
            creates no continuous and stable revenue source. Political decisions are made on a
            discretionary basis. The two public universities receive a small incremental budget (which
            could be adjusted to the general budget situation of the TCc and to special hardships of the
            universities, such as exchange rate problems or compensation for a lack of fee-paying
            students).

           There is no formula funding and no other elements of performance orientation. If a lack of
            students is rewarded by extra compensation, this creates a strange incentive.

           Prefunding of investments exists to a small extent, but is not based on competitive
            mechanisms and is not explicitly related to the achievement of goals.

Goal- and strategy-oriented public funding could be a good instrument to promote the development of
the higher education sector by pushing certain developments according to a central-level strategy. In such
a scenario, funding would also be related to dialogue processes (for instance in connection with the
instrument of target agreements/performance agreements). Nothing like this exists in the TCc. There is
no clear strategy (apparently a strategy written by YÖDAK exists, but nobody seems to know it except the
YÖDAK president; the status of this strategy is unclear). There is almost no dialogue between universities
and state authorities/YÖDAK. Even among the universities, dialogue is hardly found. This makes it difficult
for the higher education system to move forward. It leads to discussions reduced to very formal issues
such as the desirable number of universities or the maximum number of students (instead of discussions
about universities’ portfolios, target groups, quality standards, and so forth).

Relations between universities and the private economy are weak. For this reason, there is also no
relevant income stream coming from industry. Local industry seems to have an interest in practically
oriented programs and vocational training, and the universities do not satisfy these needs.

Physical infrastructure (especially buildings) seems to be well developed and not a major problem of
funding of the university sector in the TCc.




                                                                                                        41
Recommendations


1. Large-scale or revolutionary approaches to change higher education funding in the TCc are not
   realistic, but improvements are possible.

      In the current situation, full-scale implementation of a three-pillar model of public funding and
       huge public investments in higher education are not realistic. However, the European experiences
       with higher education funding could show the direction(s), and even small-scale implementation
       of some components of three-pillar models could create added value.

      The universities should not (only) wait for increased public funds; they could do something to
       improve their funding situation, especially in the longer run (see recommendation 2, below).

      However, there are perspectives beyond the current situation. One scenario is increased public
       funding in a stable political context, and the other is the possibility for more comprehensive
       international cooperation in the course of a settlement of the two Cypriot communities.

      It should not be forgotten that funding reforms are closely related to changes in other areas of
       steering a higher education system. All following considerations regarding the quality of higher
       education, for example, are closely related to the implementation of systems of quality assurance.


2. Even if the current political situation remains unchanged and if there is no option to mobilize
   additional public funding, some steps could be taken.

      The precondition for any kind of performance-oriented funding is the definition of performance
       criteria. This definition depends on the strategic goals of the higher education sector, and good
       performance corresponds with attainment of goals. The TCc should develop a strategy for the
       sector including precise and measurable goals as well as clear and specific priorities. This strategy
       must be developed in an organized, bottom-up and top-down process with intensive participation
       of, and communication with, the universities. If YÖDAK is not able to organize and lead a
       transparent process, the involvement of external (international) experts for strategy development
       is recommended. The strategy should remain pragmatic—it should not “explain the whole world”
       or go into institutional details, but it should, based on a solid SWOT analysis, describe major
       directions of development and change for the coming years. As soon as a strategy is in place and
       communicated, the funding instruments could pick up elements of the strategy and promote the
       respective goals.

      The limited system of public funding should gradually adapt the allocation procedures to the
       three-pillar model. With the given budget there is not much potential for pillar 2 (formula funding,
       ex-post-performance rewards), but the model could get closer to the features of pillars 1 and 3.




                                                                                                         42
   Suggestions for the development of pillar 1: The existing incremental budget for the public
    universities is given as a lump sum (not requiring spending in a line-item approach). It is
    guaranteed for three to five years (ideally harmonized with the time horizon of the strategic plan)
    without short-term changes to create more reliability and ability to plan.

   Suggestions for the development of pillar 3: Specific investments are explicitly related to the
    achievement of goals. If funding is given for a specific purpose, this should be related to a target
    agreement between the TCc administration and the university, which mentions and
    operationalizes the goals related to the funded activity and the time horizon for their
    achievement. Ideally, the universities would compete for these funds. Target agreements imply
    the advantage that they are related to structured discussions on goals and targets. Therefore, they
    help maintain a continuous dialogue between public authorities and universities (which is urgently
    needed in the TCc). Regarding target agreements, there is a lot of technical knowledge in many
    countries on how to use this kind of instrument in a rational manner.

   Even without any political changes, the universities should reconsider their student recruitment
    strategies regarding the target groups and the quality policy. It is clear that tuition fees will remain
    the major source of funding in the future, but the universities should not count on attracting
    students globally with an “easy access-easy graduation” strategy in the long run. The universities
    should use their enormous strength in student marketing to address new target groups with new
    quality standards.

   The marketing activities should help to promote a brand for higher education in the TCc. Low living
    costs, English language, nice beaches—all this could contribute to branding, but low quality should
    not be part of the brand. The universities have to take actions to provide a reliable minimum
    quality standard, such as through international accreditation.

   This kind of branding could be related to new products, which are able to generate revenue. The
    English language and the beaches, for example, could contribute to the establishment of summer
    schools, including language summer schools (see the developments in Malta in recent years).

   Another option is new products with a potential to generate income from local enterprises.
    Universities could establish new courses for requalification and lifelong learning for decision-
    makers in local SMEs. There is a general trend in Europe toward the need for additional academic
    qualifications in later stages of professional careers, and universities could provide these
    qualifications (leading to certificates below the bachelor level, or even leading to a lifelong
    learning bachelor).

   In general, universities could engage more in vocational training to address the needs of the TCc
    labor market. However, it is recommended linking university vocational training approaches with
    the acquisition of academic skills in a practically oriented way. Universities could offer courses
    below the bachelor level, but still with an academic touch to sustain a university’s profile. It should
    be carefully reflected what an improvement of the quality of teaching and learning in the TCc
    would mean: the implementation of very high academic standards and strong theoretical rigour

                                                                                                         43
       and/or the orientation of programs toward practice and employability. The practice and
       employability aspect might be the first element to focus on.


      Such new products would lead to four benefits: new target groups would be reached, new funding
       sources could be opened, higher education in the TCc would become more practically oriented
       and would move closer to the local labor market needs, and the attractiveness of the TCc for
       international students will not be endangered by quality image problems.


      New products could also lead to a horizontally more diversified higher education system, with
       universities working on distinctive profiles (see below).




3. The situation would improve if it were possible to mobilize additional public funding. The following
   thoughts come on top of the ideas developed for the current status of public funding, they do not
   replace them.

      The mobilization of additional public funding is important and recommended. Good-quality higher
       education is related to a certain extent of research, which needs public support. Higher education
       creates substantial external benefits for the TCc’s economy, which justify public subsidies. It is not
       possible to come close to the European average in terms of public-private funding shares, but the
       system could move a step in that direction. For the following recommendations, we assume that
       limited additional public funding would be available.

      The TCc cannot afford a broad distribution of additional basic public funding. If additional funding
       would be too fragmented and spread over all universities and activities, additional money would
       just disappear without remarkable effects. Additional funding must be competitive and targeted.
       This means that it should strengthen the second and third pillars of public funding (performance-
       and innovation-oriented funding), which could also be open to private universities.

      The TCc especially cannot afford research funding as a general basic funding for all professors.
       And if every professor in every university were to be given some research funding, incentives
       would be atomized and impact would be minimal. The only option to mobilize research funding is
       a targeted approach of capacity building. The TCc should set up a program for clustered research
       capacities. Universities could apply for competitive funds for capacity-building centers, which
       follow certain formal standards (for instance, requirements such as addressing important
       economic issues for the TCc, interdisciplinary cooperation, building critical mass, and setting
       explicit targets).

      Targeted funding would promote the idea of a horizontally diversified higher education system,
       meaning that research or other tasks of universities do not play the same role for each and every


                                                                                                          44
         institution. Public funding could be used to promote the differentiation of profiles of universities
         (but the development of distinctive profiles should also be picked up by the universities
         autonomously, even without additional public funding). The third pillar of the funding model,
         using the instrument of target agreements, could be strengthened with additional public funds.

        In situations of economies dominated by SMEs, there is often the problem of distance between
         the universities and the SMEs. SMEs have no clear ideas how to benefit from collaboration with
         universities, and universities have problems addressing a fragmented private sector. In this case,
         different countries have used the funding instrument of the “knowledge voucher.” SMEs could
         get a publicly financed voucher to be paid to a university for collaboration, especially in applied
         research. The expectation is that this kind of funding helps to overcome barriers and establish
         sustainable relations, leading to private sector funding for universities after the voucher was used.
         The voucher system is an example of a public co-funding approach that aims to create an incentive
         to acquire funds from markets.

        Again, it should be stressed: Just throwing public money into a higher education system does not
         help at all. Incentives should be carefully designed in line with strategic priorities.



4. The situation would further improve under different general political circumstances. The following
   thoughts add to the ideas developed for the current situation and for the potential situation of an
   increase in public TCc funding; they do not replace them. They assume that the TCc’s international
   isolation could be overcome, which means the political context would be different.

        A major virtue of an end to international isolation could be the TCc’s access to international
         funding sources. Membership in the European Union, especially, would allow access to European
         funds, not only for specific financing of higher education (research funds, Erasmus+ funds31), but
         also to EU structural funds. For instance, in Latvia, one of the smaller EU member states that joined
         the EU in 2004, structural funds are crucial to the development of higher education infrastructure
         and quality.

        In general, the TCc higher education sector should be prepared for a possible end to the TCc’s
         international isolation. For example, potential problems of competitiveness might become
         evident when all Cypriot universities compete for funding. Also, a comparative analysis of the
         structures and mechanisms of university funding in the GCc is necessary to assess how the
         different systems could potentially become more compatible.




31
  The Erasmus Programme (European Region Action Scheme for the Mobility of University Students) is an EU student
exchange program that was established in 1987. Erasmus+, initiated in 2014, is the new program that combines all
of the EU’s education, training, youth, and sport programs.

                                                                                                             45
Annex 1-D: Teaching, learning, recognition—options for the TCc32


The contents of this annex are based on briefing documents and discussions with World Bank and other
experts, and on the proceedings of the workshop on “Strategic Directions for the TCc Higher Education
Sector” held in Nicosia on 14 June 2016. The annex also draws on key European documents related to
teaching, learning, and recognition.



Observations from workshop presentations

There are currently about 85,000 students in the Turkish Cypriot community (TCc) and 10 universities
(with four more under preparation, see Annex 2). There is a general impression that there are too many
universities. It seemed that more universities may be established in the future although the reasons for
this were not clear to TCc participants, at least from an academic perspective.

Direct economic benefit, rather than an educational or academic benefit, was widely seen as the goal of
further expansion of higher education.

There was a desire that universities should be known for quality and have accreditation, but there is an
absence of independent planning control or monitoring. The Higher Education Planning, Evaluation,
Accreditation and Coordination Council (YÖDAK) is not perceived as being independent.

While the system has rapidly expanded, there is little information on the quality of the student experience.
During the workshop, participants mentioned that university boards seem to be inactive. Quality of
infrastructure for teaching and learning and university libraries does not seem to be consistent across
different universities. Classroom overcrowding is common and many teachers seem to lack the skills to
facilitate learning in large groups. Curriculum development is limited and curricula are described as
outdated. There is little research in the TCc. Lecturers claim that there is no time to do research and no
funding to do it. Many universities have reached the limits of their capacity by accepting ever increasing
numbers of students. There are no contingency arrangements33 in place if universities close, and problems
are solved only as they arise.

While these were the perceptions stated at the workshop, there are little if any hard data to confirm them.
An effective method of benchmarking expected standards for teaching and learning and the infrastructure
to support it would be helpful, accompanied by evaluation of individual institutions with a view to enable
them to identify and address what appear to be their shortcomings and to formulate institutional action
plans. Study visits and awareness-raising exercises for institutional leaders and key personnel would
support implementation of an action plan. This would also help build the foundations for robust internal
and external quality assurance procedures.

Even the positive attributes mentioned by sector representatives are problematic. Internationalization is
heralded as a success with a claim that the TCc is well placed for internationalization and intercultural
competence. However, the only metric used is the number of students recruited, with little evidence of,

32
     This annex was written by Andy Gibbs, Glasgow Caledonian University.
33
     Examples of comprehensive contingency plans can be found, for example, in Australia.

                                                                                                         46
for example, integration, internationalization at home, transnational education, mobility, or international
recruitment. This was summed up by the statement “we get the economic benefit without adapting to
different cultures.” Links to employers and enterprises are cited as positive; however, there seem to be
questionable links to the private sector affecting student placements. YÖDAK’s affiliate membership in
the European Association for Quality Assurance in Higher Education (ENQA) is cited as evidence of quality,
yet there is no quality threshold demanded to become an affiliate member of ENQA, merely a
demonstrable interest in quality assurance in higher education.

Among actions identified as assisting in developing the system were the partnering of new and old
universities to ensure that they can stand on their own two feet, the introduction of external control, and
the need to discuss human capacity and partnerships with business. A step-by-step strategy to show the
way was requested.



SWOT Analysis

A strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats (SWOT) analysis was conducted during the breakout
session with the following outcomes.

Strengths
     Qualification framework for secondary education is in place
     The European Credit Transfer and Accumulation System (ECTS) is used in a number of institutions
     Internationalization—experience gained through attracting and managing large groups of
       international students
     Recognition for higher study, gained through association with Turkish institutions.


Weaknesses
   There is a lack of European partners, and institutions are prevented from engaging with EU-
      supported activities associated with the Bologna Process (for example Erasmus+ Key actions for
      mobility, projects, and joint programs)
   Curricula are based on teacher specialties rather than industry needs; there are few links to
      employers and enterprises, and external employability reference points are not widely used
   There are overcrowded classrooms in many areas because the emphasis is on recruitment rather
      than on the student experience
   Curriculum needs change, and there is a high failure rate because curricula have not been adapted
      to introduce learner-centered methods.


Opportunities
    Mobility—was described as “the future” and a way of introducing, stimulating, and exchanging
       good practice
    Staff and student and faculty exchange of good practice
    Stimulate cooperation among institutions, employers, and existing partners
    Discover and implement new ways of teaching to refresh activity and curricula
    Decreasing Turkish students, increasing others

                                                                                                        47
       Teaching large groups.


Threats
    Lack of diversity/engagement
    No links to research
    No continuing education for teachers
    Competition
    No motivation to change
    Insufficient sharing of information due to competition among universities.



European standards

The Bologna Process (1999–2010) outlined a series of action lines intended to harmonize higher education
across the 48 Bologna signatory countries. The action lines pertinent to teaching and learning and
recognition are:

       Adoption of a system of easily readable and comparable degrees
       Adoption of a system essentially based on bachelor/master/PhD
       Establishment of a system of credits
       Promotion of mobility
       Lifelong Learning.


In 2010 the European Higher Education Area was established with the following priorities until 2020:

       Lifelong learning
       Employability
       Student-centered learning and the teaching mission of higher education
       Mobility.


The Standards and Guidelines for Quality Assurance in the European Higher Education Area (ESG) were
updated in 2015 with the goal of contributing to the common understanding of quality assurance for
learning and teaching across borders and among all stakeholders. They include:

    •   1.2 Design and approval of programs
    •   1.3 Student-centered learning, teaching, and assessment
    •   1.4 Student admission, progression, recognition, and certification
    •   1.5 Institutions should assure themselves of the competence of their teachers. They should apply
        fair and transparent processes for the recruitment and development of the staff
    •   1.6 Learning resources and student support Standard: Institutions should have appropriate
        funding for learning and teaching activities and ensure that adequate and readily accessible
        learning resources and student support are provided
    •   1.7 Information management: Institutions should ensure that they collect, analyze, and use
        relevant information for the effective management of their programs and other activities.


                                                                                                       48
The outcomes and benefits of these activities are:

    •   The focus moves from teaching to learning
    •   Involvement of employers, employees, and students as stakeholders increases the relevance of
        education
    •   Parts of a program can attract credit points, and accumulation of credit points is possible
    •   Levels are transparent so students can transfer credits between different programs and types of
        education to achieve an award
    •   Assessment becomes more flexible, opening possibilities for recognition of prior learning, work-
        based learning
    •   A process of qualitative transformation for students and other learners in a learning environment,
        aimed at enhancing their autonomy and critical ability through an outcome-based approach.
    •   Reliance on active rather than passive learning
    •   Emphasis on critical and analytical learning and understanding
    •   Increased responsibility and accountability on the part of the student
    •   Increased autonomy of the student
    •   A reflective approach to the learning and teaching process on the part of both the student and
        the teacher.


Options for the TCc

Two political scenarios are taken into account:

       Status quo
       Settlement and reunification.


Status Quo

The focus on economic benefit alone is probably unsustainable, and efforts should be directed toward
enhancing quality and improving the student experience. While the system is confronted with a variety of
challenges, there are a number of resources available to the sector that could be used for the benefit of
improving the system. These include:

       The pockets of good practice that exist in a number of universities. While the use of learning
        outcomes and ECTS does not seem to be widespread, there are some institutions that do use
        them. Sharing these good practices across all institutions will benefit the sector as a whole.
       The pool of international students that are enrolled brings a rich diversity of experience and
        knowledge of different systems and cultures. Promoting teaching and learning of practices that
        draw on this and enable home and other students to benefit from these experiences can be the
        first steps that can contribute to internationalization at home activities.
       Building links with the home countries of incoming students can provide opportunities for
        placement experiences, thereby creating greater relevance for foreign students and stronger links
        with employers.
       Deeper links with employers and enterprises in the TCc can be used to provide a greater and more
        relevant focus on employability and ensure that programs are more likely to produce graduates
        fit for the labor market.



                                                                                                       49
       The substantial student fee income, a part of which can be allocated to fund study visits and
        incentivize activity.


Suggested Actions

       Focus on enhancing the student experience at all stages
       Review the mission, and particularly the internationalization mission, of each university
       Build partnerships within the TCc to exchange good practices and develop a community of
        practice among university lecturers
       Use this community of practice for the development of teaching and learning approaches and the
        creation of a TCc teaching and learning strategy
       Use these partnerships to establish mobility for staff and students within the TCc and look to
        extend this to “friendly” nations (for example, Turkey)
       Incentivize the development of good practice by the award of collaborative project grants, funded
        by fee income
       Reconstitute university boards to include employer and enterprise representatives who can
        advise on curriculum updating and adoption of more relevant curricula and provide internships
       Finalize and implement a credit system.



Settlement and reunification

This option would require universities to be compliant with the requirements of a unified Cypriot system
and the Bologna Process, which in turn would require alignment with the European Standards and
Guidelines for Higher Education. While there may be pockets of good practice and varying degrees of
compliance within the TCc, it seems unlikely that the TCc higher education sector in its current form could
compete on quality. The competitive advantage of being able to compete on price and access alone would
be removed, thereby threatening the sustainability of the sector. The UK Quality Assurance Agency
recently reviewed the higher education sector in the Greek Cypriot community (GCc) and highlighted the
following areas as being of good to high quality: models of delivery, collaborative provision, partnerships,
focus on students, and relevant curriculum. In addition to existing resources, the TCc could anticipate
benefiting from additional EU resources, including Erasmus+, as well as the expertise and opportunities
to link with higher education institution professionals across the EU.

The following suggestions are made with a view to enabling the TCc to compete in these key areas.



Suggested Actions

Improve quality assurance arrangements

       A body with overall responsibility for quality should take steps to provide information and
        promote alignment with the ESG.
       Introduction of robust accreditation and quality assurance processes (quality assurance is dealt
        with in another annex but is essential for developing teaching and learning systematically).


                                                                                                         50
Modernize and make curricula relevant

A unified Cyprus would be expected to be a member of the European Higher Education Area, and in this
scenario the higher education sector in the TCc would need to be harmonized with the European
standards established in the Bologna Process, mentioned above. This would mean the adoption of the
European frameworks and tools such as Qualifications Frameworks and agreed quality assurance
provisions. In terms of teaching, learning, and recognition, the TCc would need to align the student
experience with European standards. The activities listed above can contribute to this and must include:

        Use of learning outcomes. These are seen as the building blocks of higher education reform in
         Europe and are instrumental in moving from a teacher-centered to learner-centered system, in
         recognition and via ECTS. This task would require a reorientation of programs from an input based
         system to one based on outcomes, which in turn requires a review of teaching, learning, and
         assessment approaches.
        Using ECTS, which is the form of credits universally applied within the European Higher Education
         Area. Currently, there is limited application of ECTS within the TCc and still some use of the U.S.
         credit system.
        Build employer/employee/university partnerships to ensure relevance of programs. In focusing
         on outcomes, academics should involve these groups in curriculum development to identify what
         skills and knowledge employers require. Furthermore, opportunities for work-based learning can
         be explored. In addition, a greater focus on employability could be introduced to programs by
         employer involvement.
        Mobility, internships, and workplace learning both in the TCc and the students’ home countries
         can be introduced using an outcomes approach, again improving the relevance of programs to
         society.


Modernize approaches to teaching and learning

An overall TCc strategy for developing approaches to teaching and learning should be introduced.

This must include:

            Promotion of a learning outcomes approach
            Orientation to student-centered learning approaches.


Prepare for recognition issues

The system of credits should be finalized and aligned with the ECTS. The current U.S. system used by some
universities will be irrelevant in the European Higher Education Area. While the U.S. system may be of use
in students’ home countries, a failure to implement ECTS will reduce mobility, transparency, and
curriculum development opportunities in the TCc.34

Associated with ECTS is the potential for credit accumulation and transfer, which will afford greater
opportunities for students to study within a lifelong learning system. This would also require greater


34
  A comparison of the two systems and some of the issues arising from implementation of an ECTS system may be
found at http://ec.europa.eu/education/library/study/2011/us_en.pdf.

                                                                                                          51
alignment with the needs of employers and enterprises and involvement of stakeholders, who could
become more involved in university curriculum development and decision-making bodies.

The mutual recognition of qualifications within Europe will require attention to the content of programs
to ensure alignment with Sectoral Directives on professional and academic recognition.



Prepare to benefit from Erasmus+

Key staff should be aware of the key actions of this program so that they are in a position to benefit as
quickly as possible from the developmental, mobility, and capacity-building components of Erasmus+.
Informal discussions with staff from Erasmus offices in Turkey can help in this preparation.




Useful Bologna Process-related resources

ECTS Users’      Guide    2015:    http://ec.europa.eu/education/library/publications/2015/ects-users-
guide_en.pdf
EU Free movement of professionals:             http://ec.europa.eu/growth/single-market/services/free-
movement-professionals/index_en.htm
QAA Review of UK Transnational Education: http://www.qaa.ac.uk/en/Publications/Documents/TNE-
greece-cyprus-overview-15.pdf
Student Centered Learning Toolkit: https://www.esu-online.org/wp-content/uploads/2016/07/100814-
SCL.pdf
The      European       Recognition   Manual            for     Higher       Education       Institutions:
http://eurorecognition.eu/Manual/EAR%20HEI.pdf




                                                                                                       52
Annex 1-E: Research and Development35
Background (site visit, available documents, and information)

In the Turkish Cypriot community (TCc) there has been a dramatic increase in the number of
universities and students in the last decade. While there are no transparent statistics and no data
collection on these numbers, it appears that in the last five to eight years, the number of students
doubled. In addition, there is a “circulation” of students—that is, those who move from one
university to another in order to keep their student status and/or to try to complete their studies.
A significant proportion of students come from different countries, among which students from
Turkey make the majority. The process of mass education is definitely reflected in TCc universities.

The community seems to be in favor of the high number of universities and students, primarily
from the perspective of service providers (accommodation; restaurants and cafes). There is only a
very limited industry sector.

The majority, if not all, of the existing universities are teaching universities, with a little or no
research regardless of whether they are public or private. They seem in most cases to be well
equipped with infrastructure for teaching, and facilities for learning and teaching, and they have
well-kept campuses that enable students to have an adequate social life.

Many staff members were educated abroad and trained in research, as well. However, in TCc
universities, emphasis is put on teaching, and the teaching load is often so heavy that there is little
or no time for research. But even if teachers did have time for research, the research infrastructure
is limited in most TCc universities. Some universities are satisfied with the status as a teaching
institution and are not seeking to change.

Although research opportunities are few, for academic promotion, universities do nonetheless
expect staff to perform research and publish papers in high-quality international journals. This can
cause high levels of frustration among some academics. Because of this approach to teaching and
research, universities offer almost no doctoral education and have few doctoral students. For those
that do offer doctoral education, the question remains of how to assure quality and to what extent
the offered doctoral education provides good-quality research training.



SWOT analysis/results

During the workshop on Strategic Directions for the TCc Higher Education Sector, held in Nicosia
on 14 June 2016, a SWOT analysis was done at a breakout session. Participants worked in groups
according to their expressed interest. The main aim of the breakout session was to provide a SWOT
analysis in a particular subsector (that is, research), to link the TCc status quo to European
developments, and to provide inputs for strategic directions.

The SWOT analysis was performed by a group of academics from different institutions with
different status of research at their institutions. From the institutional perspective, a few
participating institutions were more focused on research and perceived research as a vital and

35
     This annex was written by Professor Melita Kovacevic, University of Zagreb.

                                                                                                          53
relevant part of the academic life. Others put very little emphasis on research. From the individual
perspective of academics, regardless of from which institution they came, the unifying thread was
their shared interest in and care about research. It seems that institutional policy and status is not
necessarily aligned with individual academic needs and ambitions, something even more clearly
expressed when academics had experience working at a foreign research and academic institution.

It was evident that participating academics consider research as a key factor for both the university
environment and society in general. It also became clear that academics who participated had a
personal research background and that they are research active. Some of them were also
institutionally responsible for research. Throughout the exercise, there was a high level of
agreement among the group members on all the provided analysis.

Strengths. Universities are operating in a safe and peaceful place, in a very international,
multicultural environment. English, being the language of choice for teaching, enables such a
multicultural environment and makes studying in the TCc more attractive.

Weaknesses. According to the attending TCc academics, the major obstacle is financing. There is
no sufficient and stable funding scheme. All the teaching staff has an excessive teaching load that
does not allow time for doing research. Because of the number of universities, there is rivalry and
hardly any collaboration among them. The TCc has no industry and, because of that, there are no
demands for research and development coming from industry. In other words, society does not
ask for and does not expect any research and research results; the whole economy is a service
economy, as a result of political decisions. Unfortunately, the TCc perceives university societal
relevance primarily as a significant requirement for “bed and board.” Nevertheless, the existence
of a service sector should be considered as an opportunity to develop particular academic research
activities focused on the development of new knowledge relevant to that sector, such as, for
example, agriculture, tourism, environmental science, and ecology.

There are few if any policy papers on strategic direction for the entire system, but if some do exist,
their contents are not put into practice.

On the institutional level, it is evident that resources are very limited. There is no adequate research
infrastructure, and the system lacks an administrative structure that could manage research. The
higher education system as it is currently configured is not ready to absorb a bigger influx of funds.

Opportunities. On a system level, higher education/research reform is perceived as a great
opportunity for change. International accreditation is welcome and should be sought by
institutions. On the institutional level, institutional and academic collaboration is perceived as a
great opportunity for further development. There is also a need and readiness to share research
infrastructure. This would contribute to capacity building.

There are particular areas of research that have great potential, considering the natural resources
and environment, and the fact that there has been no research performed yet. Even without an
industrial sector, the service sector could trigger relevant research that could allow for significant
regional, and even international, collaboration. This would enable academic institutions to foster
research, to open universities toward society, and to translate new knowledge in the areas that the
whole of society will perceive as beneficial.


                                                                                                           54
An alternative political situation, were it to arise, would allow more collaboration on both the
institutional and individual level. Many weaknesses could be overcome in this context.

Threats. International students are admitted very easily into TCc universities, and this fact could
harm the reputation of the TCc higher education system.

If an alternative political situation were to arise, the current approach to fees could be problematic
because they are higher than in the rest of Europe, particularly on the undergraduate level. In
addition, there is a fear that the current “no strict rules” system could lead to imposing the rules
on the institutions in the TCc.



Workshop conclusions

The SWOT exercise showed a high level of awareness of the system. It also identified a need and
readiness for change. In particular, it was interesting to observe readiness for and openness to
different political scenarios, as well as a clear desire for more collaboration on all levels.

It seems that there are different layers of the system that need to be considered. To boost research,
there is a need for structural changes. The quantity of students and the heavy teaching load have
a negative impact on research. There is a need to assure resources—human, infrastructure, and
funding—to enable research. The system has to work on data collection, and on transparency and
distribution of funding, particularly in public universities. Yet, the setting and the community
environment in the TCc are positive and contribute to the attractiveness of the higher education
system.

What is lacking is communication between universities and society. Universities have not
developed their third function of innovation and transferring knowledge. At the same time, the
society that hosts all the universities at this stage does not seem to express any interest in research
and its impact. While industry hardly exists, it seems that there is also no trust (understanding?)
that universities could contribute to regional development and could take an active role in
advancing knowledge and, thus, contribute to the society in general.



Strategic directions for research (and contribution to regional development)

a) Current status. Currently, the higher education system of the TCc is not ready to absorb much
more research, and at the same time is overburdened with too much teaching. Although it could
take some time before academic staff is able to access research funds, to do it successfully, the
system needs to be ready.

To achieve readiness, and to do some strategic planning, it is necessary to do an analysis of the
current situation, which needs to start with the collection of accurate statistical information. The
data should include information on number of students, number of courses and hours per teacher-
researcher, published papers per person per institution per year (regarding different categories of
papers), available money for research per person, number of projects per type per institution, and
so forth.

                                                                                                          55
Once data are collected and analyzed, it will enable stakeholders to see what the starting point is
and to define which direction to take.

                                                 ***

The rest of this annex will do the following. For each section below, two options are considered—
the political and social situation as it is now, or the status quo (Option A), and the changed political
and social context, or the alternative scenario (Option B).

b) The role of research. On both the national and institutional level, it will be necessary to develop
a position related to research—its relevance and role within the system, and its connection or
relation with society. Once that is done, further alignment will be needed with other institutional
and individual activities and distribution of staff time (the majority of the institutions currently
position themselves as teaching universities). This will further enable strategic planning.

Option A: It would be important to identify research as a relevant part of institutional life and,
accordingly, to balance the teaching and research load; to identify central-level and institutional
research priorities; to support interinstitutional collaboration; and to start acquiring infrastructure.
It is important to recognize research as relevant for an individual researcher, university, and society
as a whole, so when hiring new staff, consideration should be given to their research potential and
individual potential contributions. It should be repeatedly pointed out that research produces new
knowledge that can be and should be translated into new developments in society.

Option B: A dialog with institutions in the region should be opened and intensified to foster
collaboration; to exchange good practice; and to support mobility of staff, both academic and
administrative, in order to accelerate personal and institutional development.



c) Structural changes. The structural changes needed include developing relevant policy
documents, redistributing obligations for academic staff (for example, teaching hours), and
developing institutional administrative support for research (for example, developing skills and
training staff, establishing new units, and supporting project management). Access to recent
literature, databases, and open-access sources is crucial to the preparation of quality research.

Option A: A profound collection of data is necessary to develop institutional policy, to be more
transparent about teaching load and research obligations, and to avoid parallel teaching duties
(teaching at more than one institution). That way, it should be possible to identify time slots for
more research to be performed at each institution. Institutional and national documents and
policies should support and emphasize the need for collaboration among TCc institutions; to start
establishing administrative support (specialized unit or office and human resources); to support
the idea of starting research on a small scale but of good quality; to start promoting student
research on a master’s level; to develop a system of transparently monitoring research
performance; and to start developing a research culture (versus emphasizing the institutional
teaching position).

Option B: Policy documents would need to support and incentivize regional research collaboration;
to support staff mobility in order to develop new skills; to assure an appropriate legal framework,


                                                                                                           56
both on the national and institutional level, for joint projects and programs; to recognize or reward
co-authoring from different regional institutions; to start developing research networks that will
enable better access to research funds, particularly European funds; and to develop a system of
job shadowing to facilitate development of new skills (particularly for better access to EU research
funds).



d) Capacity. A special section should formulate ideas on how to further develop capacity for
research that includes human resources, infrastructure, and funding. Each of those should involve
clear planning on how to further develop capacity or to reach a critical mass when needed. It should
also consider the potential of collaboration on different levels, as well as a concept of networking
as one possible form of working together that can contribute to further cooperation. Also
considered should be the role and potential strength of joint projects that rely on good networking
and continuous collaboration.

Option A: To build capacity, it is important to establish interuniversity collaboration (primarily
among TCc institutions); support research activities as an obligatory part of staff performance;
make transparent investment in infrastructure; concentrate, at the beginning, on research that is
less demanding in terms of the equipment and overly sophisticated facilities; develop a system of
awarding research performance; and start developing research staff. Universities and responsible
ministers should hold discussions to identify areas where possible smart specialization could be
developed, starting on the system level.

Option B: To further develop research, it would be necessary to support interuniversity
collaboration (now broadening to a wider set of institutions on the island, regional institutions, and
international institutions); exchange staff for short or long visits; establish joint programs and joint
research, as well as joint laboratories; establish a network of laboratories and existing
infrastructure to enable better use of the existing facilities; agree with the institutions in the region
on shared research priorities; and establish sound research planning focused on societal needs and
institutional potential (rather than trying to cover too broad a range of research areas without
sufficient resources).



e) Doctoral education. Special attention should be devoted to doctoral education and PhD
students. How to do their training as young researchers, what kind of structure they need, how to
assure a quality doctoral education, their responsibilities, and exposure to research, among others,
are all important issues to consider. Funding opportunities need to be actively sought and ensured
to guarantee a quality doctoral education.

Option A: Structuring doctoral education according to international, but particularly European,
standards will enable better communication with and access to international and European
laboratories and research. Doctoral education also needs to be structured to be more efficient and
productive, with the outcome being a good-quality, new PhD holder. Doctoral candidates from the
beginning of their studies need to be involved more in research and less in teaching and other
nonresearch activities. Courses and training for generic skills need to be provided to prepare them


                                                                                                            57
for different career paths. Efforts are needed to connect doctoral education with sectors outside
academia, and to develop doctoral programs that meet societal needs, institutional capacities, and
defined research priorities. To overcome capacity issues, joint programs (with two or more
institutions participating) need to start being developed, and administrative support needs to be
established from the very beginning, with an emphasis on a quality supervision.

Option B: Once options and conditions for alternative institutional behavior have been recognized,
it would be beneficial to establish joint doctoral programs across different regional institutions;
prepare doctoral candidate mobility within different laboratories and settings at the regional
institutions; prepare and allow for team supervision and/or co-supervision, with the supervisors
coming from different regional institutions; and start introducing international committees for a
public defense, which will have a positive impact on quality.



f) University and society. Universities need to position themselves in relation to society and
industry (industry is here a generic term that refers to all the sectors that are potential providers
of jobs) and to take on this third role—innovation and transfer technology. Here it is important to
define the mission of the university within a particular society and how a university with its staff
and students can contribute to developing knowledge and contributing to regional development.
Communication has to be two-way. Industry could also participate in funding research, and this
could be one of the strategic goals.

Option A: It would be extremely important to rethink how universities can play a role in regional
development; courses related to transfer technology, innovation, and entrepreneurship should be
a part of curricula; universities should also find a way to communicate better (for example, through
roundtables, external boards of advisors, and workshops) with local businesses and entrepreneurs,
and to bring them closer to the university; and smart specialization, if identified and defined
properly, could significantly contribute to regional development.

Option B: Sharing good practices with universities that have more experience is crucial. In addition,
possibilities should be found for common research and translation of knowledge in areas of mutual
interest; common policies should be developed on how to stimulate and support entrepreneurship
at universities (for example, startups); and smart specialization could be a regional development
booster and could attract additional research funding. This is why it is extremely important to
jointly work on identifying capacities for research and societal needs.



g) Funding. It is necessary to define how research should be funded and who should provide
funding. The system is more flexible if funding is diversified and complementary. The system also
needs to plan how to be prepared to absorb more stable funding and to prefund funding for
projects financed externally, the kind that also requires excellent project management.

Option A: More transparent allocation of the university budget is needed, particularly as related to
research. It is necessary to perceive government funding as an investment, not an expenditure, and
this view needs to be included in relevant governmental and institutional documents. Proper
national and institutional funding for research could, relatively quickly, prepare staff to bring in

                                                                                                        58
more research money from external funding schemes (such as EU research programs). Centers or
university units need to be prepared to know how to manage European research money and to
become familiar with at least the basic procedures. This on-time preparation will help greatly once
there will be access to, for example, EU funds.



Option B: To be ready for new opportunities, academics and their institutions need to be prepared
while still in a political status quo context. An adequate level of institutional autonomy, and
accountability, is required, and this includes adequate funding (as well as a certain level of
autonomy in funding). The alternative political context will open access to different funding
schemes, which will require changed internal procedures.

                                                 ***

Conclusion

Research is currently a weak link in the TCc higher education system. To strengthen it, good and
realistic strategic planning is required. Institutions and policy makers can develop plans starting
from the current situation, but it is also important to consider alternative options that might bring
different and new opportunities. To benefit from changes, the system needs to be ready to absorb
positive changes and to know how to respond to new conditions. That is why it is important not
only to make strategic plans on how to move forward, but also to know how to benefit from
potential future changes. The system will not be able to react quickly and positively if it does not
adequately prepare for changes. There are two steps it should take.

The first step, regardless of which political scenario exists, is to collect data—that is, indicators of
the current state—and to make them available to the academic community. The strategy needs to
be adopted bottom-up and should not be imposed as a top-down process only, otherwise there is
a risk that it will never be really accepted and implemented. Second, a central-level research
strategy and research strategies for each university need to be developed. The mission of each
institution needs to be defined, a strategy developed for research and innovation, and research
priorities identified, as well as existing capacity for research. Then an Action Plan needs to be
developed as soon as a strategy is adopted.

In the status quo context, two things are crucial: to start rethinking the relevance of research and
to start making it a vital part of each institution (even on a small scale), and to slowly prepare
institutions and researchers for a potential alternative political situation. If the institutions and
individual academics are better prepared for collaboration and joint work, it will be easier to
benefit from new conditions under an alternative political scenario. What needs to be avoided is a
situation in which one side imposes rules on the other side (one of the concerns a workshop
member expressed). To prevent that, it is important to start developing internal rules and
procedures relevant for research and research collaboration now.

If there were an alternative political scenario, it would open many new opportunities for academic
and institutional collaboration. This could contribute to strengthening research capacity, and
consequently contribute more to research productivity and its impact on society. To facilitate the
process, adequate steps need to be taken in advance. On a structural level, it is important to

                                                                                                           59
develop relevant documents, policies, and institutional regulations that will allow this kind of
collaboration. Moreover, individual researchers need to be prepared to do more collaborative,
solid, quality research at the institutional and central level. Finally, it is important to recognize to
which areas researchers could realistically contribute and which areas of research could be
beneficial for the whole society (which is actually an issue of research priorities and a smart
specialization process).

Substantial work lies ahead for the higher education sector in the TCc, but academics seem
motivated to welcome changes in their working environment and to contribute to their institutions
and communities by doing research.




                                                                                                           60
     Annex 2: Background Information—Higher Education in the TCc


                                               Background

Notwithstanding the political circumstances, the higher education system in the Turkish Cypriot
community (TCc) developed rapidly in recent years and exhibits several peculiar characteristics at
present. Student numbers in the TCc rose to almost 75,000 in the academic year 2014/15 and to more
than 85,000 since then, compared to an overall population of about 300,000 (Auswärtiges Amt 2015;
Gökçekuş 2016, 7; MoNE 2015, 127). In addition to 10 universities enrolling students in 2014/15, five
universities obtained a license to operate and two more have been preapproved (Gökçekuş 2016, 9-10;
MoNE 2015, 121). The main driver of the system’s growth was the increasing numbers of Turkish and
foreign students from other countries. With a share of domestic students of around 16 percent in 2014/15
only, compared to 57 percent Turkish and 27 percent foreign students from other countries, the TCc’s
higher education system exhibits a unique composition of its student body. The large number of foreign
students furthermore makes the higher education sector an important part of the TCc’s economy.

In the face of current political and economic developments in the TCc and the unique form and function
of the higher education system, fundamental questions concerning directions for the system’s
development arise. Discussing potential pathways for the future requires taking stock of past
developments and investigating the current state in detail—as this analysis seeks to do.36 It starts with
taking a closer look at the main features and the current state of the TCc’s higher education system,
processes of teaching and learning, and research activities. The focus then shifts to three key features of
every higher education system—governance structures, including the process of strategic planning itself;
quality assurance arrangements; and financing. In addition, attention will be given to the
internationalization of the system, issues related to international trends in general and the Bologna
Process, in particular, and the relationship between the TCc’s higher education system and the economy.



                                  Main features of the system
Legal framework
Fundamental legal provisions covering the TCc’s higher education system37 are set forth in the TCc
Constitution and the Law on National Education (LoNE). The freedom of science as well as the right to
education and training are both stated in the TCc Constitution (25 & 59). Additional basic provisions such
as the TCc administration’s responsibility to enable successful students without sufficient financial means
to attend higher education, the importance of lifelong learning, and the prescription that higher education

36
   Due to a lack of publicly available information and data, this analysis relies heavily on the World Bank team’s
exchange with representatives and stakeholders of the TCc higher education system during three site visits
conducted in 2016 and information provided in this context.
37
   The branch campuses established in the TCc by Turkish universities (see below), have a special status, also with
respect to the application of the legal framework (LoHE 46).

                                                                                                                61
is fee-based, are stated in the LoNE (10(2), 11 & 40). The LoNE furthermore stipulates that higher
education, like all education sectors, lies within the responsibility of the Ministry of National Education
(MoNE) (LoNE 12(2) & 68(1)).

The main component of the legal framework38 is the Law on Higher Education (LoHE), which also covers
the enactment of additional regulations. Adopted in 2005, the LoHE addresses various key aspects of the
TCc higher education system, including:

        the basic aims and principles of higher education
        the two major system-level governing bodies, that is, the Higher Education Planning, Evaluation,
         Accreditation and Coordination Council (YÖDAK) and the Inter-University Council (IUC)
        the duties, organization, working principles, and funding modalities of universities as well as the
         rules covering their establishment
        the universities’ faculty members
        higher education programs
        admission to higher education.

Concerning additional regulations, that is, sector-wide bylaws, statutes and regulations covering specific
issues and the founding laws and bylaws of universities, the LoHE determines that these are prepared by
YÖDAK (and the universities) and then approved by the Council of Ministers following their submission by
the MoNE (LoHE 12(2), 41(3), 41(6), 43(2) & 44). Such regulations have, for example, been developed for
the process of obtaining licenses from the MoNE and YÖDAK in the course of the establishment of new
universities, subunits, and programs (Statute on Program Opening; for further discussions see “Quality
assurance”), the accreditation and evaluation of programs (Statute on Program Evaluation), the
assessment of the equivalency of foreign degrees (Regulation on the Equivalence of Diplomas), and ethical
objections and disputes related to the universities’ activities (Ethical Coordination Board Statute)
(Gökçekuş 2016, 3–5).

There have been attempts to revise parts of the legal framework, but these have been disrupted by
recent political changes in the TCc administration. Reform efforts targeted, among other things, legal
provisions pertaining to YÖDAK—according to sector representatives, it was discussed to develop a
separate law for the governing body—and the process of opening new universities, subunits, and
programs, as well as accreditation and evaluation procedures. Reforms also envisaged a revision of the
legal foundation of one of the public institutions, Eastern Mediterranean University (EMU). In addition,
there are ongoing efforts to bring the legislation covering the recognition of degrees and certain
professions in line with EU regulations (Gökçekuş 2016, 35).



Higher education providers
The higher education sector of the TCc consists of universities, one teacher training college, and the
Open Education Faculty of the Anadolu University in Turkey that offers distance education programs


38
  The legal framework of the TCc higher education system resemblances Turkey’s. Similarities between the two
systems, which have close ties, furthermore pertain to all key features, including governance structures and quality
assurance arrangements.

                                                                                                                 62
(Gökçekuş 2016, 9). As defined by the LoHE (2), higher education comprises all post-secondary education
of a minimum duration of four semesters or equivalent. Leaving aside distance education delivered by the
Turkish Anadolu University and the teacher training college—as this analysis does—higher education is
provided by universities exclusively. These can be divided into three groups (for additional information
see below): public universities, branch campuses of Turkish universities, and private universities.

In academic year 2014/15, there were 10 universities that enrolled students (MoNE 2015, 121) and three
that had obtained a license to operate from YÖDAK, but did not enroll any students yet (Gökçekuş 2016,
9–10). Since then, two additional universities have obtained a license from YÖDAK and two more have
been preapproved (for a brief overview on all universities see table A2.1). It is envisaged that several new
private universities will be established in the future.




                                                                                                         63
Table A2.1 Universities in the Turkish Cypriot Community

                                                                           Year of Esta-   Number of Stu-
 Name                                            Type         Location
                                                                            blishment      dents (2014/15)
 Eastern Mediterranean University (EMU)        Public
                                                             Famagusta        1986             19,112
 Doğu Akdeniz Üniversitesi
 European University of Lefke (EUL)            Public
                                                             Lefke            1989             5,243
 Lefke Avrupa Üniversitesi
 Middle East Technical University – Northern   Branch
 Cyprus Campus (METU NCC)                      campus        Morphou          2004             2,407
 ODTÜ Kuzey Kıbrıs Kampusu
 Istanbul Technical University – Northern      Branch
 Cyprus Campus (ITU NCC)                       campus        Famagusta        2009              143
 İTÜ Kuzey Kıbrıs
 Girne American University (GAU)               Private
                                                             Girne            1985             13,096
 Girne Amerikan Üniversitesi
 Near East University (NEU)                    Private
                                                             Nicosia          1988             23,924
 Yakın Doğu Üniversitesi
 Cyprus International University (CIU)         Private
                                                             Nicosia          1996             8,674
 Uluslararası Kıbrıs Üniversitesi
 University of Mediterranean Karpasia (UMK)    Private
                                                             Nicosia          2012              640
 Akdeniz Karpaz Üniversitesi
 British University of Nicosia (BUN)
                                               Private       Kyreniaa         2013              270
 Lefkoşa İngiliz Üniversitesi
 University of Kyrenia (UK)
                                               Private       Kyrenia          2013              654
 Girne Üniversitesi
 American University of Cyprus (Website)                                                    (licensed by
                                               Private       Nicosia          2014
 Kıbrıs Amerikan Üniversitesi                                                                  YÖDAK)
 Cyprus Social Sciences University                                                          (licensed by
                                               Private          —             2014
                                                                                               YÖDAK)
 Cyprus Metropolitan University                                                             (licensed by
                                               Private          —             2015
                                                                                               YÖDAK)
 Cyprus University of Social Sciences and                                                   (licensed by
                                               Private          —             2016
 Health                                                                                        YÖDAK)
 International Final University (Website)                   Çatalköy                        (licensed by
                                               Private                        2016
                                                            (Kyrenia)                          YÖDAK)
  Nicosia Cosmopolitan University              Private          —             2014         (preapproved)
  European Leadership University (ELU)         Private          —             2015         (preapproved)
Source: Author based on Gökçekuş (2016, 9–10) and        MoNE (2015, 126), as well as university websites (see
“References”).
Note: a. The location in Kyrenia appears to be temporarily, with a campus in Nicosia being under construction
(http://www.bun.edu.tr/campus/?lang=en).


All universities—the branch campuses established by Turkish universities being a special case —fall
under the jurisdiction of the LoHE, which determines basic principles related to their structure and
functioning. The LoHE, among others, covers the process of establishing new universities and their
subunits (LoHE 12 & 43), which is furthermore covered by additional regulations, as well as the potential
closure of institutions (LoHE, 43(5)C & 43(6)). Concerning the institutions’ academic structure, the
following subunits are named in the law (LoHE 2):


                                                                                                             64
        faculties, which are responsible for teaching and learning as well as research, and can comprise
         departments and institutes
        institutes, which conduct teaching (in graduate programs) and research in particular fields, and
         can be part of a faculty or not
        schools of higher education, which have a focus on vocationally oriented associate degree
         programs in a specific field
        departments, which are the subunits of faculties.

Universities furthermore include English preparatory schools offering language programs for students
who do not possess the required competencies (see “Pathways into and through the system,” below).
Detailed provisions concerning institutional structure and functioning are supposed to be set forth in the
institutions’ founding laws (LoNE 39). These are prepared by YÖDAK and have to be approved by the
Council of Ministers upon submission by the MoNE (LoHE 41(6)).



Public universities

The status of a “public” university in the TCc is for the most part related to the way institutions are
governed and managed. In contrast to public institutions in many other higher education systems, which
receive substantial financial support from their government, appropriations by the TCc administration
account for an only minor share of the TCc’s public universities’ income. Their staff also does not have the
status of civil servants.

The older and bigger of the two public universities, Eastern Mediterranean University (EMU), was
established as a result of joint efforts by the TCc administration and the Turkish government (EMU
n.d.a). The two parties agreed to establish a university in the TCc in 1985. Subsequently, representatives
of the Turkish Council of Higher Education (YÖK) visited an institute of higher education that had already
been established in 1979 in order to transform it into a fully-fledged university. The legal transformation
took place in 1986 via the “Statute Establishing the North Cyprus Education Foundation and Eastern
Mediterranean University” (EMU Statute). Constituting EMU’s status as a public university, the statute
determines that all nine members of the board of trustees, the highest decision-making body of the
university (for details on the universities’ internal governance structures see section on “Institutional
level”, below), are appointed by the TCc’s president following their nomination by the council of
ministers.39 According to EMU representatives, it is the common practice that two of the nine members
are professors from Turkey, whereas the remaining seven members are people from the TCc chosen
according to their political affiliation so that their composition mirrors the share of the parties in the
governing coalition.

At EMU, around one third of the faculty are foreign academic staff members.40 Considering only full-
time faculty members, 27 percent were from outside of the TCc in academic year 2015/16. This share
increases to 35 percent if part-time and adjunct faculty members are included. Seventy percent of the

39
   In practice, however, other actors from the TCc administration seem to be involved in the decisions concerning
the board members as well.
40
   At this stage, the authors have no further information on the background (for example, origin) or the composition
(for example, in terms of staff categories) of academic staff for all TCc universities, which constitutes an area for
further research.

                                                                                                                  65
foreign full-time faculty members either have Turkish citizenship or double-citizenship (Turkey-TCc). To
obtain the status of professor (that is, assistant professor, associate professor, or professor) in the TCc,
candidates must have a PhD. For becoming an assistant professor, candidates also must have published a
paper in a journal that is listed in the Social Science Citation Index. Local academic staff members41 start
on fixed-term contracts but can obtain permanent contracts after six years of successful full-time
employment.

The second public university in the TCc, the European University of Lefke (EUL), was founded in 1989 on
the initiative of five donors who wanted to create a small “boutique” institution that supports the
region as its core mission. Comparable to EMU, the establishment of EUL is based on a founding law, and
the board of trustees is appointed by the TCc administration. One difference, however, is that the donors
responsible for the establishment of EUL received the status of lifetime board members, two of whom are
still active in the governance of the institution.



Branch campuses

Despite their commonality of being branches of Turkish universities, there are marked differences
between the TCc campuses of Middle East Technical University (METU NCC) and Istanbul Technical
University (ITU NCC).42

METU NCC was established following a joint request by the Turkish government and the TCc
administration to METU in Turkey with the intention to create an institution that promotes the
reputation, visibility, and quality of higher education in the TCc. Following the joint request to METU
(METU NCC n.d.), a protocol between the university and the other two parties was signed in 2000. The
campus subsequently established was funded by the Turkish government, which also continues to support
METU NCC’s operating costs. It enrolled 2,407 students in academic year 2014/15, but the campus is
designed to host up to 3,500 students. METU NCC remains part of METU, that is, it is attached to the main
campus in Ankara in all academic and administrative matters (METU NCC n.d.)—and, according to METU
NCC representatives, maintaining the standards developed at METU in Turkey is one of its main objectives.
This implies that METU NCC is still covered by the Turkish higher education law and, for example, does
not have a senate of its own. It is not a full member of the Inter-University Council, the sector governing
body consisting of representatives of all TCc universities, even though the campus president, who is
appointed from the main campus in Turkey, participates in the meetings without voting rights. With
respect to financial matters, however, METU NCC is not attached to the main campus. Whereas METU is
financed by the Turkish state, METU NCC is financed by the TCc via aid received from Turkey.

In contrast to METU NCC, ITU NCC is still in a phase of developing premises and infrastructure. Having
received its license to operate in the TCc in 2009 (ITU NCC n.d.), ITU NCC currently enrolls exclusively
English language preparatory program students from Turkey, who later return to Turkey for their study
programs. Nevertheless, current plans—according to ITU NCC representatives—envisage the
establishment of programs in, among other fields, architecture, maritime studies, engineering, social


41
  That is, TCc inhabitants, even though these do not necessarily have to be born in the TCc.
42
  According to sector representatives, at least one other Turkish university has obtained a license to establish a
branch campus in the TCc.

                                                                                                               66
sciences, and foreign languages. Similar to METU NCC, ITU NCC is funded by the Turkish government, the
funds being disbursed via the Turkish aid agency. Unlike METU NCC, ITU NCC is more formally integrated
into the TCc higher education system. For example, it is a full member of the IUC.



Private universities

The group of private universities in the TCc is heterogeneous, comprising bigger, more comprehensive
universities as well as small, niche institutions. In contrast to the Turkish higher education system, to
which the TCc’s bears great resemblance, private universities in the TCc can be established by private
persons. They can also be for-profit and—as will be discussed in greater detail below (see section on
“Financing”)—have the possibility to receive financial support from the TCc administration. The three
biggest and oldest private universities, Girne American University (GAU), Near East University (NEU), and
Cyprus International University (CIU), enroll several thousand students each and provide education in a
broad range of fields. NEU, as the biggest university in the TCc, is also the only institution with a university
hospital. Some of the smaller private universities have an explicit focus on certain subject areas. The
University of Kyrenia (UK), for example, which was established by splitting off the maritime and one other
faculty of its “sister university” NEU, has a focus on maritime and aviation subjects that—according to UK
representatives—is supposed to be extended (UK 2016). Another example is the University of
Mediterranean Karpasia (UMK), which exhibits a focus on labor-market-relevant skills aiming at the more
vocationally oriented sector of the labor market, especially in the fields of tourism, aviation, and business.



Student body
Student numbers in the TCc have increased rapidly in recent years (see figure A2.1), reaching almost
75,000 in academic year 2014/15 and increasing to more than 85,000 since then (Gökçekuş 2016, 7;
MoNE 2015, 127). Having increased by 70 percent in the last four years, total enrolment in the TCc was
74,163 in academic year 2014/1543 (MoNE 2015, 127)—compared to an overall population of about
300,000 (Auswärtiges Amt 2015; Gökçekuş 2016, 7). The higher education enrolment ratio of the TCc
reached 69 percent in 2014 (SPO 2015, 3).




43
  Academic year 2014/15 is the last year for which detailed official data on the student population are available and
will, therefore, be used as the reference year for the following discussion of the TCc student body.

                                                                                                                  67
Figure A2.1 Total Enrolment in the TCc by Origin of Students, 1988/89–2014/15

80,000
                                                                                                      74,163

70,000


60,000


                                                                                   47,907
50,000

                                                                                                        41,928
40,000
                                                                                   33,202
                                                               29,054
30,000

                                                              17,345
20,000                                                                                                 20,138
                             10,957
                                                                                   10,646
                             7,343                              9,185
10,000
                             2,917                                                  4,059               12,097
                                                               2,524
                              697
     0




                                      TCc       Turkish       Other        Total

Sources: MoNE 2014a, 106 (for 1988/89–2013/2014); MoNE 2015, 127 (for 2014/15).

The main factor behind the expansion of the sector has been the increase in Turkish students and
foreign students from other countries (see figure A2.1).44 In 2014/15, domestic students from the TCc45
comprised 16.3 percent of the overall student population, whereas students from Turkey and foreign
students from other countries comprised 56.5 percent and 27.2 percent, respectively (MoNE 2015, 127).
The non-Turkish foreign students come from over 100 different countries, the most prominent ones being
Nigeria, Pakistan, Iran, Syria, Azerbaijan, Jordan, and Iraq, with close to or even more than 1,000 students
in the TCc each (Gökçekuş 2016, 18). The shares of the different groups of students vary among
universities (see figure A2.2) and among faculties within one institution. The undergraduate student body
of the Faculty of Engineering of the Eastern Mediterranean University (EMU), for example, consists of

44
   The development of the TCc higher education system has been closely linked to developments in Turkey. As a
result of a strong demand for higher education in Turkey combined with supply-side constraints, the capacity for
enrolment of the TCc higher education system emerged as a possibility to cope with the demand of Turkish citizens.
More recently, however, expansion of the Turkish higher education sector took place, raising the question of which
impact these developments will have on the inflow of Turkish students into the TCc.
45
   At this stage, the authors have no further information on the composition of this group (for example, related to
the socioeconomic background). Further research on this issue would be required, especially for questions
concerning equity in the TCc higher education system.

                                                                                                                 68
2,814 students of which 5.4 percent are from the TCc, 30.7 from Turkey, and 63.9 percent from other
foreign countries (Hocanın 2016, 21), exhibiting a share of foreign students from countries other than
Turkey that far exceeds the ones of most universities, including EMU itself.
Figure A2.2 Share of Students by Origin, 2014/15




Source: Author based on MoNE (2015, 121).
Note: For the full names of universities, see table A2.1.


As can be seen with respect to the countries from which the biggest cohorts of foreign students come,
the remarkable degree of internationalization does not pertain to students from the European Union
(EU). One of the main reasons for this are the political circumstances of the TCc, which pose challenges
for TCc universities when it comes to cooperation with European universities and which prevent them
from benefiting from the mobility programs such as Erasmus+.

Irrespective of differences among universities, there is a clear predominance of students enrolled in
bachelor’s degree programs (see figure A2.3). Of all students in the TCc,46 80.7 percent study at the
bachelor’s degree level, compared to 11.2 percent at the master’s degree level. The shares for the
associate degree and the doctoral level are even lower, amounting to 5.6 percent and 2.5 percent,
respectively.




46
     Excluding the students at the British University of Nicosia for which student data by degree level are not available.

                                                                                                                       69
Figure A2.3 Share of Students by Degree Level, 2014/15




Source: Author based on MoNE (2015, 122).
Note: Data for the British University of Nicosia not available; for the full names of universities, see table A2.1.


Despite the great number of graduates from TCc universities, systematic activities to build relationships
with alumni seem not to exist. This issue has nevertheless been recognized as important by some
institutions, which started to address alumni via alumni organizations and databases.



Pathways into and through the system
The basic requirement for higher education admission for TCc inhabitants is the completion of upper
secondary education (LoHE 37(1)A). Following preschool (before age 6), primary (age 7 to 11), and lower
secondary education provided in middle schools (age 12 to 14), there are different tracks of upper
secondary education provided by general high schools, vocational high schools, and technical high schools
(LoNE 25, 28, 31 & 34).47 Upper secondary education graduates from all tracks, as well as individuals who
performed sufficiently well in internationally accepted exams such as the International Baccalaureate,
meet one of the requirements for higher education entrance (LoHE 37(1)). For graduates from the
vocational track of upper secondary education, there is a special way of entering higher education. These
students are eligible for enrolling in two-year programs offered by universities in the field that




47
   In 2013/14, out of a total of 21,645 students at the lower and upper secondary education level, 18,249 were
enrolled in the general track, compared to 3,396 enrolled in the vocational track (MoNE 2014a:30). Most of the
students enrolled in the vocational track can be found at the upper secondary education level. Here, 3,202 out of a
total 11,307 students were enrolled in the vocational track (MoNE 2014a, 31). In 2013/14, 1,848 students graduated
from the general track (1,001 females and 847 males), compared to 677 graduates from the vocational track (287
females and 390 males) (MoNE 2014b, 43).

                                                                                                                      70
corresponds to their upper secondary education48 and can later proceed to four-year programs if they
have completed the two-year program successfully.

TCc students furthermore must meet additional requirements set by the system-level governing bodies
and the universities (LoNE 37). Additional requirements, according to the LoHE (37), comprise an affidavit
of support, provisions determined by the MoNE, the IUC, and YÖDAK, as well as provisions set forth in the
universities laws and bylaws. In the case of programs that are taught in English, students either have to
provide evidence of their English-language proficiency, take an examination conducted by the respective
university, or successfully complete a preparatory English-language program (LoHE 37(4) & 37(5)).

The concrete admission procedures are carried out by the universities themselves. Even though a central
admission system for domestic students was supposed to be established several years ago, this—
according to sector representatives—never became functional.

Another relevant feature of higher education admission relates to the conscription of males from the
TCc. Students that enroll in bachelor’s degree programs are exempt from military service, providing an
incentive to enroll in higher education. In the case of associate degree programs, however, there are no
such benefits, creating a strong incentive for associate degree holders to continue studying and not to
enter the labor market—as many employers would desire (see section on “Teaching and learning”).

The admission of Turkish citizens to TCc universities takes place via the Turkish student selection and
placement procedures (LoHE 37(1)C). This system (World Bank n.d.) consists of two consecutive exams,
the second of which determines whether an individual is eligible for entering a university and in which
institution he or she can enroll. The choice individuals have is determined by the exam results, the grade
point average from secondary education, and the individuals’ preferences. Within this process,
universities from the TCc are incorporated in the same way as Turkish universities. The procedures are
carried out by the Student Selection and Placement Center (ÖSYM), which acts under the aegis of the
Turkish Council of Higher Education (YÖK), which also determines the procedure’s framework. The overall
admission system for students from Turkey has a direct impact on the TCc higher education system, since
as part of the process, achievements necessary to enter particular institutions are determined. This opens
up the possibility for YÖK to directly influence not only the size of inflows of Turkish students into the
TCc’s higher education system, but also the quality of incoming students (EUA 2007, 7; Williams 2010, 4).

Students from foreign countries other than Turkey are admitted according to the criteria set by the
universities themselves (LoHE, 37(1)D). The admission to master’s degree and doctoral programs is
determined by the institutions as well (LoHE, 37(2)). In both cases, however, criteria for admission have
to be in line with the provisions of the LoHE and the ones developed by YÖDAK.

Albeit considered as underdeveloped by several stakeholders, approaches of guiding prospective
students have been established by the TCc administration. The guidance of students is anchored in the
LoNE (35). It is supposed to start at the secondary education level and to become more intense toward
the high school level. These efforts target in particular students during the last two years of upper
secondary education, for example, by offering questionnaires that support the choice of suitable subjects.



48
  Recognition of prior learning in the form of former vocational secondary education students not having to take
courses whose content has already been covered during secondary education, however, does not take place.

                                                                                                             71
                                        Teaching and learning
Universities in the TCc offer academic as well as vocationally oriented programs, and programs are
taught in English as well as Turkish. The different types of programs offered comprise mainly four-year
bachelor’s degree, one-to-two-year master’s degree and doctoral programs as well as the more
vocationally oriented, two-year associate degree programs (Gökçekuş 2016, 11). Even though the LoHE
(36(4)) also permits universities to arrange summer schools, these appear not to be offered. As
determined by the LoHE (36(3)), the language of provision of all higher education programs is supposed
to be English, but programs can be offered in Turkish (or other languages) if the universities’ board of
trustees decides so and YÖDAK approves—this, according to sector representatives, is the case for a
sizable share of the programs, some being taught in English as well as Turkish. Detailed regulations related
to the programs, including the exams, are supposed to be determined within the universities’ bylaws and
regulations (LoHE 36(5); see, for example GAU By-Law).

Most TCc universities exhibit a clear focus on the teaching mission, but the scope—and, in some cases,
the ambition—for improving processes of teaching and learning are limited. The legal framework
explicitly states that student-centered learning is one of the basic principles of higher education in the TCc
(LoHE 6(6)). Nevertheless, some university representatives have doubts about the importance ascribed to
the quality of processes of teaching and learning by some universities. Complicating efforts to enhance
the student experience further is the high teaching workload of academics (EUA 2007, 12). A particularly
pressing issue appears to be student dropout (Altınay and Ezel 2011, 1749), albeit for various reasons,
among them frequent changes of universities by students and the aspiration of several of the Turkish
students to return to Turkey for their studies upon having obtained sufficiently good grades to do so. Even
though data are available on this issue within universities, they are not made public.

Even though the TCc does not formally take part in European developments related to higher education,
such as the Bologna Process, these have nevertheless been on the agenda of different actors. The
adoption of European developments has, first, been anchored in the legislative framework. The LoHE
(21(12)) provides that higher education institutions must bring higher education in the TCc in line with the
provisions of the Bologna Process and the European Higher Education Area. There have, second, been
attempts to establish support structures on the system level.49 A Bologna team has been formed within
YÖDAK that has been engaged with higher education stakeholders from all over the EU and is supposed
to support the universities’ Bologna teams with the implementation process (Gökçekuş 2016, 35).

The real progress of implementing the Bologna Process seems to vary among and within universities. In
addition to the problem that the TCc does not formally take part in the Bologna Process,50 one challenge
to overcome is the importance of the U.S.-style credit system for TCc universities, which is based on
contact hours as opposed to the workload-based ECTS system. Its relevance at least partly stems from the
accreditation procedures by international agencies in which many TCc universities are engaged. Some
universities and their subunits have nevertheless initiated comprehensive efforts to implement the


49
   In addition, a study has been initiated by the MoNE that is supposed to align the statistics produced in the TCc to
the ones collected within the European Union (MoNE 2014a, :2).
50
   Other forms of integration of TCc universities into the European higher education system are limited as well. There
are, for example, only two universities that are members of the European University Association (EUA), namely
Eastern Mediterranean University and Near East University (EUA n.d.).

                                                                                                                  72
Bologna Process. In addition to the already implemented three-cycle structure, these efforts target key
elements such as the ECTS system, including the systematic calculation of workloads, the definition of
learning outcomes, the grade system, and the diploma supplement (EUA 2007, 11–12, 17). One promotive
factor is that the compliance with European developments is considered to be important for attracting
students who intend to continue their studies in Europe.

In addition to the inflow of foreign students, universities have engaged in other forms of
internationalization as well. Some universities offer programs established with universities from
European and other countries, some of them leading to joint degrees. Another form of
internationalization relates to the staff members of some institutions, which are recruited internationally.
Finally, a comprehensive discussion of internationalization approaches has been promoted in some
faculties as a result of the requirements of international accreditation agencies.

One particularly challenging issue in the field of teaching and learning is the relationship between higher
education and the economy. Despite the universities’ mission to contribute to the social and economic
development of the TCc stated in the law (LoNE 38; LoHE 5(2) & 21), connections between the two sectors
are not well developed. One example are internships, which, despite being systematically used within
selected cooperations (Zini, Marini, and Kan 2016, 41), appear not to be widespread. The lack of
connections between the two sectors, more generally, also pertains to the matching of offers by the
universities and the needs of the economy, among others negatively impacting the returns to higher
education for students. One reason for this situation is the state of the TCc economy (see box A2.2), in
particular the underdeveloped industrial sector, which limits the possibilities for cooperation. The dual
character of the labor market divided into attractive public sector jobs and less attractive private sector
jobs adds to this (Zini, Marini, and Kan 2016, 9; see also box A2.1). As a result, possibilities for graduates
from various fields to obtain well-paid jobs in the private sector are limited and there, furthermore, are
disincentives for many to even try to obtain private sector employment (Zini, Marini, and Kan 2016, 9).

Differing views on vocationally oriented education and special benefits related to enrolling in bachelor’s
degree programs aggravate the situation. Whereas midlevel skilled workers from vocationally oriented
programs at the secondary education level or from associate degree programs are in demand by
employers, the appeal of these programs is generally low for students and their parents. Benefits attached
to bachelor’s degree programs in terms of exemption from military service contribute to the lack of
appeal. Furthermore, the value added by associate degree programs for graduates from the vocational
track of secondary education is considered to be low by some private sector representatives. In addition
to the resulting scarcity of appropriately qualified workers, there is a perceived oversupply of graduates
in a range of fields, for example, law.

In the face of the abovementioned skills shortages, there are attempts by the TCc administration to
guide the related decisions of universities and students. One approach is to determine fields where
graduates are in high demand. The results of these analyses are, on the one hand, used to guide decisions
by the TCc administration related to the opening of new programs and their student intake. Students, on
the other hand, are incentivized to enroll in the programs in these fields via scholarships. Another
approach relates to the direct entrance route into higher education for graduates of the vocational track
of secondary education. These graduates receive scholarships for enrolling in programs close to the field
of their secondary education. One problem related to these approaches is a general lack of reliable data
on skill demands, which, more generally, hampers the alignment of the universities’ activities with the

                                                                                                           73
labor market’s demands. Adding to this is the issue that the exchange between universities and key
stakeholders such as TCc administration representatives and employers is not well developed.

Box A2.1 Characteristics of the TCc Labor Market

The structure of the TCc labor market corresponds to the basic structure of the TCc economy (see
box A2.2), which is characterized by the great significance of the service sector. The agricultural
sector accounted for less than 5 percent of total employment in 2010, and the industry sector around
10 percent (see figure A2.4). Also in terms of employment, the most important sector is the service
sector, including the public sector, trade, tourism, and education, accounting for close to 80 percent.
The public sector alone accounted for 16.8 percent of total employment, increasing to almost 30
percent if the education and health sectors are included.
Figure A2.4 Employment by Economic Sector, 2014


                                                    3%

                                              10%


                                         8%




                                                            79%




                              Services    Construction      Industry   Agriculture


Source: Author based on Zini, Marini, and Kan (2016, 19).
The private sector is dominated by small, family-run businesses. More than 50 percent of workers
are employed by companies with less than 10 employees, and 24 percent in companies with more
than 10 but less than 50 workers. Additional features of the private sector are a high degree of
informality and the fact that many low-skilled jobs are occupied by foreign, especially Turkish,
workers, leading to a workforce of which around one-third are foreigners.
Compared to the EU and Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD)
country averages, labor force participation and employment rates are low in the TCc. The labor
force participation rate in the TCc was 54 percent in 2014, compared to an average of around 58
percent for EU and 71 percent for OECD countries. A similar picture emerges related to the
employment rate, which amounted to an average of almost 66 percent among OECD countries,
compared to less than 50 percent in the TCc in 2014. Both labor force participation and employment
are particularly low for younger people and women. The gender gap and participation and
employment in general decrease with increasing levels of education (see figures A2.5 and A2.6).




                                                                                                          74
Figure A2.5 Labor Force Participation Rate by Education and Gender, 2014

 100%
  90%
  80%
  70%
  60%
  50%
  40%
  30%
  20%
  10%
    0%




                                              Total   Male   Female


Source: Zini, Marini, and Kan 2016, 12.
Figure A2.6 Employment Rate by Education and Gender, 2014

 100%
  90%
  80%
  70%
  60%
  50%
  40%
  30%
  20%
  10%
   0%




                                      Total           Male      Female

Source: Zini, Marini, and Kan 2016, 11.
Levels of unemployment, however, are close to the OECD average. In 2014, the unemployment rate
in the TCc was 8.3 percent, compared to an OECD average of 7.5 percent. Again, there are differences


                                                                                                       75
among groups. Youth unemployment amounted to 20 percent in general and to 27 percent for
women, compared to the EU28 average of only 11 percent.
One of the most striking features of the TCc labor market is its “dual” character, that is, the contrast
between a public sector characterized by favorable working conditions and a private sector that
many domestic workers shun. Compared to most parts of the private sector, public employment
offers good working conditions in terms of wages, working hours, leave policies, retirement age, and
pension contributions, as well as the stability of employment and unionization. The possibility for
public sector employees to have a second job in the private sector and to take on these jobs at lower
wages worsens working conditions in the private sector even further. This dual labor market, on the
one hand, has the effect that a nonnegligible share of TCc inhabitants, especially recently graduated
individuals and unemployed, strive to become civil servants and do not even try to gain private sector
employment, albeit also related to the scarcity of options. Anecdotal evidence nevertheless suggests
that this holds true mostly for dependent employment in smaller firms, whereas working for
multinationals as well as self-employment or ownership of small businesses are considered to be
viable options by TCc inhabitants. At least some employers complain about a lack of supply of
workers.
Marked differences between the public and the private sector can also be witnessed with respect
to the workers’ levels of education. The share of university graduates in the public sector is around
40 percent, compared to 24 percent in the private sector (see figure A2.7).
Figure A2.7 Employment in the Public and the Private Sector by Level of Education, 2014
(in percent)


                University
               High school
            Primary school
 Vocational/Technical high
    Junior/Vocational high
              Masters/PhD
                     None
         Primary education

                             0        5       10         15        20      25        30       35        40

                                               Private    Public

Source: Zini, Marini, and Kan 2016, 20.
Representatives of the TCc economy express concerns related to mismatches between the skills
potential workers have acquired and those that are in demand by the economy. a Among the
potential reasons given by employers is the overall low quality of specialized workers and higher
education graduates. This adds to a perceived oversupply of higher education graduates and a lack
of graduates from vocationally oriented secondary education programs. Some employers
furthermore consider domestic workers to be too costly and too demanding.
Source: Authors based on Zini, Marini, and Kan 2016.
Note: a. It is important to consider, however, that there is not much evidence for this claim. Neither are there
data on the skills acquired by students, nor on the skill needs of employers (Zini, Marini, and Kan 2016, 9).


                                                                                                                   76
In terms of unemployment, graduates of undergraduate programs fare better on the labor market than
some individuals with lower levels of education, but not all. Master’s degree and PhD holders, in
contrast, perform better than individuals with all other levels of education. Whereas labor force
participation and employment rates are higher for university graduates than for individuals with all other
levels of education (see box A2.1), the picture emerging related to unemployment is more complex (see
figure A2.8). Graduates from undergraduate programs exhibit a lower unemployment rate (9.4 percent)
than individuals without a diploma (15.3 percent) or not more than lower secondary education (11.7
percent). The unemployment rates of general as well as vocational and technical high school graduates,
at 6.5 percent and 8.5 percent, respectively, however, are lower. The unemployment rates of master’s
degree and PhD holders are lower than in all other groups (2.1 percent).
Figure A2.8 Unemployment Rate by Education and Gender, 2014

 25%
                                                        22%

 20%
                   16%
       15%
             15%
 15%                        14%                                                          14%
                                          13%                                 13%
                                                  12%              12%

                         9%                                                         9%
 10%                                                8%                   8%
                           7%
                                   6%                         6%            6%           6%
                                                                                               2%        3%
  5%                                                               3%
                                      2%                                                            2%

  0%




                                          Total         Men         Women


Source: Zini, Marini, and Kan 2016, 16.

Despite the comparatively low levels of unemployment, university graduates account for the biggest
share of unemployed. As a result of the overall high number of university graduates, even unemployment
rates that are lower or similar to the ones of individuals with other levels of education lead to university
graduates accounting for almost 30 percent of all unemployed (Zini, Marini, and Kan 2016, 15f) (figure
A2.9).




                                                                                                              77
Figure A2.9 Unemployed by Level of Education, 2014


                University                                                        29%

            Primary school                                              22%

               High school                                       17%

    Junior/Vocational high                                 15%

 Vocational/Technical high                         10%

                     None                   6%

         Primary education        2%

              Masters/PhD         1%

                             0%        5%        10%     15%      20%     25%     30%      35%

Source: Zini, Marini, and Kan 2016, 16.



                                                   Research
The extent of research activities in TCc universities is severely constrained by the overall focus on
teaching and a lack of research funding. Even though information on research activities in TCc universities
is scarce, the circumstances under which institutions operate and the statements by sector
representatives reveal that they are insufficiently developed. One reason for this is that institutions
prioritize teaching activities because of the need to attract students and the fees they pay in order to
secure a sufficient funding base, which also leads to a high teaching workload for academic staff members.
Another reason is that TCc universities have almost no access to common research funding sources. There
is no domestic research funding body and even public institutions receive comparatively small amounts
of direct subsidies. There are limited possibilities to compete for funds from the Turkish research funding
body, the Scientific and Technological Research Council of Turkey (TÜBITAK), and other sources such as
EU funds are not accessible to TCc universities due to the political circumstances. The option of using parts
of the tuition fee income to fund research seems not to be feasible either. According to an evaluation of
the public Eastern Mediterranean University under the European University Association’s (EUA)
Institutional Evaluation Programme in 2007 (EUA 2007, 18), only 1 percent of tuition fee income was
allocated to research and development, amounting to around 0.6 percent of the overall budget of the
institution.

Despite a lack of funding for research, there are instances of research-intensive subunits within
universities, and some institutions have developed measures to promote these activities internally.
Defying the overall bleak picture, selected subunits of TCc universities managed to engage in research
activities to at least some extent (EUA 2011, 9). Some universities provide direct financial support for


                                                                                                          78
research projects, some of them on a competitive basis. Researchers are also encouraged to apply for the
external funding sources available, such as TÜBITAK support. Additional incentives are provided by some
institutions through financial rewards for publications.

The relationship between universities and enterprises in the field of research and development is not
well developed, limiting the potential for research income from the business sector as well as the impact
of higher education on the economic development of the TCc (Altınay and Ezel 2011, 1750f). The state
of the TCc economy (for a general overview see box A2.2) is one of the major factors restricting close
relationships between the higher education sector and the economy—which stands in marked contrast
to the universities’ mission of contributing to the social and economic development of the TCc stated in
the legal framework (LoHE 21; LoNE 38). Special infrastructures for this purpose, for example, technology
parks, are absent or do not function very well. This situation restricts the universities’ possibilities of
attracting additional funding for research and development activities, which could compensate for the
lack of income for this type of activity (EUA 2007, 7). Positive impulses for the TCc economy from the
universities’ activities are negatively impacted as well.

 Box A2.2 The State of the TCc Economy

 The economic situation of the TCc is strongly influenced by the political circumstances (Zini,
 Marini, and Kan 2016, 6), especially the lack of possibilities for economic exchange. Not having
 direct access to international markets, leaving the Turkish market as the major destination for
 economic exchange, makes the TCc a closed economy. In addition to a lack of possibilities for
 exporting goods and services, there are high import costs for materials and other components that
 limit the possibilities for developing manufacturing capacities. An additional effect of the latter
 issue is that wages remain the main factor behind the competitiveness of TCc companies, which
 leads to the situation that some employers consider domestic workers too costly.
 The TCc’s economy is dominated by the service sector (Zini, Marini, and Kan 2016, 7f.), including
 the public sector, trade, tourism, and education. According to estimates for 2012, the service
 sector accounted for 58.7 percent of gross domestic product, compared to 6.2 percent and 35.1
 percent for the agriculture and the industry sector, respectively (CIA 2016). The shares of the three
 sectors among the labor force exhibit a similar structure. The agriculture sector nevertheless is
 important since (processed) agricultural goods account for around 40 percent of all exports.
 Another key characteristic of the TCc economy is the dominance of small, often family-owned
 businesses (Zini, Marini, and Kan 2016, 8).
 Source: Authors based on Zini, Marini, and Kan (2016); and CIA (2016).


To an extent not found elsewhere, the higher education sector itself is a sizable part of the economy.
Given the restrictions that most economic sectors in the TCc face, especially related to export activities,
tuition fees of foreign students (the non-Turkish ones paying them in dollars) in addition to their spending,
make a significant contribution to the TCc economy. It has been estimated that the overall spending of all
students in the TCc amounted to around one quarter of GDP in 2010 (Technopolis 2012). In contrast to
most other cases, where the role of higher education vis-à-vis the economy is primarily seen as a promoter
of development, higher education in the TCc is itself a major part of the economy, contributing strongly
to its growth (EUA 2007, 5). This function of higher education in the TCc is directly supported by the
universities, which are engaged in a range of comprehensive promotional activities aiming to increase the

                                                                                                          79
inflow of foreign students, among others via getting engaged with potential students already in their
home countries.



                                             Governance
System level
Key governance actors and bodies on the central level include the President, the Council of Ministers,
the Assembly, and the Ministry of National Education (MoNE). The President, for example, has a direct
influence on the central sector governing body YÖDAK (see below) through appointing its president and
two of its four members (LoHE 8(2) & 8(3)). The Council of Ministers is involved via deciding on bylaws
and regulations (LoHE 11(1)F, 12(2), 44), among them those that cover the TCc administration’s financial
support for universities and the licensing processes for the establishment of new universities, subunits,
and programs (LoHE 39(4), 43(2)), as well as the founding laws of universities (LoHE 11(1)E, 41(2), 41(6)).
It also has responsibilities related to YÖDAK (LoHE 19), such as setting the salaries of its members. The
Assembly is involved via appointing two of the four YÖDAK members (LoHE 8(3)). The Ministry of National
Education is supposed to be involved in a broader range of financial, legal, and social matters pertaining
to the sector. According to representatives from the “ministry” itself, however, approving diplomas issued
by institutions, being involved in the administrative procedures related to the delay of military service for
students, and managing scholarships accounts for the major share of the “ministry’s” activities.

The central governing body of the sector is the Higher Education Planning, Evaluation, Accreditation
and Coordination Council (YÖDAK), to which a second governing body, the Inter-University Council
(IUC), is connected. YÖDAK (Gökçekuş 2016, 32–34; LoHE 7–19) has a juristic personality and consists of
a president, who is appointed by the president of the TCc, and four additional members. The president
and the members serve four-year terms and can only be appointed twice. Two of the members are
appointed by the Assembly and two by the TCc President following their nomination by the IUC.
Administrative tasks are performed by a secretariat, staffed with public officials. YÖDAK’s responsibilities,
as defined by the law, comprise:

       planning the development of, and coordinating and managing, the higher education sector,
        including the process of establishing new universities, subunits, and programs, as well as matters
        of quality assurance
       acting as a consulting body to the MoNE and the Council of Ministers, especially related to the
        approval of bylaws and regulations for the sector, for whose implementation YÖDAK is
        responsible as well
       reviewing institutions’ bylaws and regulations
       monitoring institutions’ activities
       coordinating the activities of the IUC.

YÖDAK convenes at least once a month. In carrying out its responsibilities, YÖDAK can establish special
commissions that deal with particular matters and report to YÖDAK. It is responsible directly to the
president of the TCc, from whose budget YÖDAK is also financed.



                                                                                                          80
In contrast to the provisions within the legal framework, it appears that YÖDAK is not capable of
fulfilling all the responsibilities ascribed to it—leading to a lack of sector steering and management.
Sector representatives, including members of YÖDAK, point out that YÖDAK is not able to fulfill all its
responsibilities for various reasons (Altınay and Ezel 2011, 1752; Williams 2010, 3, 5). One reason is a lack
of human and other resources, especially if contrasted with the rapid expansion of the sector. Another
reasons is insufficient authority and influence vis-à-vis the universities, especially the private ones.
Irrespective of the provisions in the law, YÖDAK’s capacity to receive and process comprehensive
information and data, inspect institutions, and impose sanctions appears to be limited. This, among other
factors, hampers its influence related to quality assurance purposes and the supervision of the
establishment of new institutions—a function for which, according to officials, the MoNE relies heavily on
YÖDAK.

The second sector governing body, the Inter-University Council (IUC) (LoHE 20), has responsibility for
academic matters and additional tasks ascribed to it by YÖDAK. The academic matters in question
comprise issues related to doctoral degrees and academic staff titles. The IUC consists of two elected
members and the rector of every university. It convenes at least twice a year, chaired by the president of
YÖDAK. Critical opinions on the functionality of the IUC similar to the ones concerning YÖDAK can also be
found among representatives of the TCc higher education sector. Problems identified are a general lack
of cooperation between the universities and the rectors in the TCc (Silman, Gökçekuş, and İşman 2012,
33; Williams 2010, 2),51 at least partly related to the competition between TCc universities for foreign
students, and the fact that the IUC operates under the auspices of YÖDAK.

Strategic planning for the TCc higher education sector has been identified as a policy priority by many
stakeholders, especially since there currently is no sector strategy. The increase in the number of
universities and the marked growth of student numbers have engendered questions concerning the
future development of the system—which from the perspective of various actors is driven by nothing but
the objective of increasing the inflow of foreign students because of the business they generate—among
others related to potential limits for the expansion, and a potential negative impact of growth on quality
and, thereby, on the reputation of higher education in the TCc. A sector strategy, however, does not
currently exist,52 but would be very valuable in the opinion of many representatives of the TCc higher
education system. One precondition that would have to be met for the development of a sound strategy
would be comprehensive, reliable data on the higher education system, which are currently not available.




51
     However, an association of some of the TCc universities was founded in 2015 (see
http://cyprusuniversitiesassociation.org/).
52
   There are deliberations by the president of YÖDAK that also address strategy issues, but these have not been
developed in his capacity as a YÖDAK official and have not been communicated to many sector representatives
either, including other YÖDAK members. A draft higher education strategy (Technopolis 2012) was developed with
support from the Turkish government in 2012, but it has not been adopted by the TCc administration as an official
document.

                                                                                                              81
Institutional level
The internal governance structure of TCc universities on the central level comprises a board of trustees
and the rectorate, the senate, and the university executive board.53 The board of trustees (EUA 2007, 8–
9; LoHE 42; see also the EMU Statute) is the highest body of every university and, at least in the case of
public universities, is staffed with mostly nonacademic external members. The members, of which there
are at least seven, are chosen following procedures spelled out in the universities’ founding laws and
bylaws. The related decision-making powers usually reside with the institutions’ founders, that is, the TCc
administration in the case of public institutions and the owners in the case of private institutions. In the
case of Eastern Mediterranean University (EMU), for example, the board consists of nine members who
are appointed by the TCc president and the TCc administration. The board’s meetings are attended by the
rector as well. The board has far-reaching powers, among others related to human resource policies, the
appointment of the rector and other management staff of institutional subunits, and the institution’s
budget and tuition fees, but also related to regulations covering different activities of the institutions and
the establishment of new subunits. It generally has a say in all matters that have financial consequences.
Other duties can be described in the bylaws, which can also confer powers on the rector or the university
executive board. The board also represents the university before public bodies.

The far-reaching powers of the board of trustees have the potential to substantially impact the
governance and management of universities. As has been observed with respect to EMU (EUA 2007, 8),
there is a threat that the board will micromanage the institution. Sector representatives also pointed to
the inherent potential for conflict between board leaders and the rector (Williams 2010, 2), at least partly
related to the lack of sector competences of the former. Even though the relationship between the two
parties can function well—as has been reported by some university representatives—the current
constellation has the potential to reduce the efficiency and effectiveness of governance processes.

The rectorate, as the executive organ of a university, is responsible for the management of the
institution (LoHE 23; see also EMU Statute). It comprises the rector, vice-rectors, the secretary general,
and, if the institution’s founding law determines this, other individuals. The rector is the representative of
the university and appoints the vice-rectors. His or her main responsibilities consist of governing the
university; ensuring the functioning of all its bodies and units; implementing the decisions of the senate;
reporting on the institution’s activities to the board of trustees, the senate, and the executive board; and
submitting the budget to the board of trustees. The processes of appointment and removal of the rector
and his or her term in office are determined by the institutions’ laws and bylaws, as are the number and
terms of vice-rectors.

The highest academic organ of a university is the senate; the body responsible for administrative and
financial matters is the university executive board. The senate (LoHE 25; see also EMU Statute) consists
of representatives of the faculty, administration, and students, all of them elected by their constituency.
It convenes at least four times a year. Students, however, are only involved in issues that are of direct
relevance to them, but have a vote on them. The senate’s responsibilities pertain to academic matters
exclusively. This includes determining the principles related to education, research, and publishing;


53
  The legal framework also allows for governing structures different from these, if the reasons for the structure in
question, the aims, and the working principles are spelled out in the institutions’ founding laws or bylaws (LoHE
22(2)).

                                                                                                                 82
regulations related to academic affairs and working conditions, including minimum teaching hours; issues
related to objections to the decisions of the academic boards of the universities’ subunits; and planning
of academic matters. The university executive board (LoHE 26) consists of the rector, who is also the
chairman; administrators; and elected representatives, as determined by the institutions’ founding laws
and bylaws. It convenes at least once a month. Its responsibilities cover implementing the decisions of
other governing bodies, for example, the senate; preparing and implementing activity plans; examining
the investment programs, staff needs, and budget drafts and submitting them to the board of trustees;
dealing with objections to decisions of the administrative boards of lower institutional levels; and
distributing budget allocations to subunits.

When assessing the powers of the rectorate, the senate, and the university executive board, it is crucial
to take into account the far-reaching influence of the board of trustees due to its right to be involved in
all decisions with financial consequences for the university.

Parts of the governance structure on the central level, namely the executive organ, a collegial body and
an administrative board, can be found on other institutional levels as well. On the faculty level (LoHE
27–30; see also EMU Statute), the corresponding bodies are the dean, the faculty board, and the faculty
executive board. The dean is selected and dismissed according to the procedures determined in the laws
and bylaws of the institution and supported by vice-deans. His or her main duties comprise the
management and representation of the faculty toward governing bodies on the central level. The faculty
board and the faculty executive board are responsible for academic matters, including the academic
structure of the faculty, programs offered and student intake, and administrative matters respectively.
Whereas the same structure applies to institutes and schools of higher education (LoHE 33 & 34),
departments are governed by the department chair and the department board (LoHE 31).

Employers as key external stakeholders are not directly involved in the governance of TCc universities,
or in the governance of the entire system.

In contrast to the system level, strategic planning does take place within at least some universities.
METU NCC, for example, had a strategic plan for 2009–14, and EMU currently is in the process of
developing an institutional strategy following a comprehensive approach involving various internal
stakeholders. One key challenge, however, are current uncertainties related to the political situation of
the TCc, which—according to sector representatives—complicates making sound plans for the future.



                                       Quality assurance
External
Even though there is no domestic external quality assurance system in the TCc (Williams 2010, 2), two
forms of external quality assurance exist: the basic process of licensing in the course of the
establishment of new universities, subunits, and programs; and the accreditation of programs by
international agencies. For a new institution to open and start operations (LoHE 43), it must receive
permission from the MoNE and, subsequently, a license from YÖDAK. This process of “licensing” is
frequently, and mistakenly, termed “accreditation” in the TCc context. The licensing process basically
consists of an assessment by the MoNE and YÖDAK of the compliance of the institutions or subunits with

                                                                                                        83
criteria covering basic academic and infrastructure aspects set forth in the relevant regulation (Statute on
Program Opening). Under the Statute on Program Opening Appendix 2, to obtain a license to start
provision of higher education, applicants must:

       spell out basic principles related to the institution, unit, or program in question, among others
        covering the target group, possibilities for cooperation with the private sector, and the
        relationship with other subunits or programs of the institution and with other institutions
       provide adequate facilities and infrastructure for the administration; support services; academic
        processes, including required laboratories and library capacities; and extracurricular activities
       meet requirements concerning the number and qualifications of academic staff members
       ensure that academic staff members have internet access and an e-mail-address, which students
        must be provided with as well
       provide sufficient free work spaces for students.

These criteria are in addition to the ones directly stated in the LoHE, such as that to obtain the title
“university,” institutions must have a minimum of three faculties and a minimum of six programs (LoHE
14(3)), or that at least two-fifths of the teaching staff of a university must be employed full time (LoHE
35(5)). There are additional provisions applying to accreditation and evaluation processes of programs
(Statute on Program Evaluation), which are supposed to be renewed every five years and include site visits
to the institutions, but YÖDAK has yet to carry out any of these processes.

The second form of external quality assurance is the accreditation of programs by international
agencies. In the absence of a domestic external quality assurance agency, universities in the TCc turn to
international bodies for the accreditation of some of their programs. In the field of engineering, for
example, several institutions have their programs accredited by the Accreditation Board for Engineering
and Technology (ABET) from the United States. Other bodies to which the TCc universities have turned
are the (Gökçekuş 2016, 19–24; EMU n.d.b):

       Accreditation Agency for Degree Programmes in Engineering, Informatics, Natural Sciences and
        Mathematics (ASIIN)
       Accreditation Council for Pharmacy Education (ACPE)
       Agency for Quality Assurance through Accreditation of Study Programs (AQAS)
       Akkreditierungsagentur im Bereich Gesundheit und Soziales (Accreditation Agency in Health and
        Social Sciences; AHPGS)
       Foundation for International Business Administration Accreditation (FIBAA)
       American Communication Association (ACA)
       Association to Advance Collegiate Schools of Business (AACSB)
       European Association for Quality Language Services (EAQUALS)
       European Council for Business Education (ECBE)
       Mimarlık Akreditasyon Kurulu (Architectural Accrediting Board; MİAK)
       Mühendislik Eğitim Programları Değerlendirme ve Akreditasyon Derneği (Association for
        Evaluation and Accreditation of Engineering Programs; MÜDEK)
       Teaching Education Quality in Tourism (TEDQUAL)
       Türk Pisikologlar Derneği (Turkish Psychological Association; TPD).



                                                                                                         84
Some universities have been inspected by government bodies from countries that have a greater number
of citizens studying in the TCc. Another approach that universities have deployed or intend to deploy is
the Institutional Evaluation Program of the European University Association (EUA).

Special provisions apply to institutions that want to provide programs to Turkish students, which
requires a separate license from the Turkish Council of Higher Education (YÖK). Even though this process
is often termed “accreditation” as well, it is a licensing process whose basic approach is similar to the one
by YÖDAK spelled out above. In addition to needing the license for enrolling Turkish students, institutions
perceive it to be important for attracting foreign students from countries other than Turkey.

Despite not being comprehensively engaged in quality assurance activities, YÖDAK has different
connections to the international quality assurance community. It is an associate member of the
European Association for Quality Assurance in Higher Education (ENQA), a full member of the
International Network for Quality Assurance Agencies in Higher Education (INQAAHE) and the Central and
Eastern European Network of Quality Assurance Agencies in Higher Education (CEENQA), and a board
member of the Association of Quality Assurance Agencies of the Islamic World (AQAAIW) (Gökçekuş 2016,
34).



Internal
A common approach toward internal quality assurance appears not to exist in the TCc, but several
institutions have put this issue on their agenda (EUA 2011, 10f; Silman, Gökçekuş, and İşman 2012, 33).
A range of universities has started to anchor quality assurance activities within their institutional
structures, for example, by establishing internal bodies engaged in quality assurance or by appointing
individuals responsible for this task. At Eastern Mediterranean University (EMU), for example, there is a
Council for Quality Coordination and Evaluation, which is attached to the university executive council, and
one person in the rectorate assumes a key role in internal quality assurance processes. Among the
measures used are student evaluations and a global satisfaction survey of students, which is made publicly
available (EUA 2007, 11). In addition, all administrative units of EMU must be ISO 9001 certified (EUA
2007, 10). A different approach toward quality assurance can be found at Cyprus International University
(CIU). Activities related to quality improvement and to the implementation of elements of the Bologna
Process are institutionalized via two separate bodies, the Curriculum Committee and the ECTS Committee.
Both are located on the central university level and convene regularly to, respectively, promote the
standardization of the faculties’ activities and the implementation of matters related to the Bologna
Process. A coherent approach within the whole institution is furthermore supported by one official within
the rector’s office, with which the faculties are also in contact during the accreditation processes by
international agencies.

Internal quality assurance activities face a range of challenges. According to university representatives,
these comprise insufficient infrastructure and administrative support, a lack of engagement by university
staff members, and limited expertise on the matter (Silman, Gökçekuş, and İşman 2012, 34ff).




                                                                                                          85
                                                Financing
The financial situation of both public and private universities in the TCc is characterized by the
paramount importance of tuition fee income, despite the institutions’ freedom to generate income
from various sources. Potential income sources according to the LoHE (38–39) are tuition fees and other
payments by students, property, publications and sales, revolving funds,54 donations, and sponsoring.
Financial support from the TCc administration, from which both public and private institutions can benefit,
and financial support from Turkey, have to be added to this list. Tuition fees, however, remain the main
income source for both public and private institutions. Tuition fees are determined by university boards
of trustees (LoHE 42(3)) and vary between different groups of students; foreign students pay
comparatively high fees and pay them in dollars, whereas students from Turkey pay lower fees. The fees
of domestic students are in some cases subsidized by the TCc administration. In the case of public
institutions, one of the main reasons for the importance of tuition fees as an income source is the overall
low level of financial support from the TCc administration—even though the TCc administration appears
to act as a guarantor of last resort for all situations of financial hardship (EUA 2007, 7f). All types of
universities face challenges concerning their income-generating engagement with the private sector and
a lack of research funding possibilities (see also the section on “Research”). As an example, even the
Eastern Mediterranean University (EMU), as a public university, covered around two-thirds of its expenses
via tuition fees in 2007 (EUA 2007, 7) and—according to EMU representatives—the current share of public
subsidies as part of its total budget amounts to only around 12 percent.

Financial support from the TCc administration, although low, comes via different channels. In the case
of the two public universities, there are budgetary allocations provided for in the MoNE budget (see also
box A2.3). These funds are allocated based on political decisions for the most part, which are made on an
incremental basis. In the course of the general budgeting process, the two public universities propose
budgets to the MoNE, which forwards them to the Ministry of Finance. The Ministry of Finance might then
make adjustments to the budgets related to changes to the overall TCc budget or to potential situations
of hardship for institutions, for example, when expected student numbers are not met or when foreign
exchange rates change. The funds are transferred to the universities by the MoNE in quarterly payments.
There are supposed to be protocols between the TCc administration and the universities that serve as the
basis for the budgeting process. In practice, however, allocations do take place even in the absence of
such a protocol. Another form of financial allocations from the public purse is discretionary decisions by
the TCc administration to cover tuition and accommodation costs for a certain number of students, which
are made outside of the regular budgeting process and can apply to both public and private institutions.
This type of support, according to sector representatives, is related to the intake of foreign, non-Turkish
students in most cases. Even though there are different funding channels for public and private
institutions, the overall levels of support by the TCc administration remain very low, and there are no
extensive other funding-related types of support such as tax breaks. This has led to the feeling among
some sector representatives that the importance of and the benefits from the TCc higher education sector
for the TCc are not adequately recognized.




54
  Revolving funds are funds established within organizational subunits in which income from entrepreneurial and
other activities is accumulated.

                                                                                                            86
Box A2.3 Funding from the Higher Education Budget

Direct financial support from the TCc budget is mainly limited to the two public universities Eastern
Mediterranean University (EMU) and European University of Lefke (EUL). As shown below (see table A2.2),
EMU and EUL are the only universities that receive direct financial transfers from the TCc administration out
of the TCc budget; the only other institution receiving this type of financial support is the Ataturk Teacher
Training College. In 2014, EMU and EUL received TL 27 million and TL 7 million, respectively, in this way. There
are, however, also allocations by the TCc administration from grants of the Republic of Turkey that cover
capital expenditures. These transfers added another TL 10.5 million to the EMU budget and another TL 4.2
million to the EUL budget. The two branch campuses of Turkish universities also profit from this funding
stream; METU NCC received TL 10 million and ITU NCC TL 30 million.
Table A2.2 Higher Education Budget, 2014

                                                                                      TL mil.       US$ mil.a
  Total Education Budget (MONE)                                                       515.7          235.8
   Higher Education (Transfers to Universities)                                       100.2           45.8
    Recurrent transfers to universities (from the TCc budget)                          35.5           16.2
     Eastern Mediterranean University (EMU)                                            27.0           12.3
     Lefke European University (LEU)                                                    7.0           3.2
     Ataturk Teachers Training School                                                   1.5           0.7
    Capital transfers to universities (from grants of the Republic of Turkey)          64.7           29.6
     Capital expenditures (METU campus)                                                10.0           4.6
     Capital expenditures (ITU campus)                                                 30.0           13.7
     Capital expenditures (EMU)                                                        10.5           4.8
     Capital expenditures (LEU)                                                         4.2           1.9
     Capital expenditures (others)                                                      2.5           1.1
     Promotional activities of universities                                             2.5           1.1
     Supporting scientific research activities                                          1.5           0.7
     Instructor advancement program                                                     1.0           0.5
     Support to accreditation and Bologna Process                                       2.5           1.1
   Higher Education Directorate                                                        26.4           12.1
    of which, transfers to households                                                  25.1           11.5
     Scholarships                                                                      22.2           10.1
      Domestic (TCc) students                                                           7.4           3.4
      Overseas scholarships                                                             6.8           3.1
      Foreign scholarships                                                              0.7           0.3
      Full- and half-term specialization scholarships                                   7.0           3.2
    Other transfers                                                                     3.3           1.5
      Other transfers                                                                   0.3           0.1
      Foreign educational transfers                                                     3.0           1.4
Source: World Bank 2016, 17.
Note: a. At TL 2.19 per US$ (2014).
Funding allocations from the TCc administration to private universities are restricted to specific projects,
but they also benefit from the scholarships provided. One way in which private universities benefit
financially from the TCc administration is support for activities such as technological improvement or
accreditation procedures. Private institutions also profit from the scholarships disbursed by the TCc
administration. In 2014, more than TL 22 million was disbursed as scholarships in total (see table A2.2) to
both public and private universities.
Source: Authors based on World Bank 2016.



                                                                                                                   87
Financial support originating from Turkey comes in two forms: support from the Turkish aid agency and
loans from private banks. Funds that come from the Turkish government are disbursed to the universities
via the Turkish aid agency. There apparently was a focus of this type of financial support on investments
in previous years. Recently, however, the focus has shifted toward support for quality-assurance-related
purposes. This leaves a second type of financial support, that is, loans from private banks, as the main
source of investment funding for some institutions. These loans can be obtained at favorable conditions
by universities, which pay low interest rates and benefit from long maturities.

The financial autonomy of TCc institutions appears to be high. Universities are—at least in theory—able
to generate revenues from various sources, and even the public universities are able to generate surpluses
and transfer them to the next year. There are nevertheless processes by which the Ministry of Finance
checks the compliance of the budgets of the public universities with relevant regulations.



Student funding
All higher education programs involve tuition fees (LoHE 41(4)), but there are different support
mechanisms for domestic and foreign students. First, some universities, such as EMU and METU NCC,
offer fee waivers to some of their students. Second, there are different types of fee waivers and
scholarships from the TCc administration financed by the MoNE. According to “ministry” representatives,
2,500 to 3,000 students receive scholarships for studying at public and private TCc universities. Another
group of scholarships covers the around 100 to 150 students a year who go to Turkey to study in fields of
high priority for the TCc. The candidates are selected via their achievements in secondary education, in
contrast to TCc students admitted via the Turkish selection and placement procedures. For these
scholarships, fields of study where there is a lack of graduates in the TCc are identified by the TCc
administration, and Turkish officials then decide where the quota is allocated. In the case of scholarships
that fund studies abroad, there is no obligation, according to MoNE officials, for students to return to the
TCc once the program has been finished, nor is there an obligation to repay scholarships if graduates stay
abroad.55




55
  The scholarships for students studying for their specialization in medicine in Turkey are an exception. The
beneficiaries are obligated to work in the TCc for two years after finishing their studies.

                                                                                                          88
                                             References
Altınay, M., and C. Ezel. 2011. “Challenges Facing Higher Education Sector in North Cyprus.” In
        International Higher Education Congress: New Trends and Issues (27–29 May): 1746–54, Istanbul.
Auswärtiges         Amt.            2015.           “Zypern.”          http://www.auswaertiges-
       amt.de/DE/Aussenpolitik/Laender/Laenderinfos/01-Laender/Zypern.html.
CIA   (Central Intelligence Agency). 2016. “The World Factbook. Europe:                            Cyprus.”
       https://www.cia.gov/library/publications/the-world-factbook/geos/cy.html.
EMU (Eastern Mediterranean University). N.d.a. “EMU History.” http://ww1.emu.edu.tr/en/about-
      emu/emu-history/c/593.
––––––.      N.d.b. “Accreditations, Recognitions, Rankings, Memberships and Partnerships.”
          http://ww1.emu.edu.tr/en/about-emu/accreditations-recognitions-rankings-memberships/597.
ESG (Standards and Guidelines for Quality Assurance in the European Higher Education Area). 2015.
       http://www.eua.be/Libraries/QA_Connect/Revised_ESG_approved_May_2015.sflb.ashx.
Estermann, T., T. Nokkala, and M. Steinel. 2011. University Autonomy in Europe II - The Scorecard. Brussels:
       European                                    University                                  Association.
       http://www.eua.be/Libraries/Publications/University_Autonomy_in_Europe_II_-
       _The_Scorecard.sflb.ashx.
EUA (European University Association). 2007. “Eastern Mediterranean University. EUA Evaluation
      Report.” http://ww1.emu.edu.tr/emu_v1/media/assets/files/eua-report-en.pdf.
––––––. N.d. “EUA Members Directory.” http://www.eua.be/about/members-directory.
Gökçekuş, H. 2016. “Quality Assurance & Development of Higher Education.” Presentation prepared for
       the "Workshop on Strategic Directions for the TCc Higher Education Sector, June 14, Nicosia, TCc.
Gover, A., T. Loukkola, and A. Sursock. 2015. ESG Part 1: Are Universities Ready? Brussels: European
       University          Association.         http://www.eua.be/Libraries/publications-homepage-
       list/eua_occ_papers_esg_web.pdf?sfvrsn=4.
Harvey, L., and D. Green. 2006. “Defining quality.” Assessment and Evaluation in Higher Education 18 (1)
        (July):                                                                                   9–34.
        http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/0260293930180102?journalCode=caeh20.
HEFCE (Higher Education Funding Council for England). 2015: Higher education course changes and
       closures:             statement               of              good               practice.
       http://www.hefce.ac.uk/news/newsarchive/2015/Name,107145,en.html.
Hocanın, A. 2016. “Faculty of Engineering.” Presentation prepared for the World Bank team, April 26,
       Nicosia, TCc.
ITU NCC (Istanbul Technical University Northern Cyprus Campus). N.d. “Foundation Process.”
      http://www.kktc.itu.edu.tr/index.php/en/kurulus-suereci-1.
Kennedy, Donald. 1999. Academic Duty. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
METU NCC (Middle East Technical University Northern Cyprus Campus). N.d. “General Information.”
      http://ncc.metu.edu.tr/general-information.



                                                                                                         89
MoNE (Ministry of National Education). 2014a. “Educational Statistical Yearbook. 2013–2014.” Ministry
      of National Education, Ankara.
––––––. 2014b. “Past Education Statistics. Summary.” Ministry of National Education, Ankara.
––––––. 2015. “Educational Statistical Yearbook. 2014–2015.” Ministry of National Education, Ankara.
Silman, F., H. Gökçekuş, and A. İşman. 2012. “A Study on Quality Assurance Activities in Higher Education
        in North Cyprus.” In International Online Journal of Educational Sciences 4 (1): 31–8.
        https://www.researchgate.net/publication/268198319_A_Study_on_Quality_Assurance_Activiti
        es_in_Higher_Education_in_North_Cyprus.
SPO (State Planning Organization). 2015. “Economic and Social Indicators. 2014.” State Planning
       Organization, Nicosia.
Sursock, A. 2011. Examining Quality Culture Part II Processes and Tools – Participation, Ownership and
        Bureaucracy.          Brussels:            European           University           Association.
        http://www.eua.be/pubs/Examining_Quality_Culture_Part_II.pdf.
––––––. 2015. Trends 2015: Learning and Teaching in European Universities. Brussels: European University
       Association.                              http://www.eua.be/Libraries/publications-homepage-
       list/EUA_Trends_2015_web.pdf?sfvrsn=18.
Technopolis. 2012. “Cyprus Higher Education Strategy and The Action Plan Proposal.” Technopolis.
       (Unpublished.)
UK (University of Kyrenia). 2016. “About Us.” http://kyrenia.edu.tr/?page_id=1961.
Williams, P. 2010. “Proposals for the development of a quality assurance system for higher education in
       North Cyprus.” (Unpublished.)
World Bank. N.d. “Higher Education in Turkey.” (Unpublished.)
World Bank. 2016. The Turkish Cypriot Community. A Rapid Assessment of the Higher Education Sector,
       Selected Lessons from International Experience and Recommendations. Washington, DC: World
       Bank.
Zini, M., A. Marini, and E. O. Kan. 2016. “The Turkish Cypriot Community. An Assessment of Labor Market
         Conditions and Constraints to Private Sector Employment.” (Unpublished.)


Laws and regulations
Ethical Coordination Board Statute. Adopted under Article 44 of the Law on Higher Education.
Girne American University Teaching and Examination By-Law for Associate and Bachelor’s Degrees.
Law on Higher Education. Law No 65/2005, adopted on 13 December 2005.
Law on National Education. Law No 17/1986, adopted on 23 May 1986, amended and consolidated with
       the Laws No. 10/1987, 40/1992, 53/2002, and 55/2006.
Regulation on the Equivalence of Diplomas Received from Institutions of Higher Education Abroad.
        Adopted under Article 44 of the Law on Higher Education.
Statute on Program Evaluation and Accreditation Criteria. Adopted under Article 12(2) of the Law on
        Higher Education.


                                                                                                       90
Statute on Program Opening, Preliminary License and Education Starting License for Higher Education
        Institutions. Adopted under Articles 41(3), 41(6) and 43(2) of the Law on Higher Education.
TCc Constitution. http://www.cypnet.co.uk/ncyprus/main/polsyst/constitution/.
Statute Establishing the North Cyprus Education Foundation and Eastern Mediterranean University.
        Combining the statutes 18/1986, 39/92, 58/92 and 37/97, and incorporating the la Law
        Establishing the North Cyprus Education Foundation and the Eastern Mediterranean University
        (Amendment No. 1/86-2/97).


University websites
American University of Cyprus: http://www.auc.edu.tr/en/.
British University of Nicosia (BUN): http://www.bun.edu.tr/.
Cyprus International University (CIU): http://www.ciu.edu.tr/en/.
Eastern Mediterranean University (EMU): http://ww1.emu.edu.tr/en/.
European Leadership University: http://europeanleadershipuniversity.com/.
European University of Lefke (EUL): http://www.eul.edu.tr/en.
Girne American University (GAU): www.gau.edu.tr.
ITU Northern Cyprus Campus (ITU NCC): http://www.kktc.itu.edu.tr/.
METU Northern Cyprus Campus (METU NCC): www.ncc.metu.edu.tr.
Near East University (NEU): https://neu.edu.tr/.
University of Kyrenia (UK): http://kyrenia.edu.tr/.
University of Mediterranean Karpasia (UMK): http://www.akun.edu.tr/en-US.




                                                                                                91
     Annex 3: Agenda Workshop on Strategic Directions for the TCc
                                Higher Education Sector
                                Nicosia, Court of Audit, 14 June 2016

_____________________________________________________________________________________



9.00–09.15       Welcome and introduction to the topic of the workshop
                 Representative of the TCc Administration and EUCC
                 EC Representative
                 Nina Arnhold, Senior Education Specialist, The World Bank


09.15–10.15      The TCc higher education sector – status quo and options
                 - Main features of the TCc higher education sector
                 - Status quo of the strategy discussion
                 Presentation: Olgun Çiçek, Board Member, YODAK
                 Comments:
                 -   Necdet Osam, Rector, EMU
                 -   Turgut Tümer, Campus President, METU, Northern Cyprus Campus
                 Discussion


10:15–10.30      Coffee Break


10.30–12.30      Key developments in European higher education
                    Universities and economic impact: Hans Vossensteyn
                    Governance and quality assurance: Andree Sursock
                    Financing of higher education: Frank Ziegele
                          PBF, diversification of income streams (incl. through
                             internationalization)
                    Teaching, learning, recognition: Andy Gibbs
                          Student-centered approach
                          How to make sure that programs are relevant for the labor market
                          Recognition issues
                    Research and contribution to regional development: Melita Kovacevic
                    Q&A


                                                                                              92
12.30–13.00            Light Lunch


13.00 – 14.30          Discussion in break-out groups56
                      SWOT TCc higher education by subsector
                      Linking TCc status quo to European developments
                      Input for strategic directions


14.30–15.15            Reporting back


15.15–15.30            Conclusion/next steps
                       Nina Arnhold, The World Bank
                       TCc Administration and EUCC
                       EC Representative




There will be simultaneous interpretation.




56
  There will be five breakout groups, covering (1) universities and economic impact; (2) governance and quality
assurance; (3) financing of higher education; (4) teaching, learning, recognition; and (5) research and contribution
to regional development.

                                                                                                                 93
             Annex 4: Bios of Authors and Workshop Contributors


                          Dr. Nina Arnhold is a Senior Education Specialist at the World Bank, leading
                          higher education operations in various European countries. She has worked for
                          the World Bank since 2006, among others as Human Development Sector
                          Coordinator for Central Europe and the Baltics, and as Program Leader for
                          Higher Education and task team leader for lending operations and Technical
                          Assistance programs in the Middle East and North Africa region.
                          Before joining the World Bank, Dr. Arnhold worked as a Senior Program
                          Manager for the European University Association (EUA) in Brussels, Belgium,
                          among others on Bologna reforms, quality assurance, and higher education
                          financing, and for the German Center for Higher Education (CHE) and the
Boston Consulting Group. She holds a DPhil and a Master’s degree in Comparative and International
Education from the University of Oxford, United Kingdom, and a Master’s degree in the humanities from
the Technical University of Berlin, Germany. She has authored and co-authored books and reports on
higher education and competitiveness, including in the context of the Europe 2020 agenda.

                       Professor Olgun Çiçek has been a Board Member of the Higher Education Planning,
                       Evaluation, Accreditation and Coordination Council (YÖDAK) since January 2014.
                       From 2011 to 2014, he was Vice-Rector of the Girne American University.
                       Professor Çiçek completed his Master’s degree at the University of Surrey in the
                       United Kingdom in 1992, and his PhD at Dokuz Eylul University in Turkey in 1998.
                       Since then he has been continuing his academic career both as an administrator
                       and faculty member in the fields of business, management, and tourism at
                       different universities, namely in Turkey, Singapore, the United Kingdom,
                       Switzerland, Dubai, and the Turkish Cypriot community. During his service at
                       various universities in different countries, he has been in managerial positions,
including Head of Department, Deputy Director for the Social Sciences Institute, General Manager for the
Training Hotel, Dean of Business School and Dean of Research and Development, and Vice-Rector. He has
been providing services to universities, industry associations, and other institutions with his 24 years of
teaching, research, and managerial experiences, as well as his multinational and broad outlook from his
experience gained in Europe, the Middle East, and the Mediterranean region.

                            Andy Gibbs is a Senior Lecturer in Nursing in the Department of Nursing and
                            Community Health at the Glasgow Caledonian University, United Kingdom,
                            and a distinguished expert on European higher education. As a former UK
                            Bologna Expert active in different working groups and committees, he has
                            extensive experience with European higher education reforms, especially in
                            the areas of recognition, qualification frameworks, and learning-outcomes-
                            based curriculum development.
                            Having obtained a Master’s Degree in International Nursing and Education
                            from the Edinburgh Napier University, United Kingdom, he was Head of the
                            university’s School of Community Health and President of the Florence

                                                                                                        94
European Nursing and Midwifery Network. Mr. Gibbs has been involved in a range of events and projects
with ministries and universities related to higher education reforms, and has been engaged in the
Institutional Evaluation Program of the European University Association and in reviews of national quality
assurance agencies for the European Association for Quality Assurance in Higher Education (ENQA).

                             Professor Melita Kovačević is a full professor in the Department of Speech
                             and Language Pathology of the University of Zagreb, Croatia, where she also
                             served as Vice-Rector for Research and Technology. She has been active in
                             various international and European higher education bodies and
                             committees dealing with the Bologna Process and, among others, research
                             and doctoral education.
                             Having obtained a Master’s degree from the University of Eastern
                             Washington in the United States, and a PhD from the University of Zagreb
                             School of Medicine, she held various research and visiting positions in
                             universities in Europe and the United States, and founded and heads the
Laboratory for Psycholinguistic Research as well as the interdisciplinary doctoral program Language and
Cognitive Neuroscience.

                       Professor Necdet Osam has been the Rector of the Eastern Mediterranean
                       University (EMU) since 2014. A professor of English Linguistics, he has been
                       teaching, researching, and publishing in the field for more than 20 years. He is the
                       editor and academic advisor of a range of journals, has chaired several
                       conferences, and is a member of various academic societies, including the
                       European Association of Language Testers and the Linguistic Society of Turkey.
                       Since 2012, he has been the Founding Director of the Rauf Raif Denktaş Research
                       Center of Turkish Cypriot History.
                       Before becoming rector, he worked at the Middle East Technical University and
                       the Çankaya University in Ankara, and already held various posts at EMU,
including Dean of the Faculty of Education and Advisor to the Rector. Professor Osam holds a Bachelor’s
degree from Selçuk University, Konya, and a Master’s degree from Hacettepe University, Ankara, both in
Turkey. Having completed Teacher Training at Cambridge University in the United Kingdom, he obtained
his PhD from the Department of English Linguistics at the Hacettepe University Faculty of Letters.

                      Vitus Puttmann is a World Bank Consultant working on projects in the field of higher
                      education funding, governance, and strategy development. An educationalist by
                      training, he previously was Project Manager at the Centre for Higher Education
                      (CHE) in Guetersloh, Germany. At the CHE, he investigated the relationship between
                      higher education and the world of work, the higher education entrance of
                      nontraditional students, and professionally oriented education programs.
                      He holds a Master’s degree in Educational Science from the University of Muenster,
                      Germany, where he also obtained a Bachelor’s degree in sociology and philosophy.




                                                                                                        95
                       Andrée Sursock, PhD, is a Senior Adviser at the European University Association
                       (EUA). A distinguished expert in the field of higher education quality assurance, she
                       is involved in a range of EUA projects on the topic, recently conducted a study on
                       internal quality processes in universities, and serves as a board member of quality
                       assurance agencies in the French Community of Belgium, Switzerland, and Dubai.
                       As Deputy Secretary General at the EUA between 2001 and 2009, she was
                       responsible for developing the EUA’s quality assurance policy positions and
                       activities. She holds a first degree in philosophy from the University of Paris I,
                       Panthéon Sorbonne, in France, and a PhD in social-cultural anthropology from the
                       University of California, Berkeley, in the United States. Before joining the EUA, Dr.
Sursock was Director of Development at the Centre for Higher Education Research and Information of the
Open University, United Kingdom, taught at a variety of institutions in the United States, and held an
administrative post at Stanford University.

                            Professor Turgut Tümer is the President of the Northern Cyprus Campus of the
                            Middle East Technical University (METU) and a professor of Mechanical
                            Engineering. During his academic career, he published actively in his main
                            research fields of biomechanics, machine dynamics, and weaving machinery,
                            and conducted various research and industrial projects. He has been teaching
                            in Turkey and Saudi Arabia, among others at METU where he received three
                            awards for his teaching and thesis supervision activities.
                            In addition to his academic functions, Professor Tümer has held different high-
                            level posts in the field of higher education governance and management.
                            These include being a Member of the Faculty of Engineering Steering Board at
METU, an Advisor at the Turkish Higher Education Council (YÖK), and the Associate Vice-President of the
Scientific and Technical Research Council of Turkey (TUBITAK), where he had a leading role in the Vision
2023 Project designing the science and technology policy of Turkey. Having obtained a first degree from
the Middle East Technical University in Ankara, Turkey, he received his Master’s degree and his PhD in
Textile Technology from the Institute of Science and Technology (UMIST) at the University of Manchester
in the United Kingdom.

                       Professor Hans Vossensteyn is Director and Senior Research Associate of the
                       Center for Higher Education Policy Studies (CHEPS) at the University of Twente,
                       Enschede, Netherlands, and Professor and Program Leader of the MBA Higher
                       Education and Research Management at the Osnabrück University of Applied
                       Sciences, Germany. In his mainly international comparative quantitative and
                       qualitative research, he has concerned himself with various higher-education-
                       related topics, including institutional policy and strategic management.
                       Having joined CHEPS as a Senior Research Associate in 1991, he was seconded as
                       an External Advisor to the Dutch Ministry of Education, Culture and Science, The
                       Hague, from 1998 to 1999. Professor Vossensteyn serves on various advisory
boards and strategic committees, including the Committee on the Future Sustainability of Dutch Higher
Education and the editorial boards of several journals. He is a frequent speaker at international
conferences and engaged in a range of international consultancies. He holds a Master’s degree in Public
Administration and a PhD in Higher Education, both from the University of Twente.

                                                                                                         96
                           Professor Frank Ziegele is the Executive Director of the Centre for Higher
                           Education in Gütersloh and Professor of Higher Education and Research
                           Management at the Osnabrück University of Applied Sciences, both in
                           Germany. In Osnabrück, he is in charge of the MBA Higher Education and
                           Research Management and of the Erasmus Mundus Master in Research and
                           Innovation in Higher Education. In his work on higher education he covers a
                           wide range of topics, among them higher education funding, governance, and
                           controlling.
                           An economist by training, Professor Ziegele gained his PhD from the Ruhr
                           University Bochum, Germany, with a thesis on “Universities and Financial
Autonomy.” He worked as a research assistant at the Chair of Public Finance in Bochum, held various
lecturer posts in Germany and Austria, and is co-editor of a journal on higher education and research
management. He held several board positions, including on the board of the German Society for Higher
Education Research, and worked as researcher, consultant, and trainer in the field of higher education
policy and management for almost 25 years. Professor Ziegele has extensive experience in international
higher education development, among others, via his leading involvement in the development of the
multidimensional ranking U-Multirank and his various consultancies for the World Bank.




                                                                                                   97
            Annex 5: List of Workshop Participants
Name                      Surname                       Institution
MOHAMMAD          SHIKAKHWA                MIDDLE EAST TECHNICAL UNIVERSITY
S.TURGUT          TÜMER                    MIDDLE EAST TECHNICAL UNIVERSITY
ALI               YILDIRIM                 MIDDLE EAST TECHNICAL UNIVERSITY
                                           TURKISH CYPRIOT CHAMBER OF
HASAN C.          ENGELKIRAN               COMMERCE
AHMET             PEHLIVAN                 YODAK
MUSTAFA           KURT                     NEAR EAST UNIVERSITY
NEZAKET           DOGAN                    BRITISH UNIVERSITY OF NICOSIA
OZGE              GUNER                    INTERN-EUCC
AYKUT             HOCANIN                  EASTERN MEDITERRANEAN UNIVERSITY
OZGUR             ALDEMIR PASTIRMACIOGLU   “STATE PLANNING ORGANISATION”
                                           TURKISH CYPRIOT CHAMBER OF
BAHADIR           MAHMUTOGLU               SHOPKEEPERS AND ARTISANS
DUDU              OZKAN YAVUZ              NEAR EAST UNIVERSITY
UTKU              ALTINKALEM               “MINISTRY” OF EDUCATION
HALIL             NADIRI                   CYPRUS INTERNATIONAL UNIVERSITY
MEHMET            TOYCAN                   CYPRUS INTERNATIONAL UNIVERSITY
BERNA             BERBEROGLU               EUROPEAN COMMISSION
MEHMETALI         EGEMEN                   EUROPEAN UNIVERSITY OF LEFKE
SADIK             ULKER                    EUROPEAN UNIVERSITY OF LEFKE
DURSUN            KOC                      ISTANBUL TECHNICAL UNIVERSITY
ESER              GEMIKONAKLI              KYRENIA UNIVERSITY
NECDET            OSAM                     EASTERN MEDITERRANEAN UNIVERSITY
AHMET             SOZEN                    EASTERN MEDITERRANEAN UNIVERSITY
ORHAN             KORHAN                   EASTERN MEDITERRANEAN UNIVERSITY
CAHIT             EZEL                     EASTERN MEDITERRANEAN UNIVERSITY
MURAT             ARTUGRALI                EASTERN MEDITERRANEAN UNIVERSITY
                                           TURKISH CYPRIOT CHAMBER OF
DENIZ             BERKOL                   INDUSTRY
OLGUN             CICEK                    YODAK
SEBNEM            PEKDOGAN                 “MINISTRY” OF EDUCATION
OYA               ERTUGRULOGLU             CYPRUS AMERICAN UNIVERSITY
SENOL             BEKTAS                   NEAR EAST UNIVERSITY
HALE              OZGIT                    CYPRUS INTERNATIONAL UNIVERSITY
DERVIS            KIRIKKALELI              GIRNE AMERICAN UNIVERSITY
FATIH             HUSEYIONGLU              GIRNE AMERICAN UNIVERSITY
CENK              PASA                     AMERICAN UNIVERSITY OF CYPRUS
FATOS             SILMAN                   CYPRUS INTERNATIONAL UNIVERSITY


                                                                         98
