Acknowledgements
This report was prepared by a team composed of Annette Omolo, Bruce Macphail
and Rose Wanjiru under the guidance of Tiago Peixoto. The team received inputs
from Jez Hall (PB Specialist, PB partners UK) and Giovanni Allegretti (Coimbra
University, Portugal) who have been instrumental in training Kenyan counties on
implementing Participatory Budgeting.

The report benefitted from the insights of peer reviewers namely Sanjay Agarwal
and Simon Carl O’Meally; and editorial contributions from Anne Wangalachi.

Partnership with Kenyan Counties engaged in the first phase of the Kenya
Participatory Budgeting Initiative was instrumental in the development of this
report. The Kenya Participatory Budgeting Initiative (KBPI) is implemented under
the World Bank’s Kenya Accountable Devolution Program led by Helene Carlsson
Rex and is a joint initiative with the Governance Practice under the leadership of
Tiago Peixoto. The KBPI also partners with key government institutions, namely
the Ministry of Devolution and Planning, the Council of Governors, the Commission
on Revenue Allocation and the Kenya School of Government.

The team acknowledges the critical support provided by KADP donors, namely
Denmark, DFID, European Union (EU), Finland, Sweden and USAID.




Design: Claudio Mendonca
Images: World Bank




© 2017
Contents
Executive Summary.......................................................................................................................1
Process improvements..................................................................................................................1
Emerging outcomes......................................................................................................................2


Introduction...................................................................................................................................4
Background ...................................................................................................................................4
Defining Participatory Budgeting................................................................................................5
Understanding and contextualizing Participatory budgeting 10 steps framework................7
Participatory Budgeting in Kenya................................................................................................8


Implementation of Participatory Budgeting in Makueni County.............................................10
County Profile................................................................................................................................10
Development budget allocated to PB...........................................................................................14
Key Elements of the PB Process in Makueni .............................................................................15
The case of participation in Makindu Ward...............................................................................19


Implementation of Participatory Budgeting in West Pokot......................................................23
County Profile................................................................................................................................23
Development budget allocated to PB...........................................................................................24
Key elements of the PB Process...................................................................................................28
Implementation: Success stories from citizen engagement.....................................................40


Emerging results and early lessons of implementing Participatory Budgeting ...................41
Process improvements..................................................................................................................41
Emerging outcomes......................................................................................................................42
ABBREVIATIONS AND ACRONYMS

      CEC    County Executive Committee

     CEPPS   Civic Education and Public Participation

      CSO    Civil Society Organization

      ECD    Early Childhood Development

        FY   Financial Year

      KPBI   Kenya Participatory Budgeting Initiative

      MCA    Member of County Assembly

       PB    Participatory Budgeting

      PMC    Project Management Committee
                                                                                                Participatory Budgeting in Makueni and West Pokot Counties
Executive Summary



 T
              he introduction of “citizen engagement” into law is an idea that is gaining
              popularity around the world1. New provisions in Kenya’s Constitution enshrine
              openness, accountability and public participation as guiding principles
              for public financial management. Yet, translating participation laws into
 meaningful action on the ground is no simple task. Experience has shown that in the
 absence of commitment from leaders and citizens and without appropriate capacities
 and methodologies, public participation provisions may lead to simple “tick the box”
 exercises2.

 With support from the Kenya Participatory Budgeting Initiative (KPBI), and the
 commitment from West Pokot and Makueni County leaders, Participatory Budgeting
 (PB) is being tested as a way to achieve more inclusive and effective citizen engagement
 processes while complying with national legal provisions. The initial results are quite
 encouraging.


 Process improvements
 Inclusiveness – While typical county budget consultations in Kenya consist of few
 meetings and limited inclusiveness, PB has increased opportunities for women and
 remote communities to take part in expenditure prioritization. Makueni County
 follows a sequential process of identifying citizens’ priorities, starting at the hyperlocal
 level and moving up through levels of community organization. With a total of 3,867
 meetings and over 350,000 participants, this process includes forums in villages,
 sub-wards, wards, sub-counties, and one county forum, where 1,000 individuals

 1  See, for instance, Sintomer et al. 2013, McNulty & Wampler 2015.

 2  See, for instance, McNulty 2013.                                                                              1
                                                             from across the county set the final expenditure priorities. In West Pokot County,
                                                             prior to the implementation of PB, women were systematically excluded from budget
                                                             consultations, representing on average no more than 11% of participants. With the
Participatory Budgeting in Makueni and West Pokot Counties




                                                             introduction of PB, a combination of new engagement methods and consultations held
                                                             closer to women’s homesteads there was a three-fold increase in their participation
                                                             (35%). While further inclusiveness is an imperative, these are promising results that
                                                             will inform future adjustments of participatory processes in the two counties.

                                                             Credibility – Previous budget consultations in the counties consisted of unstructured
                                                             hearing processes. During these, community representatives proposed an endless list of
                                                             (often unfeasible) projects for the county. The selection of projects to be implemented
                                                             remained at the discretion of government officials, based on no formal criteria. This
                                                             method, which raised citizens’ expectations and simultaneously incentivized “selective
                                                             hearing” on the part of government officials, undermined citizens’ very trust in
                                                             the participation process and fueled officials’ skepticism towards the value of such
                                                             processes. The adoption of PB provides clear rules of the game for; the identification,
                                                             selection, prioritization and validation of projects. PB ties the selected projects to a
                                                             specific percentage of the capital budget (approximately 30%), thus better managing
                                                             expectations and enhancing the overall credibility of the process.

                                                             Compliance – The introduction of PB has facilitated compliance with legal requirements
                                                             for public participation included in the County Government Act (2012) and the Public
                                                             Financial Management Act (2012). The PB approach has also been shown to lower
                                                             the transaction costs of such compliance. By providing a structured, streamlined and
                                                             coherent process, PB avoids fragmented public participation that results in repetitive
                                                             and overlapping activities which can be costly in terms of participants’ and organizers’
                                                             time and resources.


                                                             Emerging outcomes
                                                             Budget variance – Some early lessons are emerging on how PB is impacting the
                                                             content of county budgets. Prior to PB, capital expenditures were debated between
                                                             sectoral departments who were, in large part, concerned with increasing their budget
                                                             envelopes, which resulted in resource allocation that did not respond to actual needs.
                                                             An analysis of recent Makueni and West Pokot budgets shows that the PB process
                                                             has changed this logic, with budget allocation increasingly aligned with citizens’
                                                             priorities.

                                                             Previously, project proposals focused on building new facilities. Under the PB process
                                                             citizens’ preferences have tended towards the upgrading or renovation of existing
                                                             facilities. While previously sectoral departments were interested in larger flagship
                                                             projects, county budgets now include more community-level projects such as
               2                                             women’s development funds and wells (e.g., women’s development funds and wells).
Budget approval – PB has also facilitated budget approval mechanisms by involving
Members of the County Assembly (MCAs), who tended to disagree over resource
allocation and the use of funds, in the deliberation process. Their participation in –




                                                                                              Participatory Budgeting in Makueni and West Pokot Counties
and commitments made during – the PB meetings have allowed for swifter approval
of budgets. In West Pokot, where the County Assembly members would previously
deliberate on and change the allocations made. However following their engagement
in the PB forums, fewer changes were made to the proposed budgets.

Of course, these are preliminary results. Significant challenges remain, such as furthering
inclusiveness and strengthening citizens’ capacity to oversee budget execution.

This report describes the Participatory Budgeting approach being adopted by
Makueni and West Pokot counties. It seeks to provide detailed information on
the step by step process that the two Counties have adopted and describes the
support provided by the KPBI. At the national level, the report is mostly targeted
towards PB practitioners and county officials interested in introducing PB as part
of their budgeting cycle. The report seeks also to inform a wider audience of PB
and citizen engagement practitioners on the Kenyan experience to date.




                                                                                                             3
Participatory Budgeting in Makueni and West Pokot Counties




                                                                  Introduction
                                                                   Background



                                                                   T
                                                             1	                he Constitution of Kenya 2010 and supportive legal framework on devolution,
                                                                               place strong emphasis on public participation, transparency and accountability
                                                                               as a means of improving efficiency, equity and inclusiveness of government
                                                                               and service delivery3. The devolution framework contains multiple provisions
                                                                   requiring county governments to make information publicly available and consult with
                                                                   citizens in planning, budgeting and monitoring of service delivery.

                                                             2	    Over the past three years, counties have made some considerable progress
                                                                   implementing the legal provisions, but with some challenges. Counties have been
                                                                   allowing reasonable access to citizens to participate in the formulation of budgets
                                                                   and policies through holding of public forums and Town Hall meetings. They have
                                                                   also been establishing mechanisms to facilitate public communications and access to
                                                                   information with the widest public outreach through the use of local FM stations and
                                                                   community radio, county websites and social media, public notices and print media.
                                                                   However, progress has been varied and counties still need to improve the quality of
                                                                   budget consultation forums for more meaningful engagement. In particular, counties
                                                                   continue to face challenges related to tokenistic forms of participation where forums
                                                                   are held without provision of adequate notice or advance copies of budget documents
                                                                   in simple user-friendly versions. The meetings often do not follow an organized
                                                                   format, where citizens are asked to prioritize their needs within a set budget ceiling.
                                                                   Both counties and CSOs have expressed concerns that meetings too often turn into
                                                                   citizens presenting wish lists in an unsystematic way making it difficult to translate
               4                                                   them into practical development projects.

                                                                   3  Constitution of Kenya 2010; County Government Act 2012; Public Financial Management Act 2012; Urban Areas and
                                                                   Cities Act 2011
3	   Counties have sought guidance on how to make their processes more inclusive
     at the same time ensuring that citizen voices are represented in objective and
     structured processes. At the national level, the Ministry of Devolution and Planning




                                                                                                                           Participatory Budgeting in Makueni and West Pokot Counties
     with support from the World Bank has developed guidelines on public participation
     that provide counties with a set of minimum standards, principles and best practice
     to effect quality citizen engagement4. The Ministry, jointly with other stakeholders,
     has also developed civic education curricular. The Kenya Participatory Budgeting
     Initiative builds on ongoing practices supporting public participation and social
     accountability at both the county and national levels. It seeks to strengthen the
     capacity building processes by introducing an innovative tool at the County level
     for a more intensive form of public participation.

4	   The specific objectives of the Participatory Budgeting Initiative are to:

       i.	 Demonstrate feasibility and effectiveness of Participatory Budgeting in the
             Kenyan context at the County level

      ii.	   Provide an effective method for Counties to respond to constitutional require-
             ments with regards to public participation in the budget process

     iii.	   Reinforce the County governance system through the promotion of transpar-
             ency, participation and accountability

     iv.	    Provide an opportunity to citizens, focusing on traditionally excluded groups,
             to meaningfully engage in County budgeting processes

      v.	 Increase County responsiveness to citizens’ needs


     Defining Participatory Budgeting
5	   Participatory Budgeting (PB), is the process of directly involving local people in
     making decisions on the priorities and spending for a defined amount of the public
     budget5. This means engaging residents and community group representatives of
     all sections of the community to discuss and vote on spending priorities, as well
     as giving citizens a role in the scrutiny and monitoring of the public spending and
     budget implementation.




     4  See http://www.devolutionplanning.go.ke/wp-content/uploads/2016/04/County-Public-Participation.pdf

     5  For a more detailed definition of PB, see https://democracyspot.net/2012/09/12/participatory-budgeting-seven-de-
     fining-characteristics/

                                                                                                                                          5
                                                                  Benefits of PB

                                                             6	   Originating from the Brazilian city of Porto Alegre in 1989, participatory budgeting has
                                                                  been used in over 2500 cities, municipalities and local authorities all over the world6.
Participatory Budgeting in Makueni and West Pokot Counties




                                                                  This is a proof of its great adaptability as a methodology of citizens’ engagement. These
                                                                  international experiences have generated a growing body of evidence on the benefits of
                                                                  involving citizens in budgeting decisions, including increases in tax revenues, pro-poor
                                                                  spending, access to services, and decreased infant mortality7. Participatory budgeting
                                                                  has also been shown to be attractive in benefitting various stakeholders from elected
                                                                  officials, administration and the community, see Figure 1.1.

                                                                                                             Participatory budgeting



                                                                      government officials                     Politicians                             Community/public


                                                                      Implementing Development                Closeness to the people                 Voice heard
                                                                      Projects                                Election pledges fulfiled               Empowerment
                                                                      Generating reports                      Increased approval rating by the        Community cohesion
                                                                      Evaluating social and economic          public                                  Economic and Social benefits
                                                                      impact                                  Improved communication                  of the projects (employment,
                                                                      Government closer to the                Re-election                             services)
                                                                      people                                                                          Sense of control and ownership
                                                                      Credibility of government




                                                                                             Figure 1.1: Benefits of Participatory Budgeting to Key Actors

                                                             7	   Experiences of county budget consultations are that in most cases they fall short in:

                                                                  Ensuring citizen priorities are identified;

                                                                   Applying an objective selection process based on technical input, voting or consensus;

                                                                  Establishing project management teams which incorporate citizens’ represen-
                                                                     tatives that can participate in the supervision of the implementation of projects.

                                                             8	   Participatory budgeting typically employs a ten-step model8 that provides
                                                                  a framework through which counties can initiate new or adapt their current
                                                                  budget consultation processes to make them more effective and people-centered.
                                                                  Participatory budgeting further enhances the budget consultations by ensuring

                                                                  6  See Sintomer et al. 2013.

                                                                  7  See, for instance, Gonçalves 2014, Beuermann & Amelina 2014, Touchton & Wampler 2014.

                                                                  8  The Ten Steps PB Framework has been originally developed by Prof. Giovanni Allegretti, leading expert in Participato-
              6                                                   ry Budgeting and one of the advisers of the KPBI.
Participatory budgeting 10 steps framework




                                                                                     Participatory Budgeting in Makueni and West Pokot Counties
1    Choose the general strategy (where, what, when).



2    Prepare the organizational model (e.g. any online engagement, budget
     set aside for PB, source of the PB fund e.g. Donor, CDF, Ward Fund, etc.),
     rules of engagement.



3    Develop informational material and mobilize citizens.



4    Hold first public meeting to identify citizens’ priorities, and proposals
     for projects; ensure consultation with as many people as possible. Make
     process/venue easily accessible by going to where the people are (do not
     ask them to come to you); incorporate people’s values and needs.



5    Carry out technical evaluation of proposal (are they the right solutions,
     the right projects and quality projects).



6    Refine and publish the final list of proposals (ensure citizens are involved
     wherever possible).



7    Voting day (may include use of ballots, online voting, sms, or queue voting).



8    Create voluntary working groups on selected proposals (the project
     committees comprising of citizens have ownership over the projects and
     ensure they are implemented).



9    Approve the budget and achieve sign off by accountable body. Ensure that
     all the approved citizen projects have budget allocation.



10   Review what went well and what did not go well; measure the
     effectiveness and efficiency of the interventions and projects; Assess the
     impact and sustainability of the projects.                                                      7
                                                                  that the outcomes of the process results in implementation of projects that have
                                                                  specifically being selected by the citizens, going from open ended consultations to
                                                                  binding consultations. Box 1 below provides the 10 steps of the PB framework.
Participatory Budgeting in Makueni and West Pokot Counties




                                                                  Understanding and contextualizing
                                                                  Participatory Budgeting in Kenya

                                                                  Design and Methodology

                                                             9	   The Participatory Budgeting (PB) initiative started in October 2015 with a workshop
                                                                  held at the Kenya School of Government with the County Governments. International
                                                                  experts provided an overview of PB including experiences, lessons and results in other
                                                                  countries. Counties shared relevant Kenyan experiences in planning, budgeting and
                                                                  participation. The workshop was followed by a seminar focusing on PB 10 steps with
                                                                  a narrower group of twelve counties that showed interest and have ongoing activities
                                                                  in public participation in the budget process. The identification of participating
                                                                  Counties was made according to a combination of self-selection and criteria. About
                                                                  ten counties committed to roll out PB by confirming that they were willing to:

                                                                  Commit a percentage of their development budget (at least 5% of overall
                                                                    investment/development budget) to a process of participatory budgeting where
                                                                    citizens’ decisions on what investments the county makes will be binding;

                                                                  Adopt participatory budgeting in the next budget process;

                                                                  Demonstrate that citizen input in previous county budget exercises was integrated
                                                                    into the final budget

                                                             10	 Out of the ten counties, six were selected based on their initial action plans to
                                                                  implement participatory budgeting.

                                                                  Training participating counties in the design of the PB process

                                                             11	 For the Financial Year (FY) 2015/16 three counties were selected for further training
                                                                  on design and implementation. The other three counties would implement PB in the
                                                                  next FY 16/17 while the remaining 41 counties will benefit through the accompanying
                                                                  measures of the Initiative, which include site visits during key moments of the
                                                                  PB process (e.g. deliberation and prioritization), annual workshops, as well as the
                                                                  learning materials produced.

                                                             12	 A design workshop was held with the three counties, Makueni, West Pokot and
                                                                  Kakamega in January 2016, engaging a broad set of actors from government and
                                                                  civil society. The objective of the workshop was to facilitate county officials and
                                                                  civil society representatives to design PB processes at the County level, as well
              8                                                   as provide them with the necessary tools and methods for the implementation of
    PB within the budget preparation cycle ending on 30th June 2016. The workshop
    was followed by a set of activities intended to provide individualized support to
    the counties as well as to strengthen the authorizing environment during the




                                                                                                Participatory Budgeting in Makueni and West Pokot Counties
    implementation process: ongoing organizational and mentoring support, design
    and implementation of outreach strategies, and support with the production and
    dissemination of communication material.

    Key action points agreed upon by the counties during the workshop

13	 By design, the KPBI seeks to foster a County owned process with each county,
    carrying out its own unique activities. Each of them is designed to respond to locally
    defined problems and tailored to the processes that Counties identified during the
    design training and in consultation with the elected officials.

14	 During the PB Design Training, each of the three Counties found a different approach
    that matched their own local culture and context.

15	 Some of the practices Makueni County has espoused in the previous financial years
    closely relate to the PB methodology, and the county opted to revise their existing
    processes. The county aimed at the engagement of communities at the lowest levels
    possible (village, from previous sub-ward level) with an emphasis on involvement
    of thematic groups particularly women and youth.

16	 West Pokot, struggling with issues of geography and extreme rurality had to think more
    radically, working with thematic approaches, and servicing basic needs. The county set
    aside 5% of the total development fund to specific projects identified and prioritized by
    the communities through the PB process. The projects would be Ward level projects.

17	 Kakamega County hoped to pilot the PB process in 12 wards (6 rural and 6 urban)
    under the banner Maendeleo Mashinani (Development at the grassroots). The county
    officials planned to use the already allocated Ward Development Funds to drive
    this process. The success of the pilot in 12 wards would enable the county expand
    the process to other wards in the next budget cycle. The county however did not
    eventually implement the PB process due to failure to commit to the process.

18	 It was anticipated that the Counties would use the PB 10 steps framework as a guiding
    document and adapt their practices over time from their experience and that of other
    Counties with which they will be encouraged to exchange during KPBI learning events.
    Also, given the fact that phase 1 of the KPBI was launched while the Fiscal Year was well
    underway, the initial county initiatives are expected to be very preliminary but provide
    some introductory lessons for building upon (see Annex I for the action plans).

19	 This report captures the experiences of Makueni and West Pokot Counties.


                                                                                                              9
Participatory Budgeting in Makueni and West Pokot Counties




                                                              Implementation of Participatory Budgeting
                                                              in Makueni County

                                                             20	 Makueni County lies in the arid and
                                                                semi-arid regions of eastern Kenya.                             County Profile
                                                                The County is divided into Six (6)
                                                                                                                           Location: Eastern Kenya
                                                                sub-counties. These are, Makueni,
                                                                Mbooni, Kaiti, Kibwezi East, Kibwezi                                Size : 8,034.7 Km
                                                                West and Kilome which are further                               Population : 922,183
                                                                subdivided into 30 wards. The county
                                                                                                                                             Economy
                                                                government    further   devolved   the
                                                                                                                              Subsistence Agriculture
                                                                wards into 3 sub-wards, making them                (livestock farming, fruit growing,
                                                                a total of 90 sub-wards.                    grains, bee-keeping) & small trade and
                                                                                                                             commerce, eco-tourism.

                                                                                                                             No. of sub-counties: 6

                                                                                                                                     No. of wards: 30

                                                                                                                       No. of households: 186,478

                                                                                                                                               Climate
                                                                                                                                        Temperatures
                                                                                                                Minimum 12 °C - Maximum 28°C




     10                                                                                                  Table 2.1 - Makueni County Characteristics and Data
The PB Ten Steps in Makueni




                                                                                                   Participatory Budgeting in Makueni and West Pokot Counties
1     Step 1: General Strategy
      Key elements of the approach

    A continuation with the past tendencies, in line with provisions in the legal framework
      and perfecting them.

    Introduction of meetings at village level, (one level below sub- ward) and selection and
      validation of projects at both sub-county and county levels.

    Identification of needs and possible solutions for various thematic groups: youth,
      women, persons with disabilities, orphans and vulnerable children, Persons Living with
      HIV/AIDs and the small scale traders.

    PB applied to 12% of entire county budget (32% of development budget)

      Central Goals and underlying values for prioritizing citizen engagement

    Improve accountability and integrity –reinforces credibility of government.

    Inclusiveness - access the villager who has never left his/her immediate environment,
      except to go the market place and never proposed a project).

    Equity and fairness - equal resource allocations to each ward.

    Promote civism - to meet the Constitutional requirement to engage citizens in decision
      making.

    Responsiveness – to ensure that services are better tailored to local circumstances and
      targeted to meet local needs.


2     Step 2: Organizational model
    Existing logo: “Andu Mbee” which means people first.

    Strapline: “O Kila Nyumba Kalila”, which means every household will have equal
      opportunity for the shared resources.

    The County introduced a mission, its rallying call being “Our County, our Future,”

    Participation process is based on a model that uses sub-territories.

    The County has organized structures in place to facilitate public participation. This is a
      joint process between the Country Treasury and County Department of Devolution and
      Public Administration.

    Under the Department of Devolution, there are officers in place to conduct civic
      education and public participation (Civic Education and Public Participation –CEPPS
      officers). The CEPPs were trained on the new elements of the PB process before
      implementation.

    The county conducts civic education through training of trainers’ process. After CEPPs
      are trained, they train 30 interlocutors from each of the 30 wards. In total there are 900
      interlocutors who conduct civic education in the county.                                              11
    A civic education handbook has been developed and is used during trainings.
                                                             3     Step 3: Mobilization
                                                                   Channels of mobilizing citizens:

                                                                 A public advertisement, as required by law, was placed in the major dailies by the County
Participatory Budgeting in Makueni and West Pokot Counties



                                                                   Treasury, detailing dates, venues & timings for the meetings. It targeted meetings from
                                                                   the ward levels upwards. It also provided for written submissions to be made to the
                                                                   finance official via email.

                                                                 Local radio: Talk shows and radio announcements were used to inform the public about
                                                                   the scheduled public forums. This had the greatest outreach and impact

                                                                 Announcements were made at public gatherings such as church meetings and local
                                                                   administrative barazas. This was also very effective.

                                                                 Ward administrators mobilized citizens through the village leaders and opinion leaders.

                                                                 The governor’s office, other county officials and local leaders utilized social media,
                                                                   telephone calls and sms to reach the public. They also leveraged Whatsapp groups,
                                                                   Facebook and twitter handles.




                                                             4     Step 4-8: Public forums, selection of projects, priority lists, technical evaluations
                                                                   Public forums
                                                             5
                                                                 To create an enabling environment for citizens to participate in the development of

                                                             6     policies and budgets, the county has developed a public participation framework.

                                                                 The framework is in line with section 14 of the fourth schedule of the Constitution, which
                                                             7     requires Counties to enable participation at the lowest possible level.

                                                                 The framework aims to reduce/eliminate gatekeepers to the participation process and
                                                             8
                                                                   ensure unrestricted access to community members to hear their voices.

                                                                   Selection of projects & priority lists

                                                                 Deliberation and selection of projects took place at every administrative level.

                                                                 Mapping of the ward was undertaken by citizens to guide the selection of projects.

                                                                 From each of the levels, 11 people were selected as the development committee to
                                                                   represent the community at the next administrative level.

                                                                 Priority lists of projects captured and presented at the next level for deliberation and
                                                                   selection. A final priority list was validated at the County Forum.

                                                                   Technical Evaluations

                                                                 Technical input from the departmental staff can change a project given the limited
                                                                   technical knowledge of the citizens when identifying a project.

                                                                 In the preparation of the budget for financial year 2016/17 technical evaluation was
                                                                   conducted after the citizens selected the projects.

                                                                 In the next phase for the budget 2017/18, the county will be looking towards introducing
                                                                   technical input earlier so that citizens prioritize and make final decisions on projects
                                                                   based on technical assessments
      12
9      Step 9: Approval of Budget by Assembly
     The ward development proposals presented by the citizens were captured in the final
       executive budget presented to the County Assembly in May 2016.




                                                                                                   Participatory Budgeting in Makueni and West Pokot Counties
     County Assembly public participation forums were held in the first to second week of
       June 2016 to ascertain the development proposals from citizens.

     According to a new legislation, the County Assembly can only make amendments to a
       ceiling of 10% of the entire budget.




10     Step 10: Monitoring Project Implementation
     The uniqueness of Makueni’s participation model is that it involves citizens in the
       implementation of projects.

     This process is managed through the Project Management Committee (PMC). This
       ensures accountability as the community members provide checks and oversight
       alongside the County Assembly.

     To form the PMCs, the departments responsible for the implementation of the project,
       in collaboration with the Public Participation Officers and Ward Administrators, mobilize
       communities for a public forum.

     During the forum the officials provide feedback on the approved projects and respective
       budget allocated and the implementation plan for the projects. The community members
       elect the PMC members to provide oversight throughout the project implementation.




                                                                                                         13
Participatory Budgeting in Makueni and West Pokot Counties




                                                                  Development budget allocated to PB
                                                             21	 In Makueni, the Ward Development Projects, are those subjected to a participatory
                                                                  approach and with support of the KPBI have adopted participatory budgeting. There
                                                                  has both been a progressive increase in the number of projects and amounts of money
                                                                  allocated to the participatory process since FY 2013/14 at the start of the devolution
                                                                  process as shown in Figure 2.1. In the consultations for the budget 2016/17, 32 percent
                                                                  of the county development budget was dedicated to participatory processes. The
                                                                  budget allocated for PB was in total Kshs. 823 million which comprised 12 percent of
                                                                  the total budget.

                                                                                                 Makueni county development budget

                                                             Budget in millions KShs   0           500            1000        1500           2000   2500   3000

                                                                        FY 2013/14

                                                                        FY 2014/15

                                                                        FY 2015/16

                                                                        FY 2016/17



                                                                                       total development budget       ward development projects



      14                                                                               Figure 2.1: Budget allocations to participatory processes:
   Key Elements of the PB Process in Makueni
   Public Forums, Selection of Projects, Priority Lists and Technical
   Evaluation




                                                                                           Participatory Budgeting in Makueni and West Pokot Counties
                        County People Forum
                        1,000 delegates


                        Sub-County People’s Forum
                        Elects a development committee of 11


                        Ward People’s Forum
                        Development Committee of 11 members


                        Sub-Ward People’s Forum - 60 Units
                        Development Committee of 11 members


                        Village Cluster People’s Forum - 315 Units
                        Development Committee of 11 members from each village


                        Village People’s Forum - 3455 Units
                        Each elects a development committee of 11 members

                  Figure 2.2: Schema of public participation in Makueni County


   At the village level:

22	 The village structures had previously been neglected as an avenue for engaging
   citizens and were introduced as a strategy to be more inclusive. The county revived
   the use of the structures in 2016, asking community residents in the 3,455 villages
   to discuss and identify the following issues:

   The development projects in the area and who had initiated them, whether gov-
     ernment or civil society.

   What needed to be done in the village.

23	 The issues were deliberated in each village for a period of 5 days in meetings
   convened by the village headman. The villagers were asked to elect a representative
   leadership of 11 people to take that agenda to the next level. The villages were then
   placed into groups of commonality based on geographic and development interests,
   resulting in 315 clusters. Every cluster had between 11-15 villages and each village
   was represented by the 11 elected representatives who presented the development
   proposals from their villages. From the cluster meetings, an initial priority list of
   development and governance issues was developed.
                                                                                                 15
                                                                 Sub-ward and ward levels:

                                                             24	 At the sub-ward level, 3-7 village clusters were grouped together to present their issues
                                                                 and proposed projects and these were then prioritized. Meetings then progressed to
Participatory Budgeting in Makueni and West Pokot Counties




                                                                 the ward level, the first level of official representation. Here the residents affirmed
                                                                 the projects prioritized at the sub-ward and proceeded to prioritize ward level
                                                                 projects. Previously, political representatives, could insert their own priorities even
                                                                 when they had heard the views of the people. According to the county government
                                                                 officials the process of prioritization of projects brought forward from the sub-
                                                                 ward level protects what was said at sub-ward level as new projects cannot be
                                                                 introduced at ward level. The cascading process of the priority list ensures that
                                                                 projects confirmed at the ward level are those that emerged from the lower level
                                                                 (including villages) and gained continuous support to the next level of discussion
                                                                 up to the ward level.

                                                             25	 From each of the levels, 11 people are selected as the development committee that
                                                                 represents the community. Within these committees there is no chairperson, or
                                                                 secretary or treasurer, so that it is a representation of equals. What pertains is
                                                                 members chairing different sessions, so that everyone has a taste of the leadership.
                                                                 This builds capacity of the community. There is no specific profile on competence
                                                                 (academic) for selection of the development committee, but it is mostly based on
                                                                 skills and leadership that individuals are known for at the village level.




                                                                                                    “Devolution is about reaching everybody
                                                                                                  in the quiet places, the nooks of the village,
                                                                                                                     hearing everyone’s voice,
                                                                                                                the people who do not speak,”

                                                                                                                                      Kawive Wambua
                                                                                                   County Executive Minister, Ministry of Devolution and Public
                                                                                                               Service (Currently Executive Minister for Roads)




     16
    The Sub-County Level Forum

26	 At the sub-county level two key processes took place

   Validation of the projects identified and passed at the Ward level – this involved




                                                                                           Participatory Budgeting in Makueni and West Pokot Counties
      ensuring projects were accurately captured.

   Identification of priority projects that would be implemented at county level –
      involved plotting of sub county headline projects and Ward level flagship projects
      on a map (those initiated and completed in 2014/2015 fiscal year). Using the map
      the participants then engaged in identifying priority projects.

    Diaspora Meeting

27	 The Diaspora meeting is organized by the County to seek views from
    professionals working in Nairobi, but who are originally from Makueni. The
    professionals have organized themselves into a group, the Makueni County
    Development Forum and the forum is organized based on representation from
    the ward and sub-county level. Each of the 6 sub-counties has members from the
    various wards, each ward in the sub-county is represented by a chairperson and
    one of the chairpersons is elected as chairperson of the sub-county forum. All the
    sub-counties are represented by an elected overall chairperson who facilitates the
    consultative meeting with the county.

28	 The members from the forum engaged the county on the progress made on the
    implementation of the budget 2015/16, summaries of the projects proposed by
    citizens at the ward level meetings on the budget 2016/17 and problems and issues
    affecting thematic groups and the proposed interventions.

    The County Forum (Makueni People’s Forum)

29	 The forum was held on March 18th 2016, one week after the ward level meetings.
    The main objectives were:

   The sub-counties community representatives shared development proposals
      for the 2016/17 budget for review by the Governor and Cabinet and for onward
      presentation to the County Assembly.

   The County Treasury presented the entire draft budget 2016/17 to the county and
      members of the public.

30	 The County’s emphasis on civic education was evident. In his key note address,
    the governor focused on educating the public on their role in the development
    process. He elaborated why the county was engaging citizens in deliberations
    on the budget, reading out specific legislation from the Constitution and County
    Government Act 2012.
                                                                                                  17
                                                             31	 One important activity at the meeting was the affirmation by the public of
                                                                 what they had selected at both the sub-county forums and ward level forums.
                                                                 The county presented the final list of projects and where there were errors, the
Participatory Budgeting in Makueni and West Pokot Counties




                                                                 representatives alerted the county for rectification. The county set up a complaints
                                                                 desk to systematically address the process of receiving corrections from the wards.

                                                             32	 Marginalized groups, specifically persons with disabilities were given an opportunity to
                                                                 express their concerns to the county. Their representative stated that though the county
                                                                 had involved them at the County level meeting, there was no proper facilitation of
                                                                 their participation at the ward and sub-county level meetings.

                                                             33	 The meeting concluded with the selection of the County Development Committee
                                                                 that would oversee the implementation of the projects selected by the citizens
                                                                 (Annex II provides a summary of the process).

                                                             34	 The Governor Makueni county and the CEC Member of Finance listen and take notes
                                                                 during presentations at the County Forum.

                                                             35	 Ward level representatives present their complaints to county officials on projects
                                                                 erroneously captured in the final project budget list at the desk set up by the county.




                                                                                           “We have a duty and responsibility as the technical
                                                                                         officers to scientifically analyze the information from
                                                                                            participation and people’s preferences and wishes,
                                                                                           and provide the right prescription. The department
                                                                                            has the responsibility to inform citizens of projects
                                                                                                                      that are technically viable.”

                                                                                                                                        Douglas Mbilu,

                                                                                            County Executive Member, Ministry of Water, speaking on technical
                                                                                                                 evaluation of projects selected by the citizens.




     18
                                                                                                          Participatory Budgeting in Makueni and West Pokot Counties
The case of participation in Makindu Ward

    Participants in Makindu Ward deliberating on ward priorities during the budget consultation meeting



There are two sub-wards in the ward,                  selected.
Kiboko Twan and Makindu. The budget
                                                      “We are the citizens and we are the
consultation was structured as follows:
                                                      ones who selected the projects because
Introductions and confirmations of                    we have a need for them.” complained
projects selected at sub-ward level                   a citizen when she realized their

The meeting started with introductions                project from the village level had been
and a recap of projects selected from                 excluded from the sub-ward project
the sub-ward level. The director of                   priority list.
devolution read out the projects to                    The director explained that there was
enable their confirmation by the                      a process of prioritization at sub-ward
delegates selected to represent the                   level, so not all the projects that had
sub-wards at the ward level meeting.                  been selected from the villages made it
Community members pointed out                         into the list of priorities. The projects
that some projects they had selected                  are selected based on their weight,
had not been included in the list read                which is determined by priority and
out. Several other citizens drawn from                need. He advised the participants that
the village clusters queried why some                 in the selection of projects at ward
projects were not included and some                   level, it would be good to compromise
members got upset as they did not                     and allow others with greater need to
understand why they had to sit in                     be selected. He clarified that having
the meeting if their projects were not                a loud voice did not mean that one’s                     19
                                                             project would be selected but only         some of the various stakeholders
                                                             those with greater need would make         whose issues were being mentioned
                                                             it to the final list of priorities. Some   were not present. The community
Participatory Budgeting in Makueni and West Pokot Counties




                                                             projects that were ongoing were also       members were not informed prior that
                                                             excluded from the priority list.           they would undertake the exercise so
                                                                                                        they were not well prepared.
                                                             Selection of the meeting chair:
                                                                                                        Prioritization of projects from the sub-
                                                             The community members selected a
                                                                                                        wards
                                                             chairperson to facilitate the meeting
                                                             and a chiefwhip. The chairperson           The community members are given
                                                             selected was male and the chief            time to prioritize projects from the
                                                             whip, female. Both were drawn from         sub-wards. All projects from sub-
                                                             the community and not from the             wards are listed. They are prioritized
                                                             county executive. The chief whip           based on open debate and consensus.
                                                             is responsible for order during the        Mapping is done to aid the community
                                                             meeting including time keeping.            identify which projects are missing in
                                                                                                        the ward and which areas within the
                                                             Identification of key issues affecting
                                                                                                        ward have not received any funding
                                                             thematic stakeholders in the county
                                                                                                        for projects. The various delegates
                                                             The ward administrator led
                                                                                                        and representatives from villages sit
                                                             participants through a process to
                                                                                                        together per sub-ward and agree on
                                                             identify the key issues affecting
                                                                                                        the final list of ward level projects.
                                                             various community stakeholders in
                                                                                                        The following projects were finally
                                                             the county, namely the youth, women,
                                                                                                        selected:
                                                             business community, children,
                                                             orphans and vulnerable children,           An Early Childhood Development
                                                             farmers, Persons living with HIV             Center
                                                             AIDs and Persons with disabilities.
                                                                                                        Borehole
                                                             The objective of identifying these
                                                                                                        Training college
                                                             issues was to propose projects
                                                             and interventions that address the         Adult learning centre
                                                             challenges. The citizens identified
                                                                                                        Dispensary
                                                             and then proposed the possible
                                                                                                        Stadium
                                                             interventions. This was a new addition
                                                             to the consultation process, as the        Out of the total 117 participants at
                                                             county had previously not undertaken       the forum, there were slightly more
                                                             it. While this was a good initiative,      women (61) than men (56).




  20
    Monitoring Implementation of the PB Projects

36	 The uniqueness of Makueni’s participation model is that it involves citizens
    in the implementation of projects. This process is managed through the Project




                                                                                               Participatory Budgeting in Makueni and West Pokot Counties
    Management Committee (PMC). This ensures accountability as the community
    members provide checks and oversight alongside the County Assembly.

37	 As soon as a project is approved the (PMC) is established. To form the PMCs, the
    departments responsible for the implementation of the project in collaboration with
    the Public Participation Officers and Ward Administrators, mobilize communities
    and hold a public forum to provide feedback on the approved projects, the budget
    allocated and the implementation plan for the projects. During these follow up
    public forums, the PMCs are elected. The Committee is selected by community
    members residing within the area of the project implementation. The committee
    usually has a chairperson, secretary, treasury and members.

38	 The main role of PMCs is to oversee the implementation of the project. The
    Citizens usually are involved in; the allocation of the resources to various processes
    within the implementation of the projects, the design of project documents such as
    bills of quantities, supervision of the implementation of the project and feedback to
    the county on issues arising and to the community on progress of the project. The
    oversight process for each PMC may vary depending on the nature of the project.
    In a construction project for instance, PMCs may be involved in the procurement,
    by reviewing the Bill of Quantities, analyzing the costings of components of the
    project; they are also involved in the day to day monitoring and supervision of
    delivery and use of material on site. They sign delivery notes, and give a report on the
    implementation, trouble shoot, and eventually provide an approval for the payment
    to the contractor when satisfied that the project has been implemented according
    to specifications. The PMCs may not handle the finances directly, but they are fully
    aware of the cost and spending on the project throughout its implementation.

39	 The county department responsible for the project usually provides training
    for the committee on their roles and responsibilities. This training occurs after
    the members are elected. Community members are trained on supervisory roles,
    such as inspection of quantities and use of correct material as stated in the design
    documents and progress as per set timelines. The training is usually organized
    and facilitated by the ward administrator. In addition to the training, the county
    officials observed that members in the PMC continually consult the professionals
    within the community, to provide them with guidance during the project design and
    implementation. Community members, have for instance, reverted to the county
    to inform them that the financial resources allocated to a project are inadequate or
    too high. When the county department scrutinizes the costing of the project, they
    realize the validity of the community’s concerns. The PMCs usually take minutes                  21
                                                                  of meetings, that are submitted to the
                                                                  relevant     implementing          department
                                                                  and    provide      progress      updates   to
Participatory Budgeting in Makueni and West Pokot Counties




                                                                  community members periodically (as
                                                                  frequently as once a week in some
                                                                  instances).
                                                                                                                   Community members drawing a map of projects
                                                             40	 The county officials appreciate the
                                                                                                                   within Makindu ward
                                                                  role of the community because in that
                                                                  set up, there are no blame games. The
                                                                  community and government identify
                                                                  and implement the project together,
                                                                  and review it periodically through joint
                                                                  efforts. There is more ownership of the
                                                                  projects by the community. Previously
                                                                  the county would provide compensation
                                                                  to    individual     community        members
                                                                  whenever there was need to purchase
                                                                  land to put up a project. Through
                                                                  participation, citizens get to understand
                                                                  that the project will benefit them and
                                                                  they pool together and offer portions of
                                                                  acres of their land. This has facilitated
                                                                  the County to construct 84 medium size
                                                                  dams, to address the water problem in
                                                                  Makueni. In construction of all of the
                                                                  dams the government has not had to
                                                                  purchase any land.
                                                                                                                   Participants listening to presentations at the
                                                                                                                   Nzau Kalili ward budget consultation meeting.




   22                                                        Women participating in the ward level forums.
                                                                                                      Participatory Budgeting in Makueni and West Pokot Counties
 Implementation
 of Participatory Budgeting in West Pokot

41	 West Pokot is situated in the Rift
   valley region along Kenya’s Western                                 County Profile
   boundary with Uganda. The county is                         Location: Rift Valley Region
   characterized by a variety of topographic
                                                                            Size : 9169.4 Km
   features. On the Northern and North
                                                                                  Population
   Eastern parts are the dry plains, and
                                                                        Estimated at 700,414
   on the South eastern part sit hilly
                                                      (was 512,690 in 2009 population census)
   terrain with an altitude of 3,370 metres
   above sea level. The high altitude                                   Population Density

   areas have high agricultural potential,                               56 people per sq. Km

   while medium and low altitude areas                                               Economy
   receive low rainfall in addition to being                Agriculture (nomadic and cattle
   predominantly pastoral land. The low                  farming, subsistence agriculture –
   lands receive 600 mm of rain while             maize, onions & potatoes and some cash

   the highlands receive 1600 mm per                crop farming) mining and commercial
                                                                                     activities.
   annum. The county also experiences
   great variations in temperature from                             No. of sub-counties: 4
   10 degrees celcius in the North to 30                                    No. of wards: 20
   degrees in the South.
                                                                  No. of sub-location: 222


                                               Table 3.1 West Pokot County Characteristics and data      23
                                                             42	 The four sub-counties are North Pokot/Kacheliba, Sigor, Pokot South and
                                                                Kapenguria which are further sub-divided into 20 wards. West Pokot is amongst
                                                                the marginalized counties in Kenya. At the onset of devolution, the county’s network
Participatory Budgeting in Makueni and West Pokot Counties




                                                                of roads was only 151km of Bitumen surface, 349 km of gravel and 697 km of earth
                                                                roads. A significant proportion of the county has been inaccessible by road. The
                                                                health sector was equally marginalized with a doctor patient ratio of 1: 84,528 with
                                                                few health facilities, namely 1 district hospital, 27 dispensaries and 3 health centers.


                                                                Development budget allocated to PB
                                                             43	 The budget allocated for PB was Ksh.575 million which comprised 32 percent of
                                                                the development budget and 12 percent of the total county budget9. There was an
                                                                increase of 15 million allocated to the ward development projects in the budget for
                                                                the FY 2016/17 compared to the budget for 2015/16.

                                                                                                                  West Pokot Development Budget

                                                                   Budget in millions KShs          0            500            1000          1500            2000            2500

                                                                                 FY 2013/14

                                                                                 FY 2014/15

                                                                                 FY 2015/16

                                                                                 FY 2016/17



                                                                                                    total developmente budget         ward development projects


                                                                                  Figure 3.1: Budget Allocation for Development and Participatory Budgeting


                                                                                                               FY 2013/14          FY 2014/15         FY 2015/16         FY 2016/17
                                                                 Total Budget (in billions)                            3.631              4.273               4.830              4.712




                                                                9  for FY2016/2017 Budget as of April 30th the County Allocation of Revenue Act (CARA) had not been issued therefore the
                                                                County Equitable Share is subject to change. Also County Assembly ceilings are subject to change which might affect final
   24                                                           Development amount
The PB Ten Steps in west pokot




                                                                                                            Participatory Budgeting in Makueni and West Pokot Counties
1     Step 1: General Strategy
      Key elements of the approach

    West Pokot chose to adapt participatory budgeting within its budget consultations for
      the ward development fund.

    Increase of outreach to citizens from ward level to sub-location level (Shift from 20
      forums to over 160).

    Active engagement of women.
      Central Goals and underlying values for prioritizing citizen engagement

    Equity and redistributive justice: to achieve equal distribution of resources to all the
      regions and in particular help allocate scarce resources to the very needy areas leading to
      even development across the county.

    Greater inclusiveness and participation of women.

    Empower citizens & engender ownership: The County sought to move away from
      imposing projects on the community so that there is greater involvement of citizens in
      the development process.

    Increase effectiveness and efficiency of the process through prioritization.



2     Step 2: Organizational Model
    Logo: Kokwo Totut (sharing and planning together).

    Strapline: Our Budget, Our destiny.

    Political buy in of the PB methodology and approach by county top leadership (Active
      engagement and sensitization)

    Training of County Executive staff, ward administrators and the County Assembly. The
      ten steps of the PB process was presented and participants discussed at length how this
      could be contextualized.




3     Step 3: Mobilization
      Channels of mobilizing citizens:

    Newspaper advert as per legislative requirements although according to the county staff, this is
      not effective because of poor accessibility of the newspapers to locals and high illiteracy levels.

    2 weeks prior to the participation forums, an advert in the local vernacular radio station,
      was run twice daily for a period of two weeks. Announcements were also made during
      public events as a reminder is run. Radio turned out to be amongst the most effective
      channel as it accessed both the literate and illiterate in a language familiar to them.

    Public notices were put up one month prior to the event at chiefs’ camps, ward offices,
      schools, market places and other public places.                                                          25
                                                                 Letters of invitation were sent out to the churches, mosques, NGOs and youth with a
                                                                   schedule of meetings attached.

                                                                 Local and political leaders: MCAs and their ward managers worked jointly with the local
Participatory Budgeting in Makueni and West Pokot Counties



                                                                   administration (chiefs and village elders) and ward administrators on ground level
                                                                   mobilization. This person to person information sharing is considered another effective
                                                                   method in mobilizing people at the rural areas.

                                                                 Revenue officers distributed the schedule of meetings during market days.

                                                                 A Roadshow was held one week prior to the forums. This was undertaken in one ward (Chepararia).

                                                                 Under the PB process, the county piloted a personalized voice message from the governor
                                                                   to the citizens on the ongoing public participation forums. Although the messages were
                                                                   initially targeting the sub-location meetings, they ran during the ward level meetings.




                                                             4     Steps 4-8: Public Forums, Selection of Projects, Priority lists, Technical Evaluations
                                                                   Public forums
                                                             5    	
                                                                    Meetings were held at sub-location and were open to every community member to participate.

                                                                   Introduction of prioritization of 3 key projects at sub-location level.
                                                                 	
                                                             6
                                                                   Voting seemed an entirely new concept, but each locality represented was advised to customize
                                                                 	
                                                                   it as best possible.
                                                             7
                                                                   Ward level meetings comprised sub-locational delegates or venue witnesses elected by the
                                                                 	

                                                             8     communities themselves, chiefs and one delegate appointed by the MCA – politician. The ward
                                                                   delegates would participate in the final prioritization of projects at ward level.

                                                                   Ward delegates took into consideration the technical evaluation and costing of projects done by
                                                                 	
                                                                   the county prior to the meeting, to inform ward priority selections

                                                                   The delegates prioritize and allocate resources while taking into consideration the set budget
                                                                 	
                                                                   ceiling at ward level (KShs. 22 million).




  26
9      Step 9: Approval of Budget by Assembly
     The Assembly and its staff were represented at all the budget consultation meetings.

     Assembly members and staff documented the priorities. At the time the Executive presents




                                                                                                       Participatory Budgeting in Makueni and West Pokot Counties
       the proposed report, the Assembly confirms that what was presented by citizens is what is
       included in the final budget report.

     The Assembly does not hold separate public participation forum meetings before approval
       of the executive budget since they are engaged in the formulation process.

     This collaboration makes the budget approval process faster.




10     Step 10: Monitoring Project Implementation
     West Pokot is yet to actively engage citizens in monitoring of selected projects.

     By taking the participatory process to the sub-location level, the county feels it is better
       able to conduct an audit of the projects initiated and their impact. The community can
       provide information on how effective the projects are for instance whether a cattle dip is in
       use, and a borehole is functional? The county is then able to collect accurate information
       for monitoring and evaluation.




                                                                                                           27
                                                                Key elements of the PB Process

                                                                How Public participation was conducted in the past
Participatory Budgeting in Makueni and West Pokot Counties




                                                             44	 Public participation on the budget was previously conducted at the ward level.
                                                                Citizens attended the ward level meetings from the different 222 sub-locations. Given
                                                                the distance from their localities, only a few representatives from each sub-location
                                                                would often make it to the wards. The challenges of infrastructure would restrict
                                                                the community from attending. The wards being very vast meant the concentration
                                                                of participants would come from the exact location and immediate environs where
                                                                the meeting was held and they would articulate their specific needs. This implied
                                                                that the communities nearer where the public forums took place had a stronger
                                                                representation and stronger voice while majority of citizens residing in the locations
                                                                and sub-locations were unreached and their needs and views excluded from the
                                                                budget consultations. Table 3.1 which shows the size in kilometers of the respective
                                                                wards in the sub-county, gives an indication of the vastness of the regions.

                                                                 Sub-county                  Nº of wards Nº of locations Nº of sub-locations Area (Km2)

                                                                 North Pokot/Kacheliba                6              19                     71       3,953.2

                                                                 Pokot Central/Sigor                  4              13                    47        2,109.7

                                                                 West Pokot/Kapenguria                6              19                    67         1822.5

                                                                 Pokot South                          4              10                    37          1,284

                                                                 Total                               20              61                   222        9169.4

                                                                 Table 3.1 Demographic features                             Source: West Pokot Planning unit


                                                             45	 The challenge the county faced using the previous strategy of engagement was
                                                                the listing of too many projects against a limited budget. During the consultations,
                                                                the representatives would come up with a full list of projects they wanted the county
                                                                to implement. The lists often had over 30 projects sometimes even up to 50 projects
                                                                per ward. The planning and budget department would consolidate these projects
                                                                and share them with the respective departments. Given the overwhelming number
                                                                of projects submitted, the departments did not have any specific order to determine
                                                                which projects would qualify for implementation. A few projects were however
                                                                implemented successfully, such as the Milk cooling plant in Siyoi ward, which was
                                                                given priority as the citizens had already organized themselves and contributed
                                                                land and a substantial portion of the funds (a case study is included under the
                                                                implementation of projects section).


  28
New elements based on PB approach

2015/16                        2016/17




                                                                                               Participatory Budgeting in Makueni and West Pokot Counties
28 ward forums were held       168 forums (164 at sub-location level and 4 at sub-county
                               for ward prioritization)

4779 participants              11,549 participants at sub-location level and 349 delegates
                               at Ward forums held at the sub-county headquarters par-
                               ticipants

Separate process between       Collaboration in both budget formulation and approv-
Executive and Assembly         al Public participation forums between the Executive and
                               Assembly

Long list of priorities        Long list reduced to 3 most pressing priorities per sub-lo-
from Ward level submit-        cation. These are also from different sectors. These 3
ted to budget office and       priority projects were consolidated to form Ward priority
then redistributed to the      projects which were presented at the Ward meeting. During
various sectors.               the Ward level meeting, these priority projects were further
                               evaluated, debated and prioritized by the representatives
                               of sub-locations (delegates). A final Ward Project list was
                               submitted which ensured that projects were balanced by
                               sector and sub-location. This final list took into consider-
                               ation the amount available for new projects for the Ward.

No technical evaluation of     Technical evaluation by technocrats provided to partici-
projects during the public     pants at the ward level (It was mostly based on estimated
forums                         costs and whether County or National function rather than
                               other technical considerations)

Long list reduced to select    Using the technical evaluation feedback, equity and equal-
projects by technocrats        ity considerations, and review of ongoing and completed
from various departments       projects from the previous financial years, public forums
& budget officers              identified a priority project per sector. Emphasis was placed
                               on ensuring that each sub-location had at least 1 project.

               Table 3.2: Changes in the process comparing FY 2015/16 and FY 2016/17




                                                                                                 29
                                                                 Territorial Scope

                                                             46	 To manage the participation forums at sub-location level during the PB process,
                                                                 some of the sub-locations were grouped together for joint meetings, while in the
Participatory Budgeting in Makueni and West Pokot Counties




                                                                 larger sub-locations that were also a distance away from others, singular meetings
                                                                 were held. Table 3.3 shows the breakdown of the number of forums held per ward.

                                                                 WARD                                            No. of sub-locations          No. of Public Forums
                                                                 Alale Ward                                                         20                           8
                                                                 Batei Ward                                                           8                          8
                                                                 Chepareria Ward                                                     17                         10
                                                                 Endugh Ward                                                          8                          6
                                                                 Kapchok Ward                                                         8                          9
                                                                 Kapenguria Ward                                                     10                         10
                                                                 Kasei Ward                                                          12                          7
                                                                 Kiwawa Ward                                                         14                          8
                                                                 Kodich Ward                                                         10                          6
                                                                 Lelan Ward                                                          13                         10
                                                                 Lomut Ward                                                          14                          7
                                                                 Masool Ward                                                          6                         12
                                                                 Mnagei Ward                                                          9                          9
                                                                 Riwo Ward                                                           17                          7
                                                                 Sekerr Ward                                                          8                          4
                                                                 Siyoi Ward                                                           9                          9
                                                                 Sook Ward                                                           16                          3
                                                                 Suam Ward                                                            7                         15
                                                                 Tapach Ward                                                          9                          6
                                                                 Weiwei Ward                                                         11                          9
                                                                 Total                                                             222                         164

                                                                                   Table 3.3 Number of forums held per ward and sub-location




 30
    Effects of mobilization:

47	 The total number of participants who engaged in the budget process in 2015/16 cycle
    and in the 2016/17 varied considerably. In the 2015/16 cycle the public participation fo-




                                                                                                                                     Participatory Budgeting in Makueni and West Pokot Counties
    rums had a total of 4779 compared to 11,898 participants in 2016/17 as shown in table 3.4.

     Levels                  Female         % to total            Male       % to total         Total No. of Participants

     Wards                          37               11%             312             89%                                      349

     Sub-location                4010               35%           7539               65%                                    11,549

           Table 3.4: Mobilization and Participation of Communities during FY2016/17 Budget Formulation



48	 The women representation more than tripled (from 11% to 35%) when the
    meetings were held closer to their homesteads at the sub-location level. This
    was a great increase in women’s voice and representation in the public forums10.
    Annex III (a) further shows the breakdown of the engagement of women in the
    sub-locational meetings, while annex III (b) provides further breakdown of the
    profile of participants per gender and age at the sub-county meetings for ward
    level prioritization of projects. The percentage of women represented at ward level
    prioritization meetings held at the sub-county were however very low compared to
    the male counterparts. A delegates approach was used to identify representation at
    the sub-county meeting. The sub-locations nominated one representative.

    Process of engaging citizens; evaluation, priority lists, selection
    of final proposals

   Engagement of citizens at the Sub-location level:

49	 The participatory budgeting process was incorporated into the budget consultation
    process and not undertaken as a separate engagement process. This helped the
    county lower the costs associated with the implementation of the participatory
    process. The PB process was specifically targeted at ward specific projects which
    are first identified by citizens at the sub-location level. Citizens were provided with
    guidance on the kind of projects to select within the sectors for which counties are
    responsible namely health, agriculture, roads, and early childhood education. The
    meetings were facilitated by the ward administrators, assisted by the chiefs and
    assistant chiefs. The MCA and/or the ward managers were present.




    10  Case story included later indicates how the various wards ensured women’s voice and influence in decision making.                  31
                                                             50	 The meeting agenda progressed as follows:

                                                                Opening remarks from the local leaders (MCA and the chief).

                                                                Overview of the projects undertaken by the government in the area (MCA).
Participatory Budgeting in Makueni and West Pokot Counties




                                                                Ward administrator provides guidelines for the conduct of the meeting.

                                                                Discussion of the needs of the areas and generation of project list.

                                                                Selection of the top three priorities (in order of priority) from the project list.

                                                                Voting for the venue witness (delegate to the ward level meeting held at the sub-
                                                                  county).

                                                                Closing remarks by the MCA and county team.

                                                             51	 During the opening remarks, the MCA explained the purpose of the meeting and
                                                                its objectives. In this instance the MCAs also took time to explain why the process
                                                                was different, and to endorse PB as an initiative bringing the government closer to
                                                                the people and to help in identifying the correct needs of a given region. The MCA
                                                                also explained his role during the meeting, which was to listen to the priorities
                                                                as identified by the community, and to follow up on these priorities when the
                                                                proposed budget would be presented to the Assembly by the executive. The MCAs
                                                                would provide oversight to ensure the projects are correctly captured and that they
                                                                are implemented by the executive.


                                                                                                       Participants voting for a road project in Serowo sub-location




                                                                                         “If you woke up at midnight and thought about that
                                                                                           problem, or issue that is lacking in the region, then
                                                                                                               you know that is your priority,”

                                                                                                                               MCA Chepararia ward

                                                                                                            in helping community members try to understand
                                                                                                            the concept of prioritization in their sub-location.
   32
52	 The main focus of the sub-location meeting was the discussion and selection
    of priorities. Final priorities were determined through discussions and consensus,
    sometimes by voting. The process of arriving at a final decision on the three priorities




                                                                                               Participatory Budgeting in Makueni and West Pokot Counties
    was unique for different sub-locations. In some areas, voting was adopted while in
    other sub-locations there was consensus arrived at through a guided process of
    what was more important, and the availability of existing community resources to
    facilitate the implementation of the projects.

53	 Comprehensive lists presented by sub-locations varied in their numbers but
    each had to narrow the list to three priorities. In Korellach sub-location a list
    of 21 projects were initially selected by community members. Out of these the
    three final projects selected through discussion and consensus were a dispensary,
    a cattle dip and the construction of a road to the chief’s office. In Chepturguny
    sub-location a shorter list of 12 projects was initially generated and shortened to
    3 priority projects through discussion and consensus. Voting only occurred for the
    two venue witnesses.

54	 In Serowo sub-location in Riwo ward, community representatives resorted to
    voting to select projects, when consensus was not arrived at. The sub-location
    representatives had listed several projects, and agreed on two priorities, but could
    not arrive at a consensus on the third priority. They therefore chose to vote between
    the two, the construction of a road from one area to another, and the construction
    of an ECD. Majority voted for the construction of the road.

55	 The results of the voting were however not acceptable to all, even though there was
    a clear majority vote. The outcome generated further debate from the community
    when one of the two who had voted for the ECD, refused to endorse the voting and
    grabbed the pen from the chair who was taking notes. He tried to convince the other
    members that if they chose to construct an ECD which was more progressive for
    their community, the road would automatically follow, as it would be required to
    deliver materials for construction of the ECD. A heated debate arose, and the chair
    in a bid to diffuse tempers, proposed that both the road and ECD be shelved for a
    neutral project. Participants who had voted for the road however disagreed saying
    they had voted and there was a clear majority. In the end, the road was listed as the
    third priority despite there being dissenting minority voices.




                                                                                                 33
Participatory Budgeting in Makueni and West Pokot Counties




                                                                                                           Participants note down their top three priorities out of the broad project list


                                                             56	 The public consultation process in Simotwo sub-location had a more vibrant and
                                                                conciliatory voting process. Community members initially went through a systematic
                                                                process of detailing projects by the different sectors. From the comprehensive list, the
                                                                community then narrowed down to the priorities. The sub-location is very vast with
                                                                long distances to cover between the two main centres, Simotwo and Msywon. In the
                                                                health sector members had selected two dispensaries to be located in both centers. The
                                                                county executive and the assembly led by the MCA, requested the residents to select
                                                                one dispensary due to the cost implications, which could result in one dispensary being
                                                                constructed without a third priority project. An intense deliberative process then took
                                                                place with citizens residing in each of the centers advocating for the dispensary to be
                                                                constructed in their locality. Eventually through a trade-off process, it was agreed that
                                                                the dispensary would be situated in Simotwo, due to the ready availability of donated
                                                                land and a water project would go to Msiywon. Residents then had to vote for a third
                                                                project to replace the extra dispensary initially selected. The decision was between a
                                                                bridge and a box culvert. During the voting, to avoid cheating, the chief requested that
                                                                members who had already voted stand up and step aside, and those seated were then
                                                                counted. The majority vote went to the bridge.

                                                                         Voting process during project prioritization in Simotwo Sub-location




                                                                Community residents in Simotwo Sub-              To ensure a transparent voting        Participants who opted for the culvert
                                                                 location voting to select a bridge over       process, where members do not vote                 remain seated.
   34                                                            a box culvert. Women participants are         twice, participants who voted for the
                                                                        involved in the process                   bridge are asked to step aside.
                         “I came to the meeting to listen to the views of mem-
                         bers of my sub-location. The priorities given are good




                                                                                                  Participatory Budgeting in Makueni and West Pokot Counties
                          and will help our community which for instance has
                             not had a cattle dip and one has to travel long dis-
                          tances to access the nearest one. The same applies to
                           the dispensary, having a nearby one would serve us
                           well. If they also fix the local roads it would help our
                          children access the school, which has been perform-
                             ing well in national exams. This time, the govern-
                            ment has been able to access us, last time they held
                            the meeting at ward level, we could not attend as it
                          was too far, and we did not even receive notification.
                                         This time they publicized the meeting”.

                                                                         Joyce Tarama,

                          Korellach sub-location in Chepararia Ward. She participated and gave
                                her views on support for vulnerable groups particularly widows.




57	 The final projects selected are listed on a project submission form which is co-
    signed by the ward administrator, area assistant chief, the ward manager and the
    venue witness. (Annex V is a sample of the project submission form at sub-location
    level and Annex VI at ward level).

    Case study on the participation of women in West Pokot

58	 Implementing participatory budgeting at the sub-location level resulted in an
    increase in the number of women engaging in the budget process. Majority of women
    were previously unable to attend the meetings when they were held at ward level. In
    majority of the sub-locations, the women sat separately from men, as per the cultural
    norms. The West Pokot community is largely a patriarchal society, where women defer
    to the decisions made by their male counterparts. This has been reflected in past budget
    consultations, where women sit separately from the men and endorse the projects
    that their male counterparts propose without direct involvement. During the training
                                                                                                    35
Participatory Budgeting in Makueni and West Pokot Counties




                                                               Women seated separately from men during the joint               Korellach sub-location prioritization meeting starts out
                                                                sub-location briefing meeting in Chepararia ward              with the men talking and women standing behind listening




                                                             Women observing the meeting proceedings from a distance          The ward administrator asks the women to join the men
                                                                                                                                            and positions them centrally




                                                               A representative of a widows group gives her views             Another woman gains confidence and takes the floor to
                                                                         advocating for vulnerable groups                                        present her views




                                                             Women continue with their presentations, even as their fellow       Both men and women voted for the venue witness/
                                                             women proceed with their daily tasks of weaving as they listen      delegate to the sub-county meeting in Chepararia

  36
    process, the county asked the ward administrators to facilitate the engagement of
    women and the representation of their views in the selection of priorities. While this
    was not uniformly achieved in all the sub-locations, there were significant milestones




                                                                                                   Participatory Budgeting in Makueni and West Pokot Counties
    made in several sub-locations where women spoke up on their priorities and these
    were reflected in the final selection of projects.

59	 An observation of the engagement of the women in different sub-location shows
    the varying degrees of their participation depending on the cultural contexts. In
    all the meetings, the women sat separately from or behind the men, but during the
    selection of priorities, in some sub-locations that were closer to urban centers, the
    women spoke up sometimes in the midst of the men. In other sub-locations the men
    asked the women to give their priorities, even though they still sat separately whilst in
    other sub-locations which were more distant from urban centers, the women merely
    endorsed what their male counterparts selected. The active participation of women was
    particularly evident in Korellach sub-location in Chepararia ward. Here the facilitator
    asked the women to step forward and give their priorities. Several women were able
    to raise the problems facing them including the need for construction of dispensaries,
    water projects and support for widows. By contrast, in Chepturguny sub-location in
    Chepararia, the men did not involve the women during the selection of priorities and
    noted that the women would endorse the projects they had chosen. The projects were
    a cattle dip as the first priority, construction of three classrooms and a water project.
    Kopwosis sub-location was among the few where a woman was selected to represent
    the community at the sub-county ward prioritization meeting.

60	 In Serowo sub-location in Riwo ward, while the women were not present, the top two
    priorities captured womens’ concerns. According to the chair of the representatives
    the priorities addressed issues in the community the women had been asking for
    namely a maternity wing at the local dispensary and a nearby water borehole.

61	 In a nearby sub-location Chepkram, still in Riwo ward, the men asked the women to
    give their top priorities and these were listed as the first two. The projects were drilling
    of boreholes in ongoing ECD construction projects. The third priority was selected by the
    men, - the construction of a cattle metallic crush for vaccinating their animals.




                                                                                                       37
Participatory Budgeting in Makueni and West Pokot Counties




                                                                   Different atmosphere in Chepturguny sub-location    In Chepkram, women sat separately but were given the
                                                                 where the men dominated the discussions and did not    opportunity to give their priorities that were listed as
                                                                   involve the women, except to endorse the projects                         the first two


                                                                 Final selection of project priorities:

                                                             62	 A budget allocation of KShs. 28 million is set aside for ward specific projects.
                                                                 Citizens make final decisions on projects to be implemented in their sub-location
                                                                 within a budget ceiling of KShs. 20 million. 2 million covers the cost of implementation
                                                                 of the projects, while the rest is reserved for bursaries. Following the sub-location
                                                                 meetings, the planning and budget team compiled and published a list of all the sub-
                                                                 location project priorities for each of the wards. The list was for use during the final
                                                                 ward prioritization process held at the sub-county. The planning and budget team
                                                                 also prepared a standard costing sheet that listed the costs for completion of specific
                                                                 projects including dispensaries, boreholes, construction of ECD classrooms amongst
                                                                 other. Annex VII captures all the projects provided in the costing sheet.

                                                             63	 Participation in the process was limited to a small number of representatives
                                                                 of the community. All the venue witnesses or delegates representing the sub-
                                                                 locations in all the 20 wards, the sub-chiefs, chiefs, ward administrators, and 2
                                                                 nominated delegates by the MCA’s per ward and MCA’s participated in the final
                                                                 prioritization process. The MCAs were given opportunity to select delegates to the
                                                                 ward level prioritization. The process of selection of the delegates involved the
                                                                 planning and budget office and county assembly (MCA’s). This process ensured
                                                                 that the politicians accepted the legitimacy of the budget formulation procedure.

                                                             64	 The final prioritization process was characterized by intensive discussion,
                                                                 negotiation and consensus to arrive at decisions. The participants were guided by
                                                                 several factors to arrive at the final list of projects. Teams assembled in their respective
                                                                 wards for prioritization, with the MCA and ward manager and the county executive
                                                                 technical team present to give guidance. Participants took into account the need
                                                                 to balance out projects within the ward with a bias towards regions lacking certain
                                                                 infrastructure and facilities; projects that were ongoing or already had a planned start
                                                                 date for implementation; project and implementation costs and their implications
                                                                 for other sub-locations vis a vis the overall budget. These factors implied that some
  38                                                             projects were dropped off the priority lists. For instance, the cost of a dispensary is
                                                                 KShs. 5 million and where 3 sub-locations in a ward each selected a dispensary, the
    costs would significantly cut into the Kshs. 20 million budget. The sub-locations had
    to negotiate and take into account several factors to finally decide who would get
    the dispensary. Voting did not work very well during the final prioritization process




                                                                                                Participatory Budgeting in Makueni and West Pokot Counties
    and agreements were reached based on consensus. In one ward where three sub-
    locations had each selected dispensaries, members decided to take a vote on where
    the dispensary should be located. The results of the voting process were however not
    broadly accepted by all the representatives present. In the end, the MCA led the team
    through a discussion that saw the sub-location that had won the vote, give up the
    dispensary amicably to another sub-location that already had land available for the
    project. This type of conflict is normal and expected when different groups can have
    competing interests in the allocation of resources, this needs to be kept in mind during
    the Participatory Budgeting processes and be managed appropriately (by ensuring
    inclusive participatory process and transparency in the selection of sub-projects).

65	 In some wards, the representatives systematically selected the priorities as they were
    listed in each sub-location until they arrived at the 20 million ceiling. This sometimes
    meant the top two priorities in each sub-location were selected, and the rest of the
    projects cut off.




                    Citizens are provided with refreshments as they deliberate on priorities

66	 Representatives from the sub-locations provided feedback that the communication to
    their community members at the time of selecting the top three priorities should have
    included clarity on the 20 million budget ceiling. The representatives said they would
    have to go back to explain to the community members at the sub-location why some of
    the project priorities were not included in the final list, but this could have been made
    easier if information on the budget cut-off had been availed earlier. It would also have
                                                                                                  39
    informed the community members to be more strategic on their choices.
Participatory Budgeting in Makueni and West Pokot Counties




                                                                                     Citizens deliberating priorities in their respective wards


                                                                 Implementation: Success stories from citizen engagement

                                                                 The Siyoi Milk cooling plant

                                                             67	 West Pokot is yet to move towards actively engaging citizens in the implementation
                                                                 and monitoring of projects, however, there are a few success stories that the
                                                                 county can draw lessons from. One such successful story is the milk cooling plant
                                                                 in Siyoi ward. The construction of the plant was the result of a public participation
                                                                 process. Local residents had gotten together and raised initial funds to start the
                                                                 project. When the county held the budget consultations for the FY 2014/15, the
                                                                 citizens requested the county to support the construction of the project. The
                                                                 county government approved the project and constructed the plant. The local
                                                                 residents oversee the day to day logistics. The plant has had a positive impact in
                                                                 the lives of the locals especially women. Previously the women would milk their
                                                                 cows and have to sell the milk on the same day due to the lack of storage facilities.
                                                                 The proceeds from the daily sales were low and the women were not able to plan
                                                                 effectively on how to utilize the funds. With the availability of cooling and storage
                                                                 facilities, the milk is now sold in bulk to processing companies. The women earn
                                                                 as much as KShs. 50,000 per month and with this substantial amount of funds
                                                                 have been able to undertake entrepreneurship projects, investment activities and
                                                                 educate their children.
  40
    Emerging results and early lessons of
    implementing Participatory Budgeting




                                                                                               Participatory Budgeting in Makueni and West Pokot Counties
68	 While in very early stages, some emerging results and early lessons on implementing
    PB in Counties can be drawn from these two experience. On a general note, the
    importance of political commitment to public participation in decision making has
    been shown to be a key factor for effective public participation. In both Makueni
    and West Pokot counties the commitment emanated from the top political
    leadership starting with the Governor and the MCAs in West Pokot. The leadership
    then communicated and facilitated the bureaucrats and technocrats to implement
    this vision. Specifically, with regards PB, the following process improvement and
    emerging outcomes have been identified:


    Process improvements
69	 Inclusiveness – While typical county budget consultations in Kenya consist of few
    meetings and limited inclusiveness, PB has increased opportunities for women and
    remote communities to take part in expenditure prioritization. Makueni follows a
    sequential process of identifying citizens’ priorities, starting at the hyperlocal level
    and moving up through levels of community organization. With a total of 3,867
    meetings and over 350,000 participants, this process includes forums in villages,
    sub-wards, wards, sub-counties, and one county forum, where 1,000 individuals
    from across the county set the final expenditure priorities. In West Pokot, prior
    to the implementation of PB, women were systematically excluded from budget
    consultations, representing on average no more than 11% of participants. With the
    introduction of PB, a combination of new engagement methods and consultations
    held closer to women’s homesteads led to a three-fold increase in their participation
    (35%). While further inclusiveness is an imperative, these are promising results that
    will inform future adjustments of participatory processes in the two counties.

70	 Credibility – Previous budget consultations in the counties consisted of unstructured
    hearing processes, during which community representatives proposed an endless
    list of projects for the county. The selection of projects to be implemented remained
    at the discretion of government officials, based on no formal criteria. This method,
    which raised citizens’ expectations and simultaneously incentivized “selective
    hearing” on the part of government officials, undermined citizens’ very trust in
    the participation process and fueled officials’ skepticism towards the value of such
    processes. The adoption of PB provides clear rules of the game for the identification,
    selection, prioritization and validation of projects and ties the selected projects to
    a specific percentage of the capital budget (approximately 30%), better managing
    expectations and enhancing the overall credibility of the process.                               41
                                                             71	 Compliance – The introduction of PB has facilitated compliance with legal
                                                                 requirements for public participation included in the County Government Act
                                                                 (2012) and the Public Financial Management Act (2012) in a meaningful way. The
Participatory Budgeting in Makueni and West Pokot Counties




                                                                 PB approach has also been shown to lower the transaction costs of such compliance.
                                                                 By providing a structured, streamlined and coherent process, PB avoids fragmented
                                                                 public participation that results in repetitive and overlapping activities which,
                                                                 beyond producing little added value, are costly in terms of participants’ and
                                                                 organizers’ time and resources.


                                                                 Emerging outcomes
                                                             72	 Budget variance – Some early lessons are emerging on how PB is impacting
                                                                 the content of county budgets. Prior to PB, capital expenditures were debated
                                                                 between sectoral departments who were, in large part, concerned with increasing
                                                                 their budget envelopes, resulting in resource allocation that did not respond to
                                                                 actual needs. An analysis of recent Makueni and West Pokot budgets shows that
                                                                 the PB process has changed this logic, with budget allocation increasingly aligned
                                                                 with citizens’ priorities. For instance, previously, project proposals focused on
                                                                 building new facilities, while under the PB process citizens’ preferences have
                                                                 tended towards the upgrading or renovation of existing facilities. Whereas before,
                                                                 sectoral departments were typically more interested in larger flagship projects,
                                                                 the county budgets now include more community-level projects (e.g., women’s
                                                                 development funds and wells).

                                                             73	 Budget approval – PB has also facilitated budget approval mechanisms by involving
                                                                 Members of the County Assembly (MCAs), who would previously tend to disagree
                                                                 over resource allocation and the use of funds, in the deliberation process. Their
                                                                 participation in – and commitments made during – the PB meetings have allowed for
                                                                 swifter approval of budgets. In West Pokot, where the previous two years’ budgets were
                                                                 approved months after the deadline, MCAs’ public commitments during PB forums to
                                                                 implement citizen priorities have given impetus to more timely budget approval.

                                                             74	 Of course, these are preliminary results. Significant challenges remain, such as
                                                                 furthering inclusiveness and strengthening citizens’ capacity to oversee budget
                                                                 execution. However, based on early lessons, county governments are already
                                                                 working on the design of new features and activities to be implemented this year.
                                                                 Simultaneously, as other counties join this effort, the KPBI is putting in place a robust
                                                                 monitoring and evaluation plan to assess whether PB is generating additional results,
                                                                 such as increased local tax revenues and improved service delivery. In the meantime,
                                                                 PB is off to a good start in better aligning resources to needs and leveraging the
                                                                 expertise of citizens to shape decisions that invariably affect their lives.
   42
List of References
Beuermann, D. W., & Amelina, M. (2014). Does Participatory Budgeting Improve




                                                                                           Participatory Budgeting in Makueni and West Pokot Counties
Decentralized Public Service Delivery? (No. IDB-WP-547). IDB Working Paper Series.

Gonçalves, S. (2014). The effects of participatory budgeting on municipal expenditures
and infant mortality in Brazil. World Development, 53, 94-110.

McNulty, S. (2013). Improved Governance? Exploring the Results of Peru’s Participatory
Budgeting Process.

McNulty, S. L., & Wampler, B. (2015). Participatory Governance. Emerging Trends in
the Social and Behavioral Sciences: An Interdisciplinary, Searchable, and Linkable
Resource.

Sintomer, Y., Herzberg, C., Allegretti, G., & Röcke, A. (2013). Learning from the South:
participatory budgeting worldwide-an invitation to global cooperation: study [updated
version]. InWent.

Touchton, M., & Wampler, B. (2014). Improving social well-being through new
democratic institutions. Comparative Political Studies, 47(10), 1442-1469.




                                                                                              43
44
                                                    Participatory Budgeting in Makueni and West Pokot Counties




Annex I: Participatory Budgeting Action Plans
 Where they stood               Opportunity                   Challenge                      Proposed Action

                                                         Makueni

 Well-structured public         Strong leadership             Limited financial resources    Introduce identification &
 participation framework/       commitment                    Process well advanced but      selection of projects at lowest
 matrix                         Well-structured mechanism     lacks systematic technical     level possible ( village level)
 Identification of projects     for engagement                evaluation                     Introduce involvement of
 starts at ward level           Effective communication       Community needs                thematic groups (women &
 Each ward has a public                                       sensitization                  youth)
 participation & civic                                        Political interference (weak   Adopt technical evaluation
 education officer (30 in                                     relationship between           of projects alongside citizen
 total) & 3 interlocutors (90                                 executive & assembly           engagement
 in total)

                                                        West Pokot

 Community inputs not           Goodwill from the public to   Cultural – women often do      Political mobilization &
 considered in year 1 of        engage in budget meetings     not speak in the presence of   training of MCAs on PB
 devolved county, some          Need for strategic            men, arrangements made for     More inclusivity including
 considered in year 2           planning at ward level for    them to listen separately.     of women and marginalized
 Meetings take place at ward    more effective growth &       Difference between national    regions
 level for 20 wards             development                   and county functions still
 Chief officers from            Ward Specific Projects Act    unclear to public in request
 Departments review citizen     provides clear parameters     for projects
 proposals and determine        for decision making &         Vast rurality of West Pokot
 what will go into budget       project implementation        Wish lists from citizens
 Ward development fund
 (500 million) is used for
 community identified
 projects.
Annex II: Makueni Public Participation Matrix and Key Activities
 No.   Level                   No. of Meetings               Dates                   Population* Targeted   Dev Committees Elected

 1     Village Meetings        Total Villages 3455           10th to 12th Feb 2016   345,500 (3,455x100)    38,005

       Details of Activities
       Identify development and service delivery challenges and issues.
       Identify and prioritization of development projects.
       Election of village development committees. (11 Persons – across the social divide)

 2     Village Clusters        Total Village Clusters 315    13th - 15th Feb 2016    37,800 (120x315)       3,465

       Details of Activities
       Prioritization of development projects – (Prioritizing the projects from the village levels)
       Election of Village cluster development committees (11 Persons)

 3     Sub Wards               Total Sub Wards 60            16th – 17th Feb 2016    7,200 (120x60)         660

       Details of Activities
       Highlighting the main economic activities in the sub-ward.
       Identifying existing development projects (funded by County, National government other development partners)
       Resource mapping identifying the distribution of social amenities in the respective areas (Water, Health, Education and
       Environment Issues)
       Prioritization of development projects – (based on list of projects from the Village Clusters)
       Election of Sub Ward development committees (11 Persons). The committee include 20 coopted organized groups and
       special interest representatives.




45
                                                            Participatory Budgeting in Makueni and West Pokot Counties
46
                                                        Participatory Budgeting in Makueni and West Pokot Counties
 No.   Level                 No. of Meetings              Dates                  Population* Targeted       Dev Committees Elected

 4     Wards                 Total Wards – 30             10th – 11th Mar 2016   3,600 (120x30)             330

       Details of Activities
       Mapping of all development projects (On a map)
       Identifying Ward specific economic activities and proposed strategic interventions geared towards boosting / improving
       the economic activities for sustained socio economic development.
       Identifying the challenges affecting specific key interest groups (Youth, children, Women, Business community, PWDs, OVCs,
       Farmers, Cooperatives, Boda Boda) and proposing strategic interventions to counter the challenges/ to improve their wellbeing.
       Prioritization of development projects – (Prioritizing the projects from the Sub Wards)
       Selecting Ward Flagship Projects
       Election of Ward development committees- (11 Persons). The committees included 20 coopted members representing
       organized groups and special interest representatives

 5     Diaspora Hearings     Nairobi                      14th March 2016        200                        0

       Details of Activities
       Presentation on the County’s achievement’s (Development) Progress
       Presentations on the Thematic Group proposals.
       Discussions - (thematic Groups issues, Proposed interventions)

 6     Sub County            Total Sub Counties – 6       16th March 2016        720 (120x6)                66

       Details of Activities
       Election of Sub County development committees- (11 Persons) & nomination of 20 representatives from Key interest groups.
       Validation of the Ward prioritized projects
       Identifying urban development initiatives (Development interventions for respective urban centers
       Selecting Sub County Flagship Projects (Prioritized from the Ward Flagship Projects)

 7     County’s People       1 People’s Forum             18th March 2016        1,000                       
       Forum

       Details of Activities
       Comprise 11 representatives from each of the 60 Sub Wards (660) and 10 Persons per ward from special interest groups
       (300). They are joined by other stakeholders (business associations, religious leaders) as well as elected leaders (MCAs,
       MPs), etc. Approximately 1000 people in total.
Annex III (a): Overview of participation of women in the West Pokot forums (%)
Sublocation Public Forums for Fy2016/17 Budget Formulation

 S/No     Ward                         M/ Adult   F/Adult    M/ Youth   F/Youth   Total Attendance   % Male   % Female

      1   Alale Ward                        231      128          47        26                432      64%        36%

      2   Batei Ward                       420        177         128        14               739      74%        26%

      3   Chepareria Ward                  427       200           81       72                780      65%        35%

     4    Endugh Ward                       181      128          199       66                574      66%        34%

      5   Kapchok Ward                      118       60          36        20                234      66%        34%

     6    Kapenguria Ward                  440       179          137        8                764      76%        24%

      7   Kasei Ward                       374       247          87         10               718      64%        36%

     8    Kiwawa Ward                      297       297           0         0                594      50%        50%

     9    Kodich Ward                       251       313         100       52                716      49%        51%

     10   Lelan Ward                        189      136          104       62                491      60%        40%

     11   Lomut Ward                       280        137         157       64                638      68%        32%

     12   Masool Ward                       233      168          128       45                574      63%        37%

     13   Mnagei Ward                      260       147          96        120               623      57%        43%

     14   Riwo Ward                        242       165          162       83                652      62%        38%

     15   Sekerr Ward                       128       53          159        8                348      82%        18%

     16   Siyoi Ward                       244        92          82        82                500      65%        35%

     17   Sook Ward                         113       29           25       24                 191     72%        28%

     18   Suam Ward                         301       141         153       46                641      71%        29%

     19   Tapach Ward                      440       179          137        8                764      76%        24%

     20   Weiwei Ward                      243       195          109       29                576      61%        39%

          Total                           5,412     3,171       2,127      839             11,549      65%        35%




47
                                                  Participatory Budgeting in Makueni and West Pokot Counties
48
                                                  Participatory Budgeting in Makueni and West Pokot Counties



Annex III (b)
Breakdown of Participants at the Sub-county forum based on Gender and Age
WARD MEETINGS HELD AT SUB COUNTY FY 2016/2017

 S/No    Sub County   Male Adult   Female Adult   Male Youth   Female Youth   Total Attendance   % Male   % Femaile

     1   West Pokot          38               3           51              1                93      96%          4%

     2   South               43              8            9               1                61      85%         15%

     3   Central             36              5            19              3                63      87%         13%

     4   Nort                89              10          27              6                 132     88%         12%

         Total              206             26          106              11               349      89%         11%
Annex V
Sample of sub-location priorities submitted




                                              Participatory Budgeting in Makueni and West Pokot Counties
after budget consultations in West Pokot




                                                49
                                                             Annex VI
                                                             Ward Project submission form capturing
Participatory Budgeting in Makueni and West Pokot Counties




                                                             priorities from all the sub-locations in
                                                             West Pokot




 50
Annex VII
Sample of the standard costing sheet used




                                                 Participatory Budgeting in Makueni and West Pokot Counties
during ward level prioritization in West Pokot




                                                       51
