Dimagi: Improving Maternal
and Newborn Care
		
Through mobile technology, a social enterprise helps
frontline service workers care for pregnant women
and their newborns at the last mile in rural India




                                                       1
    © Copyright April 2017
    The World Bank
    1818 H Street, NW
    Washington, D.C. 20433
    All rights reserved


    Acknowledgements
    This case study was prepared by Natalia Agapitova and Cristina
    Navarrete Moreno from the World Bank’s Social Enterprise
    Innovations team, with support from NRMC India, a management
    consulting firm in New Delhi, India.

    Special thanks to the Dimagi team, led by Devika Sarin and Anushree
    Banerji.

    Sharon Fisher provided design and additional editing support.


    Contact Information
    Social Enterprise Innovations
    Leadership, Learning, and Innovation at the World Bank Group
    Contact: Cristina Navarrete Moreno
    www.worldbank.org

    Dimagi, Inc.
    Contact: Rushika Shekhar
    Web: www.dimagi.com
    Facebook: www.facebook.com/dimagi.inc
    Twitter: @dimagi




2
Dimagi: Improving Maternal
and Newborn Care


Contents
Summary................................................................................................................................. 5
Challenge............................................................................................................................... 6
Innovation............................................................................................................................... 8
Implementation................................................................................................................... 12
Impact................................................................................................................................... 15
Sustainability and Scale-Up................................................................................................ 18
Lessons Learned.................................................................................................................. 21


Appendices
I. References........................................................................................................................... 22
II. Dimagi Products and Services.......................................................................................... 24
III. Users and Supporters of CommCare.............................................................................. 26
IV. Screen Images of Lessons................................................................................................ 27
V. Images of Mobile Data Collection and Storage ............................................................ 27
VI. Partners of Dimagi and Geographic Distribution ......................................................... 30
VII. Role of Partners and Evolution of Partnerships ........................................................... 32




                                                                                                                                               3
4
Summary
India suffers from a high maternal and infant mortality rate, especially in rural areas, where poor
women do not receive effective care and one in every 22 infants die within one year of life.
    One of the main problems is the poor access, quality, and accountability of services provided
by government Accredited Social Health Activists (ASHAs). There is delayed data collection
and reporting; a lack of follow-up and compliance with visits; minimal coordination between
ASHAs and nurse midwives; and no standardized delivery of counseling. The Indian govern-
ment has not focused on building the capacities of ASHAs and has limited ways to monitor
their performance.
    In 2010, Dimagi, in partnership with Catholic Relief Services (CRS), IntraHealth International,
Real Medicine Foundation, and Save the Children, deployed CommCare mobile technology
to help ASHAs improve their care for pregnant women and their newborns at the last mile in
rural India. CommCare is an open-source software application with mobile and cloud infra-
structure that runs on inexpensive mobile phones.
    CommCare uses audio, video, imagery, SMS texting, data and tracking forms, multiple
languages, and other features to standardize ASHAs’ service delivery, improve counseling
techniques and patient coordination, and collect real-time data for performance monitoring.
The multimedia aids enhance client engagement and assist low-literate ASHAs and their
clients. CommCare electronic forms and database store information that would otherwise sit
in thousands of paper notebooks with possibility of errors.
    Today, over 4,000 ASHAs use CommCare (up from 2250 in 2015) in the health sector across
60 projects in India. These programs are currently spread across 17 states in India. Various
qualitative studies have shown that CommCare has improved the quality of health services
for pregnant women and newborns; timeliness of pre- and post-natal visits; data collection
and monitoring; and ASHAs’ accountability. Ongoing impact evaluations will provide more
information in terms of the impact of CommCare on health outcomes.
    Factors to consider when scaling up CommCare use by ASHAs include: integrating
CommCare generated data with the government’s Mother & Child Tracking System, which could
also be used for performance monitoring of the ASHA program; using findings of qualitative
studies and impact evaluations to build the business case for CommCare scale-up; moving
from a grant-based to a revenue-based financial model to strengthen financial sustainability;
and forging direct partnerships with state and national government.
    Through a partnership with the Government of India and the Bill & Melinda Gates Founda-
tion, a CommCare-based application is being scaled across eight Indian states to strengthen
the monitoring of the service delivery of Anganwadi Centres in the country. The CommCare
mobile application is intended to replace the extensive paper registers Anganwadi workers
are required to maintain. The app is designed to improve the care Anganwadi workers provide
their communities, tracking distribution of immunizations & supplementary food, attendance
of children at preschool and the nutrition status of children up to age five. The scale-up is
built off a pilot that was deployed to 500 Anganwadi workers in Bihar, India through a project
with CARE. Currently 10,000 Angandwadis are using the system already and will be scaling
to 25,000 in the near future.



                                                                                                      5
    Challenge
    The status of mother and child health in India remains poor, as reflected in a high Maternal
    Mortality Rate (MMR) of 190 and a high Infant Mortality Rate (IMR) of 47 in 2012 (Figure 1).
    Just 52% of births are attended by skilled health staff (Figure 2). However, studies have shown
    that by moving deliveries from the home to the hospital, maternal mortality can be reduced
    by half. Further, indicators such as 49% of pregnant women not having three antenatal visits
    during pregnancy and only 47% of mothers receiving iron and folic acid for at least 100 days
    during pregnancy, point to health care service delivery failures.

    Figure 1. Maternal and Infant Mortality Rate                       Figure 2. Prenatal Care
         Europe & Central Asia                                            Sub-Saharan Africa
              (developing only)                                            (developing only)
             East Asia & Pacific
              (developing only)                                                   South Asia
    Middle East & North Africa
                                                                                        India
              (developing only)
    Latin America & Caribbean                                     Latin America & Caribbean
              (developing only)                                             (developing only)
                    South Asia                                    Middle East & North Africa
                                                                            (developing only)
                          India                                            East Asia & Pacific
                                                                            (developing only)
            Sub-Saharan Africa                                         Europe & Central Asia
             (developing only)                                              (developing only)
                                   0    200       400       600                                  0           50            100
      n Infant mortality rate t (per 1,000 live births), 2010        n Pregnant women receiving prenatal care (%), 2009
      n Maternal mortality ratio (modeled estimate, per 100,000      n Births attended by skilled health staff (% of total), 2010
        live births), 2013


    Source: World Bank, World Development Indicators.



        In this context, the Government of India launched the National Rural Health Mission (NRHM)
    in 2005 to incentivize institutional delivery and the use of government health facilities in rural
    areas, and to provide services to underserved communities, including vaccinations, nutri-
    tional supplements, and family planning methods. NRHM aimed to establish a fully functional,
    community owned, decentralized health delivery system. To achieve this, NRHM appointed
    trained female community health activists per thousand populations—termed Accredited
    Social Health Activist (ASHA).
        ASHAs are expected to visit clients’ homes in their respective villages to promote health
    services and facilitate pediatric and prenatal visits to local facilities. The three criteria for
    becoming an ASHA are that she is a married, permanent resident of the village, preferably
    25 to 45 years old, and literate with eight years of formal education. However, these require-
    ments “may be relaxed if no suitable person with this qualification is available” (NRHM 2011).
    Since 2005, NRHM has deployed more than 750,000 ASHAs (Reddya and others 2012).
        However, the ASHAs face a number of challenges in performing their jobs, including high
    workloads, insufficient training, poor credibility in the community, difficulty addressing sensitive
    topics with families, poor support for home visits, language barriers, and little or no feedback

6
about performance. They operate with minimal supervision, and do not properly collect and
report data on patients and home visits (DeRenzi and others 2012; Baqui and others 2008;
and Chittamuru and Bhavsar 2012). Improvements are needed to optimize ASHAs’ health
care delivery.




                                                                                            7
    Innovation
    Dimagi Organization
    Since its inception in 2002 at Harvard and MIT Media Lab, Dimagi has been involved in the
    design, development, and implementation of adaptable mobile applications that strengthen
    health systems. Dimagi’s mission is to deliver open and innovative technology to help under-
    served communities everywhere.
        Dimagi is a privately held social enterprise headquartered in Cambridge, Massachusetts with
    offices in, in India, South Africa, Senegal, Guatemala, and additional staff based around the
    world. While Dimagi focuses on projects that span industries and technologies, the company
    got its start in healthcare and most projects still fall in this sector. Dimagi’s 120-person team
    has experience working in both the developing and developed worlds, and across rural, urban,
    and tertiary settings in the United States, Africa, Latin America, and Asia.

    CommCare: Mobile-based Software for Client Counseling and Management
    Starting in 2010, Dimagi deployed CommCare, a mobile-based, cloud supported, open-source
    application that runs on inexpensive phones, to address the challenges of standardizing the
    delivery of services by ASHAs and improving their accountability (Figure 3). Instead of paper
    registers and flip charts, ASHAs easily track and support clients with registration forms, check-
    lists, key counseling points using multimedia (images, audio, and videos), decision support,
    simple referral algorithms, and SMS reminders.
        Highlights of the CommCare innovation include:
        •	 Case management: ASHAs track multiple cases over time and promote timely, scheduled
            visits by sending SMS reminders. Real time data collected by ASHAs is stored on the
            central cloud server, CommCareHQ. The data is privacy-protected and provides access
            to health supervisors of ASHAs to assess each health worker’s performance indicators,
            including daily activity, number of clients, length of visits, and follow-up rates.
        •	 Training and home visit support: ASHAs use multimedia to enhance their engagement
            and credibility with clients, generating more demand for their services. Audio/visual aids
            improve adherence to protocols and audio prompts assist illiterate ASHAs. CommCare
            supports multiple languages, which mitigates distrust over local languages and dialects.

    Figure 3. Features of CommCare




     Collect and Monitor Data   Manage Clients               Engage with Multimedia       Manage Workforce
     ASHAs gather complex       ASHAs use CommCare’s         ASHAs use CommCare’s         Supervisors use SMS
     data on clients and        case management features     audio, videos, checklists,   texting and forms to
     supervisors view data in   to track clients on mobile   and images to engage         remotely manage the
     real-time on the web for   and the web, rather than     their clients and increase   CommCare application
     performance monitoring.    paper-based methods.         their own knowledge.         and ASHA workforce.

      CommCare mobile technology standardizes frontline service delivery and improves client coordination



8
   •	 Data-driven monitoring: ASHAs provide real-time data of their daily activities to super-
      visors, who track their performance and provide feedback to nurse midwives.
  Dimagi trains the ASHAs on how to use CommCare and offers implementation support.
They also offer customized service packages to implementation partners who support ASHAs.

CommCare Product Development and Rollout
    In 2004, Dimagi began working with the Centre for Disease Control and Prevention in
Zambia to design and develop SmartCare, a country-wide smart card based Electronic Health
Record System. The system would track patient information across rural and urban clinics to
improve continuity of care for the patients and providers, as well as strengthen the capacity
of managing information on the country’s health.
    Dimagi’s other consulting projects at the time also helped fund Dimagi’s core operations.
Over the years, Dimagi realized these disparate projects required creating custom solutions
for each client that could limit Dimagi’s prospects to scale. In addition, maintaining multiple
software codebases during various stages of development for various clients and providing
maintenance support with the same or diverse nature of problems across multiple clients was
leading to duplication of work.
    To overcome these challenges, Dimagi decided to develop a general version of a software
platform product that would fit the needs of multiple clients. It used cases based on different
configurations—a product approach—rather than creating unique solutions built from scratch
for each client’s project—a project approach. Under the product approach, Dimagi aimed at
providing a turnkey solution to clients that would satisfy 90% of the functionalities required
by the client (at a cheaper price). The product was designed to facilitate creation of multiple
applications using a common codebase. This generalized product was named CommCare.
    Dimagi’s vision and goals for CommCare was threefold: (1) enable organizations to create
and maintain Dimagi’s product with minimal technical support; (2) make Dimagi’s product
widely accessible at a low cost; and (3) minimize duplication across projects.
    In its infancy, the CommCare platform
was used to create applications to serve Figure 4. CommCare in India as of 2017
as a data collection and reporting system
on personal digital assistants (PDAs) for
use by community health workers. Later,
CommCare included tracking features
that became a key differentiator in the
product. PDAs were used early on because
there was a perception that mobile phones
could not perform complicated tasks.
However, this notion faded after some
experimenting by Dimagi on a few of its
projects, and there was a shift shortly after
to transfer the functionality from PDAs to
mobile phones.

Financial Structure
Dimagi registered as a for-profit social enterprise under the Indian Companies Act of 1956.
Although a for-profit enterprise, its financing mechanism since its establishment in India has
largely been grant-based. In 2011, 95 percent of revenues were generated through grants
(Figure 5). Grants from USAID (51 percent) and the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation (14
percent) were the biggest contribution to the revenue stream. In 2010, Dimagi received grants
from USAID-sponsored Development Innovation Ventures (DIV) to establish Proof of Concepts
for the use of mobile applications in the delivery of basic services.

                                                                                                  9
                          In the past few years revenue from sales has increased from 5 percent in 2011 to 28 percent
                      in 2013 (Figure 6). These sales were generated from implementation partners such as CRS and
                      World Vision using consulting services provided by Dimagi to support deployment (training of
                      users and maintenance of CommCare). Dimagi also charges user hosting fees—approximately
                      USD 2 per month/per user for any organization with more than 10 ASHAs using CommCare.
                      The fee covers hosting, running and maintenance costs for the core software and servers. In
                      2016, sales (including bundles and services with partners and enterprise solutions for large
                      scale projects has moved to 86% while product sales have grown to 7% (Figure 7).




                     51+14+7135                                                                 26+21+428
                       Figure 5. Composition of Financing 2011                     Figure 6. Composition of Financing 2013

                                                     n USAID Grant
                                    5%                                                                                      USAID Grant
                               5%                                                              Sales
                                                     n Gates Foundation Grant                                               26%
                          5%                                                                    28%
                                                     n UN Foundation NORAD
                       13%                              IWG Grant
                                             51%     n Population Services
                        7%                              International Grant             NORAD
                                                     n WHO Grant                       Grant 4%
                              14%                                                                                         Grant
                                                     n Indian Council of Medical
                                                                                                                          Challenges 21%
                                                       Research Grant                          World Bank
                                                     n Sales
                                                                                                Grant 21%




                                                         83+7+3
                                                      Figure 7. Composition of Financing 2016
                                                                                           n Enterprise
                                                                                           n Innovation grant
                                                                                           n Product
                                                                                           n Bundles and services




                      Results Chain
     Figure 8. Results Chain for CommCare Model

              Inputs                            Outputs                          Outcomes                    Development Goal

      •	 Financing: largely              •	 Increased cases of           •	 Reduction of                    •	 Enhance health, life
        grant-based                        institutional deliveries           maternal mortality                expectancy, and
      •	 Technology: mobile-               of babies                          rate                              overall well-being for
        based, open source               •	 Enhanced pre- and            •	 Reduction of infant                 poorest populations
        platform for ASHAs                 post-natal care                    mortality rate
      •	 Manpower: to assess             •	 Increased knowedge
        demand, customize                  and improved
        software, and                      counseling skills of
        support training and               ASHAs
        implementation                   •	 Increased awareness
      •	 Hardware/                         of family members
        equipment: provide                 in maternal and
        mobile phones to                   newborn care
        ASHAs to pilot use of
        CommCare



10
Implementation
Data Collection and Management
CommCare apps allow ASHAs to manage patients’ files through a continuum of care in much
the same way that a traditional doctor stores patient files on a computer. CommCare sends this
collected data to a cloud-based server in real time, and it can also be used without mobile or
Internet connectivity. Real-time data on patient health indicators and health worker performance
provide clarity and insight into remote interactions, allowing for targeted service provision,
enhanced quality of care, and constructive feedback to health workers. With CommCare, health
workers are spending less time filling out paper forms, more time interacting with patients,
making fewer data entry errors. Appendices IV–V provide examples.

Software Sales and Implementation Support
Dimagi has a Global Services team of solution architects, public health specialists, and experi-
enced development professionals that work with organizations to deliver various implementa-
tion services. These services include everything from initial application design, development,
field testing and iterations with users, and training and capacity building of all relevant stake-
holders within an intervention. The services have the twin purpose of enabling the partners
to manage local-level troubleshooting and customize the application as per the requirement.
    More specifically, Dimagi offers five types of Implementation Bundles, a package of services,
and 12 months of software plans (Figure 9). If the Implementation Bundle does not fit the
needs of a partner organization, most of Dimagi’s services can be accessed through a la carte
offerings. A partner can select the software plan based on the required features and the size
of its projects, add capacity services depending on their program and technology needs, and
add performance plans according to longer-term support strategies.

Figure 9. Dimagi’s Package of Services—Implementation Bundles




                                                                                                     11
     Figure 10. Software Plans




     Customized Design
     Through an iterative design process, Dimagi works alongside frontline health workers to design
     the application, which ensures mobile apps respond to the unique challenges that these
     workers need resolved. The interface is designed in an audio-visual format so that ASHAs with
     a lower literacy level can perform their functions effectively. The software includes registration
     forms, checklists, a tool for monitoring danger signs, and educational prompts with images
     and audio/video clips available in multiple languages. Appendices IV–V provide examples.
         CommCare Exchange is an app store where organizations can share applications each has
     built using the CommCare platform to facilitate co-creation of mobile-based health application
     and easy download for reuse/customization. This app store provides cost-effective solutions
     and reduces duplication of efforts while building applications on CommCare.

     Supply and Messaging Functionality
     CommCare Supply is a logistics system which leverages mobile technology to strengthen
     supply chains in low-resource settings. Designed in close collaboration with health systems
     logistics experts from JSI and Ministries of Health, the technology has been tested and evolved
     through real-world deployments in Tanzania (ILSGateway), Ghana (Early Warning System),
     Malawi (cStock), and Senegal (cStock). All of these countries have now taken the system to
     national scale. Today, CommCare Supply is being used to improve quality of reliable, real-time
     stock information to decision-makers at all levels, streamline logistics systems with targeted
     alerts to supervisors and managers, facilitate early detection, resolution, and prevention of
     stockouts, reduce lead times through improved supervision of requisition and delivery, and
     improve resupply times for last-mile health workers.
        CommCare Messaging allows organizations to build sophisticated messaging applica-
     tions, tracking contacts over time and delivering customized and targeted messaging. It can
     also integrate with CommCare mobile phone applications and other tools built on top of
     CommCareHQ. CommCare Messaging can be used in a wide variety of workflows including
     communicating with patients in clinical trials, collecting infrequent information from farmers,
     sending out medication and appointment confirmations, SMS-based surveys or quizzes or
     simply as an information service.

     Partnerships
     Dimagi has fostered partnerships with three sets of partners:
       •	 Implementing partners: NGOs such as CRS, IntraHealth International, Real Medicine
          Foundation, and Save the Children implement CommCare technology in the field.
          Dimagi provides technical expertise, capacity building, design support, and the tech-
          nology platform at the outset of the project that the implementing partner then incor-
          porates into its program.

12
   •	 Funding agencies: Funding agencies provide financial assistance directly to Dimagi to
      promote and foster technological innovation in different geographical contexts. Core
      funding is provided by the Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, International Develop-
      ment Research Centre (IDRC), UN Foundation, Norwegian Government, Rockefeller
      Foundation, USAID, and Vodaphone Foundation, Wellcome Trust. In 2013, the World
      Bank, through a Development Marketplace grant, enabled Dimagi to try a new innova-
      tive model of engagement—reaching scale in one state with one standardized applica-
      tion and directly engaging with the government.
   •	 Government: Before the partnership with Development Marketplace, Dimagi’s engage-
      ment with the Indian government at the state level (Bihar, Uttar Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh,
      etc.) was through the implementing partner NGOs. Through Development Marketplace,
      Dimagi directly engaged with the government for the first time through a block-wide
      state NRHM-approved pilot without the presence of an implementing partner. This
      gave Dimagi a chance to establish a relationship with the government and state-led
      development partners, and demonstrate the applicability of CommCare as a job aid.
   Appendix VII describes the nature of Dimagi’s partnerships and how the partnerships could
evolve over the next 3–5 years.

Project Highlights
World Bank Development Marketplace—CommCare Scale-up in Jharkhand (June 2013–
June 2015, World Bank, National Health Mission—Jharkhand): With support from the
World Bank Development Marketplace, worked with UNICEF, USAID-MCHIP, and the National
Health Mission of Jharkhand to test and scale a mobile job-aid for community health workers
to track maternal and child health. Working with content experts, including UNICEF, Dimagi
has developed and piloted a tool for ASHA workers to track pregnant women and newborn
children through the continuum of care. Currently, the mobile tool is being used by 238 ASHA’s
in 1 high-priority district in Jharkhand, in partnership with local and district health officials.
Dimagi is continuing to work with the National Health Mission to evaluate the ongoing pilot
and the intervention has been included in the state’s Project Implementation Plan for 2015 to
scale to an additional 7 districts.

Ananya Project—MOTECH Suite Handset Application Development and Implementation
(Jan 2013–Present, Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, Multiple Partners): CommCare
is being deployed by a consortium of 10 partners (including CARE, BBC WST and Grameen
Foundation) as part of a five-year, statewide initiative with over $120 million from the Bill &
Melinda Gates Foundation to improve health outcomes throughout the state of Bihar in
India. While over 600 health workers are currently using CommCare, there is potential that
the project will be scaled to all 60,000 health workers in the state. Through this effort that is
in partnership with the Government of Bihar, CommCare and MOTECH are being integrated
as part of a comprehensive mHealth platform that will be expanded to include other tech-
nologies such as OpenMRS. Partnered with the Grameen Foundation, Dimagi is integrating
CommCare data with MOTECH such that a complete solution encompassing SMS, IVR, and
Mobile Apps could be delivered across the entire set of partners in Bihar.

USAID Development Innovation Ventures Stage I and II—Scaling CommCare to Deliver
Better Community Health to Millions throughout India (Sept 2012-Aug 2014, USAID,
Multiple Partners): Dimagi completed USAID’s Development Innovation Ventures (DIV) Fund
Stage 1 Award in 2012 and Stage 2 to further scale up its work in 2014. Both DIV Fund Stage
1 and Stage 2 awards focused on scaling CommCare to over 50 organizations that support
frontline worker (FLW) programs throughout India. By combining at scale an innovative, field-
tested mHealth solution, a massive health workforce, a broad base of implementation partners,

                                                                                                     13
     and rigorous, relevant, and timely research, Dimagi worked towards realizing the full potential
     of community- based primary care as envisioned by the Government of India, and globally.
     Dimagi rapidly built the capacity of organizations to use mobile solutions across a number of
     sectors including health, finance, education, and agriculture, as well as rigorously evaluated the
     benefit of mobile solutions within the Accredited Social Health Activist (ASHA) program in India.

     Catholic Relief Services ReMiND Project—Reducing Maternal and Newborn Deaths in India
     (June 2012–Sept 2015, CRS): In Uttar Pradesh, Dimagi has been working with Catholic Relief
     Services (CRS) to roll out pregnancy, postpartum, infant, and referral CommCare modules for
     FLWs in consultation with district and state health authorities. 400 FLWs are using audio and
     visual prompts to systematically counsel and assess women and babies for danger signs. FLW
     supervisors are also alerted when visits are missed. The CRS site has become a strong inno-
     vation test bed and an increasingly well-known example globally of mHealth as a supportive
     supervision tool. The project is currently assessing how direct-to-FLW feedback improves FLW
     motivation and performance. Preliminary results show that, after using CommCare for five
     months, ASHAs showed a 24% increase in knowledge of maternal and newborn interventions
     and a 34% increase in likelihood that they would encourage clients to use health services.

        Over the last ten years, Dimagi has also participated in research initiatives for ICT platforms
     and healthcare delivery in under-served populations. Research (jointly conducted in partnership
     with University of Pennsylvania, Microsoft Research, and University of Washington) demonstrates
     the potential for organizations to use CommCare to improve their community programs, with
     an emphasis on monitoring and communication.




14
Impact
More than 50 studies explored CommCare’s impact on frontline programs in low-resource
settings.

Several published case studies on CommCare provide evidence that the system is well received
by ASHAs and clients across different geographical regions and types of community programs
(Mhila 2009; Bogan 2009; Mangilmam 2010; and Treatmen 2012). In India, qualitative research
shows that CommCare technology is improving the quality of health, timeliness of visits, data
collection, and ASHAs’ accountability (Table 1). A study conducted by Mathematica Policy
Research provides statistically significant evidence of substantive change in client behaviors
from equipping FLWs with CommCare (Borkum, 2015). Another study found that an interven-
tion using CommCare increased the average number of ANC sessions per woman by 41%,
with 58% more women attending 3 or more ANC visits. It also doubled the number of FLW
visits per woman.

Figure 11 presents the statistically significant improvements in ANC, child health, and family
planning in the CommCare intervention group. Highlights include a 73% increase in women
who attended at least three ANC visits, 58% increase in women who consumed 90 IFA tablets,
and 36% increase in women using a permanent method of contraception as compared to the
control (Borkum, 2015).

Figure 11. Impact of Intervention




Improved Quality of Counseling
A study in India found that frontline workers’ counseling techniques improved after five months
of using CommCare. This improvement included a 34 percent increase in frontline workers
who encouraged clients to use a health service, a 22 percent increase in frontline workers
who encouraged clients to ask questions or speak during visits, and a 25 percent increase in

                                                                                                  15
frontline workers who waited for clients to respond to a question (Mohamed and others 2013).
Mathematica, a third-party company, conducted a comprehensive evaluation of continuum of
care services (CCS) in 2014. Preliminary analysis of the CommCare data illustrates the tool’s
positive effects, including an increased number of pregnant women registering at the early
stage of pregnancy, correctly receiving 90 iron and folic acid tablets and accessing skilled care
at birth. These early results also show a substantial leap in the percentage of women visited
by a frontline worker within the first 24 hours of delivery from 6.7 percent to 59.5 percent in
less than one year (CARE 2014).
    Alongside Mathematica’s current evaluation, Dimagi and CARE India conducted a short
study to explore the impact of CCS on the quality and experience of care via observing a small
number of ASHAs with their clients. The study also focused on whether different ASHA char-
acteristics, such as literacy and education, affect ASHA adoption of the tool and the quality
and experience of care directly. Among many findings, results indicate that higher levels of
CommCare adoption are significantly associated with higher quality and experience of care.
    For instance, the ASHAs who used CommCare most frequently scored 33.4 percent higher
on visit quality and 24.7 percent higher on visit experience, compared to ASHAs who used
CommCare least frequently (CARE 2014). Among other factors, the effect depended on how
much ASHAs use audio, video, and images through CommCare during home visits. It also
found that non-CommCare users often had short and incomplete visits, targeting care to the
immediate state of mother and child, rather than to the full continuum of care. From these
visits, CommCare appears to increase the comprehensiveness of home visits and instances
of accurate counseling.

Job Aid for ASHAs
CommCare Evidence Base (Chatfield, et al, 2014) suggests that within a period of four months
of usage of CommCare, its easy-to-use features have enabled health workers under CRS inter-
ventions to show a 22 percent increase in their knowledge on critical signs for the health of
the mother and newborn. The enhanced knowledge among ASHAs on routine immunization,
nutrition, and the health education needs for pregnant women is contributing to the social
capital in the project locations.
   The audio-visual counseling module embedded in CommCare has enhanced the knowledge
base of ASHAs. An independent study found that compared knowledge retention of ASHAs
for at least three to five critical signs across all key health categories before and after four
months of deployment of CommCare. It highlights that ASHAs had increased their knowledge
retention from 48 percent to 70 percent by using CommCare (IntraHealth 2012).
   Using CommCare has also given ASHAs increased confidence in their job and respect from
their clients. For example, in the case of ASHA Sunita of the village of Amra, pregnant women
and their families are more respectful toward her, because she carries a mobile and uses it
for structured counseling. For ASHA Lakshmi of the village of Bharasawan, the availability of
content from CommCare has given her the confidence to provide structured counseling to
pregnant women during home visits.

More Inclusive of Family
Quantitative studies and qualitative interviews confirm that CommCare attracts family members
to counseling sessions. A study of 25 frontline workers using CommCare and 25 not using
CommCare in Kaushambi, Uttar Pradesh investigated how long frontline workers spent with
their clients and who attended the counseling sessions. The results showed that sessions led
by frontline workers using CommCare are on average 1.7 times longer, 2.6 times more likely
to include the client’s husband, and 1.6 times more likely to include the client’s mother- in-law
than counseling sessions led by frontline workers that don’t use CommCare. Another study in
India found that family members of pregnant women—specifically their husband, sisters-in-
law, and mothers-in-law—were more likely to sit in on home visits with CommCare (Mohamed
and others 2013).

Improved Data and Case Management


    CRITERIA                                                 EVIDENCE

 Reach/Access     •	 Availability—Number of ASHAs using CommCare increased: 100 in 2012 to 2,250 in 2013.
                  •	 Access—Substantial leap in the percentage of women visited by a frontline workers within
                    the first 24 hours of delivery from 6.7% to 59.5% in less than one year (CARE 2014).

 Effectiveness    •	 More inclusive of family in care—Sessions lead by frontline workers using CommCare are on
                     average 1.7 times longer, 2.6 times more likely to include the client’s husband, and 1.6 times
                     more likely to include the client’s mother-in-law.
                  •	 Improved counseling techniques—One study showed a 34% increase in frontline workers
                     who encouraged clients to use a health service, a 22% increase in frontline workers who
                     encouraged clients to ask questions or speak during visits, and a 25% increase in frontline
                     workers who waited for clients to respond to a question (Mohamed and others 2013).
                  •	 Increased knowledge of care concepts—ASHA knowledge of at least 3 of 5 danger signs
                     improved from 48% to 70% after four months of using CommCare (IntraHealth 2012).
                  •	 Higher quality and experience of care—ASHAs who used CommCare most frequently
                     scored 33.4% higher on visit quality and 24.7% higher on visit experience, compared to
                     ASHAs who used CommCare less frequently (CARE 2014).

 Accountability   •	 Increased data completeness, with 98% on-time delivery of data.
                  •	 CommCare informs client counseling sessions, tracks clients, and helps ASHAs deliver
                    appropriate information (Schwartz 2013).
                  •	 Data completeness with CommCare is significantly higher at 84% compared to paper-
                     based forms at 10% (Medhi and others 2012).
                  •	 CommCare strengthens ASHA workflow by improving ASHA performance, improving the
                     ASHA-beneficiary interaction, changing health norms in the community, and improving the
                     monitoring of ASHAs within the health system (Flaming 2014).
                  •	 Regular tracking of clients by ASHAs using mobile phones and sending SMS reminders to
                     mothers/families regarding scheduled visits to health centers.

 Cost-            •	 As an open-source product platform, CommCare’s model can support development of
 effectiveness      scalable mServices that can demonstrate economies of scale by supporting multiple use
 and                cases, reuse of application workflows, and integration with national health information
 Affordability      systems. This reduces costs for sustaining and scaling ICT solutions, enabling health
                    systems to replicate multiple, integrated mHealth solutions rather than focus on investing in
                    infrastructure and additional development for scaling a single project or use case.
 Impact on        •	 Preliminary analysis of CommCare data illustrate the mobile tool’s positive effects on
 Development         health, including an increased number of pregnant women registered at the early stage of
 Outcomes            pregnancy, correctly receiving dietary supplements, and accessing skilled care at birth.
                  •	 Two ongoing impact evaluations are being conducted by CARE and Mathematica
                     Policy Research, and Catholic Relief Services, Harvard Business School, and University
                     of Washington, to provide information on impact of the deployment of CommCare
                     technology on health outcomes.

 Impact for       •	 In 2011, 95% of Dimagi’s revenues came from grants. In recent years, revenues from sales to
 Sustainability      partners have increased from 5% in 2011 to 28% in 2013 (NRMC 2014).
                  •	 Dimagi plans to productize CommCare to increase sales revenue and financially
                     sustainability.

 Potential for    •	 The potential for scalability is high once Dimagi productizes CommCare and enters into
 Scalability        direct partnerships with state and national governments through NRHM.



                                                                                                                      17
     Sustainability and Scale-Up
     Opportunities
     Before the engagement in Jharkhand funded by a Development Marketplace grant, Dimagi
     had always worked with implementing partner NGOs, who would then in turn liaise with the
     government on any issues related to project implementation. Instead, Dimagi’s engagement
     with the government was limited to sharing a platform as resource persons, such as during
     training of frontline workers or attending review meetings convened by the district health
     department.
         Hence, Dimagi has created limited branding in its operational model of working through
     the partners and indirectly with the government. Further, where a given partner NGO (such
     as CRS) sub-contracts the field-level management to another local NGO with a grassroots
     presence, the possibility of engaging with government gets further constricted and so is the
     possibility for creating any major buy-ins from the government for replication and scale-up
     in the future.
         For this reason and given the potential for scale-up, Dimagi is moving toward scaling-up
     the deployment of CommCare through a series of initiatives:
         •	 Dimagi is planning to scale up the CommCare app with ASHAs across Jharkhand,
            thereby enforcing minimum standards of service delivery, maximizing the effectiveness
            of resources being deployed, and giving program managers access to timely, high-
            quality, and actionable information about current interventions.
         •	 Dimagi’s medium-term goal is to transition from the current user fee model (with NGOs
            as implementing partners) to a variant of the enterprise model in direct partnership
            with India’s state and national government. Dimagi wants to arrive at a rate whereby
            the agreement could indicate that when any mobile project is launched by a given state
            government, then Dimagi comes in and supports them at a fixed fee for time and work.
         •	 Another long-term possibility is active engagement with systems integrators (private
            companies such as TCS, Infosys, etc.) as a sub-contractor for training.
         •	 Dimagi’s long-term plan is to directly approach the state governments with the demon-
            strated ability to handle scale, without going through any system integrator. Dimagi has
            recently begun a pilot in Bihar (implemented through CARE) that bypasses a systems
            integrator to integrate the interactive voice responses with CommCare. Leveraging its
            partnership with other mobile health application developers, Dimagi plans to use the
            MOTECH Suite for undertaking the proposed integration for addressing core needs
            of mHealth. Upon success of the Bihar pilot, Dimagi would be able to demonstrate its
            capacity to handle scale and replication in other states.
         Dimagi’s revenue has grown in the past 10 years (+214% Compound Annual Growth Rate
     between 2010 and 2014), and has produced consistent small profit every year while investing in
     growth and expansion. In 2014, about 56 percent of Dimagi’s expenses were covered through
     implementation services contracts, 4 percent through SaaS (Software as a Service offering),
     and the remaining 40 percent were covered from large direct grants to Dimagi. Globally,
     Dimagi has developed a plan to grow, accelerate its impact and become self-sustaining
     without innovation grants within five years (2020). To achieve this goal, Dimagi will accelerate



18
its customer acquisition, expand into new sectors, further invest in its technology and offer
new value-added services.
    Between 2015 and 2020, Dimagi expects to expand from about 200 to 1,500 organizations
using CommCare and from about 20,000 to 180,000 users. They expect only 43 percent of
the targeted customer base to be paying software fees. The other 57 percent will be able to
access CommCare for free through pro-bono offering or through simple community subscrip-
tion. Thanks to this growth, Dimagi expects to benefit over 100 million people within 10 years.

Factors to Consider Moving Forward

Partnerships
  •	 Integrate CommCare data with government data. Since the CommCare application is
     embedded in public health care service provision and Dimagi is moving to scale-up
     CommCare, it is essential for Dimagi to proactively engage with the government to
     link CommCare data with the government’s Mother and Child Tracking System. Data
     collected through CommCare is presently used by the program managers of NGOs
     for performance monitoring, and not by the government. Payment of incentives for
     ASHAs is based on Mother and Child Tracking System data, which is not integrated
     with the CommCare data.
  •	 Facilitate scale-up through standard operating procedures and mechanisms for identi-
     fying partners. Dimagi selected partners under the USAID first round of funding on an
     ad hoc basis. For the second round of AID funding, Dimagi conducted a formal assess-
     ment of partners, which would need to be formalized before partners were signed. A
     due diligence process for identifying partners would ensure that future partners have
     the requisite technical and financial capabilities to effectively implement and sustain
     the partnership.
  •	 Foster direct partnerships with state and national governments. By entering into agree-
     ments with state and national government through the NRHM and ASHA program,
     whereby Dimagi supports the deployment of CommCare at a fixed fee, Dimagi could
     increase the reach of CommCare technology manifold.

Human Resources
  •	 Train personnel to supervise the deployment of CommCare. The availability of human
     resources that can provide technical support, supervise implementation and delivery
     of services, and help scale up operations is a key challenge. To address this long-term
     human resource challenge, the state governments are recruiting ASHA facilitators
     to supervise the work of 10–15 ASHAs. They need substantial capacity building and
     budgetary support to enable them to perform their tasks independently. In the interim,
     sector facilitators provided by NGOs supervise ASHAs on a daily basis. Once the NGOs‘
     involvement is over, ASHA facilitators are expected to be hired by the government to
     provide necessary support. This challenge also provides a new opportunity for Dimagi
     to enter into the domain of skill development of trainers who can provide direct support
     to the government in supervision and monitoring of ASHAs.

Finances
   •	 Move toward a revenue-based financial model. To make its model financially sustain-
      able, Dimagi is moving toward productizing CommCare. Based on Dimagi’s estimates,
      a base of 25,000 or more active users across all Commcare applications would help
      the organization sustain the cost and cover operating expenses. With a current user
      base of 2,250, it would require a significant jump for Dimagi to reach its sustainability
      targets in the near future (2–3 years). Dimagi claims it doubles its user base every year,

                                                                                                   19
           but without a direct sales or marketing team and with its continued reliance on grant
           proposals it is difficult to predict when the model would become financially sustainable.

     Research and Advocacy
       •	 Build an evidence base on CommCare benefits. Working directly with the govern-
          ment requires evidence in terms of cost-efficiency and the associated benefits of using
          CommCare, along with its positive impact on improving health outcomes. For instance,
          even after three years of intervention in the Kaushambi district, there is no budgetary
          support in District Plans for piloting/rolling out of CommCare. Until an evidence base
          is created, Dimagi’s engagement with the government and scaling up of operations
          would be constrained. Two independent impact evaluations underway could generate
          the government confidence needed before any full-scale integration is considered.




20
Lessons Learned
Use technology and multimedia to enable service delivery
The Dimagi model demonstrates how technology-based solutions have the potential to scale
access of health services in a cost-effective manner, standardize delivery of services at the last
mile, and improve the accountability of field-level workers.

Use multimedia to improve client engagement
Multimedia aids—such as video/audio clips, images, checklists, and educational prompts—can
enhance engagement with clients, quality of counseling, and frontline workers’ knowledge
and skills. Multimedia is also useful for low-literate groups, by emphasizing visual/auditory
cues over text.

Integrate collected data from non-state partners with government data
It is essential for players such as Dimagi and social enterprises to proactively engage with the
Indian government to develop a common understanding around data collection and moni-
toring. Initiating collaborative efforts toward data collection, reporting, and data manage-
ment of pilot data and beyond could significantly enhance the core of funding and support
for subsequent pilots.

Involve family members in care
Being more inclusive of the client’s family members in home visits and general health care—such
as husband, mother, and in-laws—creates a circle of trust and a tight support system that can
prove critical during pre- and post-natal care. Audio recorded in the local dialect and clearly
designed images can attract the attention of key decision-makers, such as the mother-in-law.

Create an evidence base for advocacy
Social enterprises should collaborate with research institutions to conduct qualitative studies
and robust impact evaluation to build the evidence base on the impact of interventions on
development outcomes. This evidence would inform government and development institu-
tions on future development strategies, including resource allocation.




                                                                                                     21
     APPENDIX I

     References
     	 Baqui Abdullah H, Shams El-Arifeen, Gary L Darmstadt, Saifuddin Ahmed, Emma K
     Williams, Habibur R Seraji, Ishtiaq Mannan, Syed M Rahman, Rasheduzzaman Shah, Samir
     K Saha, Uzma Syed, Peter J Winch, Amnesty Lefevre, Mathuram Santosham, Robert E Black
     for the Projahnmo Study Group, 2008. Effect of community-based newborn-care intervention
     package implemented through two service-delivery strategies in Sylhet district, Bangladesh:
     a cluster-randomised controlled trial. The Lancet, 2008, 371:1936–1944.
     	    Bogan Molly, van Esch Jan, Gayo Mhila, Brian DeRenzi, Neal Lesh and Marc Mitchell 2009.
     Improving standards of care with mobile applications in Tanzania. W3C Workshop in Africa to
     Explore the Role of Mobile Technologies for Development, Maputo, Mozambique.
     	    CARE, 2014. Continuum of Care Services: A Holistic Approach to Using MOTECH Suite
     for Community Workers, Providing coordinated care across the continuum of maternal and
     child health in Bihar, India
     	    Chatfield, Alison, Gillian Javetski, Andrea Fletcher, Neal Lesh, 2014, CommCare Evidence
     Base, CommCare.
     	    Chittamuru, Deepti and Mohini Bhavsar 2012. CommCare: evaluation of a mobile appli-
     cation for maternal health in rural India. Presented at the International Association of Media
     and Communication Research, Durban, South Africa, 15–20 July 2012.
     	 Chittamuru, Deepti, 2012. CommCare: Evaluation of a mobile application for maternal
     health. International Association of Media and Communications Research, 2012 Conference:
     South-North Conversations. Durban, South Africa.
     	    DeRenzi, Brian, Leah Findlater, Jonathan Payne, Benjamin Birnbaum, Joachim Mangilima,
     Tapan Parikh, Gaetano Borriello, Neal Lesh, 2012. Improving community health worker perfor-
     mance through automated SMS. Proceedings of the 5th International Conference on Informa-
     tion and Communication Technologies and Development, 2012:25–34.
     	 Flaming, Alison, 2014. Interoperability of Commcare Within India’s Asha Framework: A
     Study On Mobile Health In Kishangarh Block Of Ajmer, Rajasthan
     	    Intrahealth, 2012. mSakhi: Putting Information into the Hands of Community Health Workers
     Lessons from a pilot intervention in Uttar Pradesh, India, http://www.commcarehq.org/docs/
     rfa/div2/mSakhi_report.pdf
     	 Mangilma J., DeRenzi B., Lyons J., Mrema B., Ollis S., Schaefer W., Sims C., & Lesh N.
     CommCare: a phone-based tool for home based care in Tanzania. Second International Confer-
     ence on Mobiles for Development, Kampala, Uganda, 2010
     	    Medhi, Indrani, Mohit Jain, Anuj Tewari, Mohini, Bhavsar, Michael Matheke-Fischer, and
     Edward Cutrell. 2012. Combating rural child malnutrition through inexpensive mobile phones.
     Nordic Conference on Human-Computer Interaction, 2012.
     	 Mhila, Gayo, Brian, DeRenzi, Caroline Mushi, Timothy Wakabi, Matt Steele, Pradhjot
     Dhadialla, Jonthan Jackson, Neal Lesh, 2009. Using Mobile Applications for Community-based
     Social Support for Chronic Patients. Submitted for HELINA 2009 Health Informatics in Africa
     Conference, April 2009, Abidjan.
     	    Mohamed, N., Lesh, N., Conte, F., and Findlater L., 2013. Using ICT for CHW To Influence
     Decision Makers. Mobile Communication For Development Conference. April 2014. Dakar,
     Senegal
     	 Ramachandran, Divya, Vivek Goswami, and John Canny. 2010. “Research and Reality:
     Using Mobile Messages to Promote Maternal Health in Rural India.” 2010 Proceedings of the
     International Conference on Information and Communication Technologies and Development
     (London, England), December 13-16, 2010



22
	 Reddya, Hanimi, Manas R Pradhana, Rohini Ghosha, A G Khanb, 2012. India’s progress
towards the Millennium Development Goals 4 and 5 on infant and maternal mortality”, WHO
South-East Asia Journal of Public Health 2012;1(3):279-289.
	   Schwartz, Ariel, Mohini Bhavsar, Edward, Cutrell, Jonathan Donner, and Melissa Densmore,
2013. Balancing burden and benefit: non-prescribed use of employer-issued mobiles devices.
Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Information and Communication Tech-
nologies and Development.
	 Treatman Derek, and Neal Lesh, 2012. Strengthening Community Health Systems with
Localized Multimedia. Mobile for Development, Dimagi, Inc..
	   Wilson, Nevin, Archana Trivedi, Sarabjit Chadha, Sunita Prasad, and Sanjay Kumar. 2014.
mTB by Front Line Workers in a Tribal District in India: A Pilot Study. Poster at the 45th Union
World Conference On Lung Health in Barcelona Spain, October 28-November 1 2014.

This case study was developed through an analysis of qualitative and quantitative studies,
desk review, organizational-level data analysis, and local consultations.




                                                                                                   23
     APPENDIX II

     Dimagi Products and Services

     Products Offered
        •	 CommCare: CommCare is an easily customizable mobile platform for frontline
           workers to track and support their interactions with clients.
        •	 CommTrack: A tool for mobile logistics and supply chain management.
        •	 CommConnect: A solution for building SMS applications allowing for two-way
           messaging, conditional reminders, surveys and broadcast messages.

     Services Offered
     Dimagi offers services in technology strategy, software engineering, and training. The primary
     focus is public health in the developing world, with expertise in mobile health solutions.

     1. Software Development
     Software development expertise in a variety of capacities:
         •	 End to end development
         •	 Engineering program management
         •	 Core development
         •	 Technical and logistical support
         •	 Deployment strategy
     Experience in a variety of application domains
         •	 Nationwide medical record system using smartcards and offline synchronization
         •	 SMS-based emergency disease outbreak surveillance, data aggregation, and
            reporting
         •	 Mobile and SMS-based inventory tracking and supply chain management, from small
            warehouses to nationwide antimalarial bednet distributions
         •	 Interactive Voice Response (IVR) systems for health education awareness
         •	 Distributed data collection and transformation for statistical analysis
     Experience in development on unique, limited platforms
         •	 Extensible mobile development, including cell phones, PDAs and SmartPhones
         •	 Proven capabilities in developing high-quality software on low-cost platforms
         •	 Experience designing distributed systems with limited network access
     Experience in diverse types of team environments
         •	 Single person or small team rapid prototyping
         •	 Multi-country, multi-person development
         •	 Collaboration among single independent contributors to an open source community
         •	 Large open source development
         •	 Creating productive teams with members with a wide range in technical skill levels


     2. Technology Strategy
     Example strategic services include:
         •	 System architecture and design
         •	 Data warehousing and analytics
         •	 Project planning and management
         •	 Team building, agile planning, and training
        •	   Due diligence (for new or existing projects)
        •	   Technology evaluation and selection
        •	   Harmonizing technical implementation with budgetary constraints
        •	   Integration with existing infrastructure and legacy systems
24
3. Technology in Health Care
Dimagi provides specialized health care informatics consulting services to commercial, academic
and government organizations worldwide.

Understanding of health care provider domain
  •	 Clinical, financial, and billing data
  •	 Electronic medical records and decision support
  •	 Requirements and feasibility analysis in clinical settings
  •	 Years of experience designing front ends for both low resource and high end
      customers
Experience with health care data standards
  •	 Security and Privacy (HIPAA)
  •	 Controlled vocabularies (SNOMED, ICD, CPT)
  •	 Health Information Exchanges (HIE)
Experience with advanced medical informatics
  •	 Medical artificial intelligence and machine learning
  •	 Data visualization and modeling
  •	 Bioinformatics
  •	 Imaging and Radiology


4. Technology as a Teaching Tool
Experience deploying creative solutions
    •	 Distance learning courses
    •	 Mobile phone based health education curriculum with airtime incentives
    •	 Literacy retention by means of SMS distributions


5. Training
Dimagi provides design and support for effective technical training plans for teams of various
technical skill levels.

Training expertise
   •	 Years of in-country support and training time in South Asia, Africa, and other regions
   •	 Remote assistance, training, and troubleshooting on multiple off-site projects
   •	 Experience working with a variety of diverse projects and teams




                                                                                                  25
     APPENDIX III

     Users and Supporters of CommCare

     Hundreds of organizations actively use CommCare, ranging from pilot projects to national
     deployments. Dimagi is working on more than 500 projects in over 60 countries today. Our
     partners include: Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, USAID, World Vision, and more. For more
     information, check out the Dimagi’s Partner site: http://www.dimagi.com/partners/.




26
APPENDIX IV

Screen Images of CommCare
Example screens of a CommCare appp on Android interface.




APPENDIX V

Images of Mobile Data Collection and Storage

CommCare sends data over standard phone networks for inspection on the web in real-time..




                                                                                            27
     User Configurable Platform – Anyone can Create a Free Account




     User Configurable Application Builder (No Software Coding Required)




28
Daily Reports




                29
     APPENDIX VI

     Partners of Dimagi and Geographic Distribution

     State               Partners          Project Focus          Description of Partnership

     Tamil Nadu      ICTPH (IKP         Risk Assessment      CommCare case management tool
                     Centre for                              deployed with 10 CHWs in Sep 2011.
                     Technologies in                         Steadily expanding its models to
                     Public Health)                          additional areas.

                     PHFI (Public       Chronic Care         Wellcome Trust funded 3-year large-
                     Health                                  scale study of CommCare to reduce
                     Foundation of                           key risk factors and treat chronic
                     India)                                  illness including hypertension and
                                                             diabetes. Grant awarded. This project
                                                             is taking place in Karnataka and
                                                             Haryana.

     Rajasthan       Save the           Maternal and Child   CommCare case management tool
                     Children, HP       Health               deployed with 10 ASHAs in May
                                                             2011. Obtained funding from HP
                                                             and phones from Nokia to scale and
                                                             evaluate with 70 ASHAs from Jan 2012
                                                             to Sep 2012.

     Uttar Pradesh   CRS (Catholic      Maternal and Child   CommCare case management tool
                     Relief Services)   Health               deployed with 10 ASHAs in April
                                                             2011. Expanded to 110 ASHAs in
                                                             September 2012. Funded to scale to
                                                             another 140 ASHAs in a neighboring
                                                             district by June 2013. Strong
                                                             involvement from District CMO, large
                                                             RCT on performance motivation
                                                             underway.

                     IntraHealth        Maternal and Child   CommCare training application
                                        Health               deployed with 10 ASHAs in March
                                                             2011. Part of demonstration project
                                                             with statewide scale potential. Was
                                                             Phase I of mSakhi.

                     Harvard School     Maternal and Child   Maternal and child surveillance for
                     of Public Health   Health               Gates-funded study of a Better Births
                                                             checklist requiring 170,000 births
                                                             to be monitored. Pilot started in
                                                             November 2012. Planned start to the
                                                             study in May 2013.




30
State               Partners           Project Focus            Description of Partnership

Maharashtra     IL&FS Education     AIDS                   Technical investigation for a mobile
                and Technology                             health system for community health
                Services                                   workers in partnership with local
                                                           NGOs and the Maharasthra State
                                                           AIDS Control Society. Developed
                                                           technical requirements for mobile
                                                           system; three-week duration in August
                                                           2010.

                World Vision        Maternal and Child     CommCare case management tool
                                    Health                 deployed with 10 ASHAs in July 2011.
                                                           Scaled to 40 ASHAs in July 2012.
                                                           Attempting further scale across six
                                                           sites with expectation of government
                                                           uptake if successful.

                PATH                Tracking Pregnant      CommCare project Navi Mumbai
                                    Woman                  slum from April 2012 to August 2012
                                                           to track pregnant mothers by 15 LINK
                                                           workers.

                SNEHA NGO           Maternal and Child     CommCare Android application
                                    Health                 focused on reducing malnutrition
                                                           in 18,000 households in Dharavi,
                                                           Mumbai from March 2012. Scaled to
                                                           another 30 workers in June 2012.

Gujarat         JSI (John Snow,     Oral Rehydration       Assess implementation of CommTrack
                Inc.)/MI            Salts (ORS) and Zinc   to track ORS and zinc and support
                                    Tracking               the current supply chain for ASHAs,
                                                           AWWs and ANMs.

West Bengal     Durbar/UCLA         HIV Medicine           CommCare Android application
                (University of      Adherence              combined with Interactive Voice
                California, Los                            Messaging to deliver voice-based
                Angeles)                                   health and appointment messages
                                                           daily to improve adherence to
                                                           medicine for HIV positive people in
                                                           Kolkata as part of RCT with UCLA.

Delhi           PHFI(Public         Survey Tool            CommCare Android application
                Health                                     used to survey 16,000 households
                Foundation of                              to evaluate the effectiveness of the
                India)/IIPHD                               new cadre of urban health workers
                (Indian Institute                          throughout Delhi.
                of Public Health)
Various:        PSI (Population     ORS and Zinc           Implementing CommTrack and
Chhattisgarh,   Services            Tracking               CommCare to manage ORS and
Rajasthan,      International)                             zinc supply chain at approximately
Orissa,                                                    20,000 shops across the country.
Assam,                                                     Salespersons will use CommTrack to
Gujarat,                                                   report stock and sales of ORS and zinc
Maharashtra,                                               at various sales outlets. CommCare
West Bengal                                                and CloudCare will be used to track
                                                           progress of training and outreach
                                                           sessions. Pilot began in November
                                                           2012. Scale up in December 2012.




                                                                                                    31
                       APPENDIX VII

                       Role of Partners and Evolution of Partnerships
                                                                _________________   EVOLUTION   _________________


        Type                Role            Inception (0-2 years)         Current (2-3 years)         Plan for future (3-5 years)

     Imple-         •	 Receiving funds      •	 Number of             •	 Number of Partners:           •	 Partner selection: call
     menter           for implementa-         Partners: 10 iden-         40 identified for under-        for proposals; due
     •	 Partner       tion from Dimagi        tified partners            taking pilots under             diligence of partners’
        NGOs          (from DIV 1 and 2       undertook pilots           funding from DIV 2              capacity recommended.
        (CRS in       funding) for Proof      with funding from          (2,500 users).               •	 Role:
        Uttar         of Concepts.            DIV 1 for estab-       •	 Partner selection:               oo Continue
        Pradesh).   •	 Local liaison and      lishing Proof of           through call for                   implementation;
     •	 Grass-        MoU with district       Concepts through           proposals from Dimagi.          oo Smaller partners
       roots          administration          100 CommCare                                                  availing of CommCare
                                                                     •	 Role:
       NGOs           for project imple-      users.                                                        exchange for
                                                                        oo Earlier role continues;
       (Vatsalya      mentation.            •	 Partner selection:          Handholding                      accessing suitable
       in UP).      •	 Liaison with state     Adhoc                        support to cluster               applications (free of
                      government for        •	 Role: Organize              coordinators                     cost till 50 users).
                      possible replica-       training for                 for minor                  •	 Payment: Pay to Dimagi
                      tion.                   frontline workers,           troubleshooting               the user fee, hosting
                    •	 Identifying and        cluster coordina-            in the use of                 fee, training and
                      training grass-         tors and in-house            CommCare.                     technical support fee.
                                              IT team on use            oo Training of in-house
                      roots NGOs for
                      field implemen-         of CommCare                  field managers of
                      tation.                 (Dimagi’s staff as           partner NGOs on
                                              resource persons);           interpreting reports
                    •	 Enabling training
                                              regular moni-                generated by
                      of in-house IT
                                              toring.                      CommCare.
                      team for field                                    oo Advanced capacity
                      deployment of         •	 Payment: No
                                              fee charged                  building of in-house
                      CommCare.
                                              from partner                 IT team for managing
                    •	 Interface                                           90% of the troubles
                                              NGOs during the
                      between benefi-                                      faced by Frontline
                                              inception phase.
                      ciaries, commu-                                      workers in using
                      nities, grass-                                       CommCare.
                      roots NGOs,
                                                                     •	 Payment: Partner
                      government and
                                                                         NGOs (not grass-
                      Dimagi.
                                                                         roots NGOs) pay user
                                                                         fee, hosting fee and
                                                                         management and
                                                                         technical support fee to
                                                                         Dimagi.




32
                                                             _________________   EVOLUTION     _________________


     Type               Role            Inception (0-2               Current (2-3 years)         Plan for future (3-5 years)
                                        years)

Government       •	 Concurrence to      •	 Partner NGOs            •	 Partnership with           •	 State government
•	 State/          implementers           (such as CRS)                district NRHM                 buys into the scien-
  District/        for the project in     and grassroots               continues.                    tific evidence created
  Block level      select areas.          NGOs inter-              •	 Partnership with               on the benefits of use
  government     •	 Stakeholder in        acted with the               state governments             of CommCare (e.g.,
  function-        using CommCare         district and                 for scale up. Direct          evidence on reduction
  aries.           data for perfor-       block function-              interaction between           in MMR and increase in
                   mance moni-            aries.                       Dimagi and the                institutional delivery).
                   toring of ASHAs.     •	 District health             state government.         •	 State governments
                 •	 Enabling              department                                                 replicate and upscale
                   programmatic           provided                                                   use of CommCare in
                   linkage with           necessary                                                  the state.
                   NRHM.                  concurrence                                            •	 State government
                                          for the project;                                           provides the platform
                 •	 Stakeholder
                                          nominated                                                  to Dimagi for finalizing
                   in reviewing
                                          ASHAs for                                                  content for CommCare
                   project progress
                                          training on                                                and rollout across state;
                   and impact of
                                          CommCare.                                                  avoiding duplication of
                   CommCare in
                   reducing MMR.                                                                     enabling platforms.
                                                                                                 •	 MoUs with state
                                                                                                     governments for part-
                                                                                                     nership for any mobile
                                                                                                     projects of the govern-
                                                                                                     mentt; payment terms
                                                                                                     on agreed rates.
Donors           •	 USAID funding       •	 DIV 1 funding           •	 DIV 2 funding for          •	 Grants for innova-
•	 Interna-        support to             for establishing             establishing addi-            tions and creating the
   tional id       Dimagi under           10 Proof of                  tional 40 Proof of            evidence base.
   and Devel-      DIV 1 and              Concepts.                    Concepts.                 •	 Working with Bill &
   opment          2 for estab-                                    •	 Development                    Melinda Gates Foun-
   Agencies:       lishing Proof of                                    Marketplace grant             dation on integration
   World Bank,     Concepts.                                           scale up and part-            of CommCare with
   IFC, USAID,   •	 Development                                        nering with govern-           MOTECH suite (with
   etc.            Marketplace                                         ment.                         CommCare as the front
•	 Special         grant for Dimagi                                •	 Bill & Melinda                 end and MOTECH as
  Grants:          for upscaling                                       Gates Foundation              the backend).
  Devel-           the Proof of                                        grant received for
  opment           Concepts in                                         applying Motech
  Marketplace      Jharkhand.                                          suite in Bihar for
  of the World                                                         integration of IVR
  Bank; DIV                                                            based system and
  1 and 2 of                                                           mobile-based
  USAID.                                                               applications (no
                                                                       role for system inte-
                                                                       grator).




                                                                                                                                 33
34
35
 uffers from a high maternal and infant mortality rate, especially in
reas, where poor women do not receive effective care and one in
22 infants die within one year of life. The main problem involves
 or access, quality and accountability of services provided by
nment Accredited Social Health Activists (ASHAs).

 g in 2010, Dimagi has deployed CommCare—a mobile-based,
supported, open-source application that runs on inexpensive
 s—to address the challenges of standardizing the delivery of
es by ASHAs. Multimedia aids enhance client engagement, quality
 nseling, and ASHA skills. Real-time data collection monitors
s’ activities and allows regular review of their performance

esult, there have been marked improvements in patient
gement, quality of services, monitoring and accountability.
gi has developed a broad base of partnerships and platforms for
mentation, funding, and collaboration to promote this technology
 tion in different geographical contexts and build an evidence
 or policy change.




         36
