Micro Insurance Academy:
Improving Health Insurance
Coverage in India		
Through training, research and advisory services, this
social enterprise empowers the bottom of the pyramid
to design and manage their own insurance schemes




                                                         1
    © Copyright April 2017
    The World Bank
    1818 H Street, NW
    Washington, D.C. 20433
    All rights reserved


    Acknowledgements
    This case study was prepared by Ergun Ertekin and Cristina Navarrete
    Moreno from the World Bank’s Social Enterprise Innovations team,
    with support from NRMC India, a management consulting firm in New
    Delhi, India.

    Special thanks to the MIA team, led by Dr. David M. Dror, for their
    assistance in compiling the information for this case study.

    Sharon Fisher provided design and additional editing support.


    Contact Information
    Social Enterprise Innovations
    Leadership, Learning, and Innovation at the World Bank Group
    Contact: Cristina Navarrete Moreno
    www.worldbank.org

    Micro Insurance Academy (MIA)
    Contact: Dr. David M. Dror at david@mia.org.in
    Web: www.microinsuranceacademy.org




2
Micro Insurance Academy: Improving
Health Insurance Coverage in India



Contents
Summary................................................................................................................................. 5
Challenge............................................................................................................................... 6
Innovation............................................................................................................................... 8
Implementation................................................................................................................... 13
Impact................................................................................................................................... 17
Sustainability and Scale-Up................................................................................................ 20
Lessons Learned.................................................................................................................. 22


Appendices
I. References........................................................................................................................... 23
II. Organizational Overview.................................................................................................. 25
III. Example of CHAT Decision Tool..................................................................................... 26
IV. Revenue and Expense Sheet........................................................................................... 27
V. Partner Assessment........................................................................................................... 28




                                                                                                                                               3
4
Summary
Faced with inadequate medical services, deficient living conditions and severe shifts in weather
patterns, the poor of India are often susceptible to catastrophes without the benefit of any
insurance coverage. Healthcare financing largely relies on direct out-of-pocket spending,
which causes immense health-related financial burdens for the poor—nearly 39 million
people in India are pushed into poverty because of ill health every year (Balarajan, Selvaraj
and Subramanian 2011).
    Despite recent efforts by the government and the private sector, only 15 percent of the
population in India is covered by health insurance (Berman, Ahuja and Bhandari 2010). This
dilemma has resulted in the proliferation of micro insurance schemes to protect low-income
people against specific perils—from illness to crop failure, death to natural disaster. Recently,
community-based health insurance (CBHI) has emerged as a solution to reduce healthcare
expenditure vulnerabilities for the poor. A CBHI scheme involves pre-payment and pooling
of resources to cover healthcare costs. Some CBHI schemes are operated by non-govern-
ment organizations (NGOs) as mutual aid societies, whereas other NGOs act as agents of
commercial insurance providers.
    Though some of these schemes have managed to extend financial protection to rural
communities, they have not been able to extend the coverage to the poorest of the poor
for several reasons: irregular cash flows of poor households where they are unable to pay
premiums; lack of awareness about the benefits of health insurance; and inability of the illit-
erate population to understand the terms and conditions of the insurance policy.
    In India, the Micro Insurance Academy (MIA) extends health insurance at the last mile by
providing technical assistance to local NGOs operating mutual aid through a bottom-up
approach to the design, implementation and management of CBHI. Through state-of-the-
art research, MIA develops a robust understanding of each community, and delivers efficient
and customized tools and frameworks that build a community’s capacity to self-manage micro
insurance schemes. Communities participate in identifying their insurance needs, including
the benefit package and premium. Strong local implementations partners—usually a local
organization or NGO with established credentials working in the target areas—are chosen
through rigorous capacity assessments.
    MIA positions itself as a trusted source that does not sell or promote pre-designed market
linked products. Rather, MIA bridges the gap between insurers and the bottom of the pyramid
(BoP) by providing advisory support and insurance education to establish CBHI. To date, MIA-
supported micro insurance schemes cover more than 40,000 people in India and Nepal. The
cumulative claims ratio across the schemes is reported at 65 percent, and insurance education
and understanding of the community has increased by 80 percent.
     MIA offers an independent, grant-based model, and the insurance schemes are finding
increasing acceptance among the poor as evident from high enrollment and renewal rates.
Going forward, having more evidence of development impact and increased usage and invest-
ment in technology will help MIA scale up and leverage partnerships with the government
and private sector. Because catastrophic events could wipe out pooled contributions, MIA is
investigating creating federated structures and a larger scheme to mitigate this and other risks.



                                                                                                    5
    Challenge
    In India 81 percent of total healthcare expen-
    diture takes place in private sector clinics
    and hospitals (Berman, Ahuja and Bhandari
    2010), out of which 94 percent is out-of-pocket
    expenses. It is estimated that in a single year
    in India more than 40 percent of hospitalized
    individuals borrow money or sell assets to cover
    the cost of their healthcare and nearly 39 million
    people are pushed into poverty because of ill
    health (Balarajan, Selvaraj and Subramanian
    2011).
        In fact, “hardship financing” of access to
    healthcare through borrowing with interest occurs not just in cases of hospitalizations, but
    also in cases of maternity and even for outpatient care (Binnendijk, Koren and Dror 2012).
    In India, health insurance as a way to finance healthcare expenditure is a limited practice as
    compared to other countries where it is an established practice.
        The potential is huge for development of health insurance models, particularly for the poor
    in India. Since independence, governments in India have followed a mix of tax-based schemes
    and social health insurance mechanisms to improve the penetration of health insurance in the
    country. In 2001, the Indian insurance sector was opened up for private companies. Since then,
    private sector and communities (facilitated by voluntary organizations) have developed health
    insurance schemes. Despite recent efforts in expanding health insurance by government, the
    private sector, and local civil society organizations, less than 15 percent of the population in
    India is covered by health insurance (Berman, Ahuja and Bhandari 2010).
        Recently, community-based health insurance (CBHI) has emerged as a solution to reduce
    healthcare expenditure-related vulnerabilities for the poor (Lahkar and Sundaram-Stukel 2010).
    A CBHI scheme involves pre-payment and pooling of resources to cover healthcare costs.
    Furthermore, they are designed with a not-for-profit objective to target poor households and
    treat the household rather than an individual as the unit of insurance (Ahuja and Jutting 2003).
        Several CBHI models have emerged and a number of NGOs are involved in operating
    them in different parts of India (Figure 1). Though some of these schemes have managed
    to extend financial protection to rural communities, they have not been able to extend the
    coverage to the poorest of the poor (Jakab and Krishnar 2004). Hence, those sections of the
    population that are not participating in this contributory model have not obtained any protec-
    tion from this mechanism.
        Some of the challenges of having CBHI include (Kishor 2013; Jakab and Krishnar 2004):
        •	 Irregular cash flows of households where they are unable to pay the premiums.
        •	 Lack of familiarity and trust for the service providers.
        •	 Lack of awareness about the value of insurance among the poor.
        •	 Difficulty of illiterates to understand the terms and conditions of the insurance policy.
        •	 Lack of transport to access hospitals providing services under these schemes.



6
Figure1. Formats of Health Insurance Schemes in India

           GOVERNMENT                                  PRIVATE                          COMMUNITY-BASED

 Two contributory health insurance        Offered by commercial                  Initiated by NGOs and
 and one fully government subsi-          organizations:                         community-based organizations,
 dized insurance schemes in India:        •	 Voluntary health insurance          there are three basic models of
 •	 Central Government Health                wherein people enroll and           community-based insurance:
    Scheme introduced in 1954 for            purchase their preferred            •	 Provider model: Hospital plays
    the government of India’s civil          insurance product, paying a risk-      the dual role of providing
    servants (approximately 5.5              rated premium.                         healthcare and running the
    million beneficiaries).               •	 Out of these, Mediclaim,               insurance programs. Examples
 •	 Employees’ State Insurance              introduced in 1986, is the most         include: (1) ACCORD, Gudalur,
   Scheme established in 1948 for           sold product.                           Nilgiris, Tamil Nadu; (2) MGIMS
   low-paid industrial workers in the                                               Hospital, Wardha, Maharashtra.
                                          •	 Subscribers are usually the
   formal sector (approximately 16          middle and upper class; there is     •	 Insurer model: Voluntary
   million beneficiaries).                  a tax benefit in subscribing.          organization is the insurer,
 Eligible people contribute through                                                while purchasing care from
 a payroll tax toward a specific health                                            independent providers.
 fund:                                                                             Examples: (1) DHAN
 •	 Rashtriya Swasthya Bima Yojana                                                 Foundation, Theni district, Tamil
    (RSBY) is the National Health                                                  Nadu; (2) Yeshasvani Trust,
    Insurance targeting BoP families,                                              Bangalore, Kamataka.
    a recent addition in government-                                             •	 Linked model: Voluntary
    sponsored health insurance (23                                                 organization plays the role
    million families enrolled in 2013).                                            of an agent, purchasing care
    [Note: This scheme has been                                                    from providers and insurance
    discontinued for at least one                                                  from insurance companies.
    year.]                                                                         Examples: (1) BAIF, Pune,
                                                                                   Maharashtra; Karuna Trust,
                                                                                   Mysore District; Karnataka; (2)
                                                                                   SECA, 11 district of Gujarat.




                                                                                                                       7
    Innovation
    Micro Insurance Academy (MIA)	
    In 2007, Sarvajan Unnati Bodhini was established as a
    charitable trust in New Delhi, India under the Indian
    Trusts Act to advance the development of micro
    insurance. To achieve this, Sarvajan Unnati Bodhini
    created MIA as its implementing body. MIA’s mission
    is to empower and enable poor communities to play
    an active role in reducing their financial vulnerabilities
    through innovative approaches in micro insurance. They
    envision that all people will have access to relevant risk
    management techniques to improve their livelihoods
    and lift themselves out of poverty.
        Professor David M. Dror is the Founding Chairman and Managing Director of MIA. Professor
    Dror is an international expert in micro insurance, with over 35 years of experience in social
    protection and health financing. With about 50 employees in its New Delhi office, MIA is
    currently the world’s largest resource center dedicated specifically to micro insurance, with
    experience in health, life, agriculture and natural catastrophic risk domains.

    Customized Micro Insurance Solutions for the Poor
    MIA has developed a voluntary and contributory CBHI model that focuses on involving the
    BoP population (Figure 2). Their objective is to empower communities to assess and manage
    financial risks through tailored insurance solutions that match their needs and willingness to
    pay. The key features of the MIA model are:
        •	 Pooled community money: The model protects the poor from indebtedness by creating
           a mechanism wherein the community pools the money (premium) to cover the costs of
           health-related events. Households pay a premium—typically between USD 1.60 to 4.33
           per person per year—for coverage against specific events, such as drought or illness.
           If the covered event occurs, the household is reimbursed for related costs within the
           limits of their benefit package.
        •	 Tailored insurance with community input and local risk data: The model assesses
           prevalent disease pattern and willingness of the community to pay. MIA quantifies the
           risk exposure based on its evidence base and facilitates the community’s understanding
           of the risk exposure. It engages beneficiaries in designing benefits/insurance packages,
           assessing suitability of the package and facilitating administration of the scheme. Bene-
           ficiaries can relate to these customized solutions and choose to implement them with
           their limited resources.
        •	 Community-run: MIA helps to set up the operating infrastructure by training community
           members to manage the scheme, such as a claims committee and an insurance coor-
           dinator to oversee enrollments, claims and reimbursements.




8
Figure 2. Operating Architecture of MIA’s Model of Health Insurance

                  Local Field Partner
                  •	 Usually an NGO with a history of working with BoP in target areas
                  •	 Works with claims committee, insurance activists and villagers during implementation and
                       management of scheme
                  •	 Provides support to MIA in establishing and maintaining contacts, conducting baseline survey,
                       enrolling members, etc.

                  Insurance Coordinator
                  •	 Locally appointed official manages membership and financial records using MIA’s data
                       management software
                  •	 Establishes and maintains relationships with healthcare providers
                  •	 Salaries paid by field partner with financial support from MIA

                  Insurance Activists
                  •	 Trained frontline workforce provided by field partner
                  •	 Go door-to-door in every village to enroll members, collect premiums, provide education and
                     assist insured with availing health services and filing claims
                  •	 Number depends on village population, size and terrain
                  •	 Salaries paid by field partner with financial support from MIA

                  Claims Committee
                  •	   6–8 designated representatives by the community from between 10–12 villages
                  •	   Manage common fund of pooled premiums
                  •	   Assess reimbursement of claims and manage payouts
                  •	   Meet once a month and receive sitting fee (administrative cost borne by the scheme)

                  Villagers
                  •	 Work with MIA and partners to design insurance products that meet their product and
                       pricing needs
                  •	 Insurance scheme is open to everyone
                  •	 Enroll by paying a premium for all family members: typically between USD 1.60 to 4.33 per person
                       per year of coverage
                  •	 Submit a claim when necessary

                  MIA
                  •	 Provides ongoing technical assistance and training to communities to operate independent
                       health insurance scheme
                  •	 Implements these activities in association with field partner




   MIA operates resource centers to connect health insurance actors and combine local
knowledge with MIA’s expertise and resources. MIA also conducts and circulates action-research
to generate findings from implementation projects and field experience.
   Thus, unlike existing CBHI schemes, MIA acts neither as a provider nor as an insurer or an
intermediary. MIA does not underwrite risks or serve as an insurance agent, and it does not
charge grassroots communities for services it renders. It simply acts as a catalyst and engages
communities to devise and implement CBHI with local resources.

Evolution of the MIA Model

Launch
Two years after its establishment in 2007, MIA received its first research grant from the European
Union to undertake research on health-seeking behavior for the rural population (Figure 3). In

                                                                                                                        9
                 Figure 3. Key Milestones of MIA Model

       2007           2009               2010              2011             2012                      2013

     Establish     Receive first     Implement         Establish new    Launch climate            MIA becomes
       MIA         major grant      project for the     schemes in          change-                one of the
                 from European       first time in     Uttar Pradesh     related micro             grantees of
                    Union for       Odisha, India        and Bihar;        insurance                the World
                   undertaking                        ISO 9001:2008        project in                 Bank’s
                   research on                         International      Maharashtra             Development
                                                         Standard                                 Marketplace
                                                        certification



                 2010, MIA started its first implementation project in the poorest district in India (Kalahandi,
                 Odisha) with financial support from Misereor (Katholische Zentralstelle für Entwicklungshilfe
                 e. V.). The project “Niramaya Community Based Health Insurance Scheme” was launched with
                 field partner Mahashakti Foundation in 52 villages in the Mandanpur Rampur block of the
                 district. In 2011 this scheme experienced its first
                 renewal season. In its two years of operation until
                 2012, Niramaya reached 3,700 people. The project
                 aims to reach 60,000 people by 2015.

                 Expansion
                 In 2011, MIA expanded its operations and launched
                 two schemes with support from the European
                 Union under its seventh research framework
                 program:
                     •	 Swasthya Kamal Scheme in Vaishali district
                         (34 villages in Mahua block)—the scheme was implemented with Nidan as the field partner.
                     •	 Jeevan Sanjivani scheme in Pratapgarh district (15 villages in Raniganj block) and Kanpur
                         Dehat district (46 villages in Rasoolabad block) in Uttar Pradesh—the scheme was imple-
                         mented with Shramik Bharti as the field partner.
                     In addition to implementation, both schemes had a component on impact evaluation. As
                 part of this, MIA carried out a Randomized Control Trial (RCT) to analyze the situation before
                 and after CBHI implementation, which is still underway. In the same year, with funding from
                 Miseror, MIA also launched a CBHI scheme in two districts of Nepal (Dhading and Banke).
                 Nirdhan and DEPROSC were field partners in Nepal.
                     In 2011, MIA established a non-profit entity in Germany to set up CBHI models for African
                 countries. In 2012, MIA’s international office in Bonn received funding from the Swiss Tropical
                 and Public Health Institute and Swiss Development Cooperation to provide technical assistance
                 in strengthening the government of Tanzania’s health insurance scheme for the informal sector.
                 They provided technical assistance to strengthen the governance structure of Community
                 Health Funds; to introduce new standard operating procedures; and to design training modules
                 for Community Health Funds staff on health insurance. In the same year, Miseror engaged
                 MIA (Bonn office) to help the Bishops of the Bamenda Ecclesiastical Province, Cameroon in
                 reviewing and redesigning a health insurance scheme.
                     In 2013, MIA became one of the grantees for the World Bank’s Development Market-
                 place. The objective of the funded project was to create awareness and build capacity of
                 low-income communities in the State of Chhattisgarh (Rajnandgaon district) for protection
                 against adverse financial consequences of illness. The target was to enroll 10,000 members in
                 the CBHI scheme as direct beneficiaries and indirectly benefit another 30,000 members who

10
could be future participants in the CBHI scheme through awareness campaigns and insurance
literacy workshops.
    The grant was an important milestone because it helped MIA expand its geographical reach
to a new state in India. It also helped MIA to fast track or compress pre-implementation, imple-
mentation and post-implementation phases of its delivery model without diluting the quality
norms. This has allowed MIA the benefit of a quick rollout, where needed.

Diversification from Other Sectors
In 2012, funding support from the Climate Change and Development Division of the Embassy
of Switzerland in New Delhi (DEZA) triggered the process within MIA to move beyond health-
care insurance. Using this fund, MIA, together with Basix Consulting and Training Services
Limited (BCTS), started a project (RES-RISK) to enhance the resilience of vulnerable communi-
ties to climate change by developing pro-poor micro insurance solutions and piloting in two
locations in India.
    Beed (Maharashtra) is semi-arid and prone to droughts while Vaishali (Bihar) is prone to water
logging and floods. MIA has found that communities do not perceive climate-related risks in
isolation: if there is a flood, it not only affects health issues, but it also impacts crop yield, livestock
and additional risk categories. In this project, MIA linked climate change with the priorities of
the target population to develop customized solutions covering composite risks. Field partners
for the project included Nidan and Vaishali Area Small Farmers Association (VASFA) in Vaishali
district, Bihar and JVSS (Janvikas Samajik Sanstha) in Beed district, Maharashtra.

Financing
MIA started operating in India in 2007 through a three-year grant received from HIVOS Inter-
national and an individual contribution from the promoter, Professor David Dror. The grant was
used to establish MIA in India and complete all legal formalities for registration in India. Two
full-time people (in addition to the promoter) were also hired.
    MIA’s revenues (grants and research funds) have seen a regular and substantial increase in a
seven-year time span, from USD 75,000 to USD 1.3 million per year. There is a significant jump
in revenues in 2008–9 due to a grant from the European Union. The other significant spike can
be observed in 2012 when MIA received funding support from DEZA for the RES-RESIK project
(Figure 4).
    There also has been a shift in the allocation of funds. For instance, MIA’s funding require-
ment for operational expenses (core funding in MIA parlance) has reduced from 24 percent


Figure 4. MIA’s Revenue in USD                                Figure 5. Revenue Allocation
     1,400,000
                                        1,307,119 1,317,627   100%
     1,200,000                                                                19%
                                                              80%                             41%
     1,000,000                 958,136 924,407                                24%
                                                              60%
                                                                                              10%
      800,000             731,017
                                                              40%             32%
      600,000        522,881                                                                  36%
                                                              20%
      400,000                                                                 24%
                                                                                              13%
                                                               0%
      200,000
                 75,593
                                                                     n Core         n Human Resources
            0
                 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013                  n Research     n Project Expenditure



                                                                                                               11
     in 2009 to 13 percent of total revenues in 2013. This period also sees a corresponding increase in the funds


     Figure 6. Results Chain for MIA Model



      •	 Identify local          •	 Number and               •	 Early diagnostics        •	 Enhance health,
        implementing                percentage of heads        checkup                     life expectancy and
        partners                    of households given      •	 More regular visits to     livelihoods of BoP by
                                    insurance literacy         doctors                     reducing percentage
      •	 Undertake research
                                    training                                               of households falling
        to enable actuarial                                  •	 Reduction in out-of-
                                                                                           below poverty
        calculations             •	 Number and                 pocket expenditures
                                                                                           line due to lack of
                                    percentage of heads
      •	 Generate awareness                                  •	 Reduction in hardship      or limited health
                                    of households
        and engage target                                      financing                   insurance
                                    purchasing insurance
        population to
        prepare customized       •	 Number and
        benefit package             percentage of claims
                                    reimbursed within set
      •	 Provide support for
                                    days
        CBHI implementation
        by communities           •	 Increase in use of
                                    health services
                                 •	 Increase in
                                    re-enrollment rate




12
Implementation
Analysis of Local Risk Data
Exposure to risks is location-specific, and the estimation of each class of risk requires different
information and represents different technical complexities. For example, for health risk
exposure there are considerations for morbidity, health-seeking behavior, costs and availability
of providers. To assess and quantify these risks, MIA analyzes prevalence of disease, morbidity,
use of healthcare services/infrastructure and costs incurred to avail services. They provide this
evidence for the assessment of the risk exposure and willingness of the community to pay to
design customized insurance packages.

Community Involvement
MIA works together with the communities to create and design insurance products that meet
their needs, priorities and levels of willingness to pay. They conduct a comprehensive series
of local studies and workshops with the local communities to train, coach and assist them in
developing relevant and cost-effective systems and processes. Resources collected from the
community for the insurance premium remains within the community, which instills confidence
in members that their money will be used for mutual support. This community involvement
helps limit adverse selection, moral hazard and fraud, and thus keeps the cost of the product
as low as possible.
     MIA uses a field-tested, game-like tool called
CHAT—Choosing Healthplans All Together—to
enable the local community to jointly define the
benefit package that covers their most relevant
needs (see Appendix III for an example). In CHAT,
illiterate and innumerate persons can participate
and decide on the composition and price of their
health insurance. In this way, the coverage versus
premium decision is turned over to the house-
holds. The primary beneficiaries of CHAT are BoP
communities who are able to help decide on their health insurance priorities.
     MIA has a three-tier structure for implementation of their framework. The three-tier structure
is based on the principle of subsidiarity: matters ought to be handled by the smallest (or the
lowest) competent authority, and a higher (or more central) authority should perform only those
subsidiary tasks that cannot be performed effectively at a more immediate or local level. Thus,
the MIA model (as illustrated in Figure 2) involves:
     •	 Communities at the grassroots level in the form of a Claims Committee, and
        Insurance Coordinators and Activists.
     •	 NGOs as field partners at the intermediary level.
     •	 MIA at the apex level as an external technical and resource agency.
     The most notable feature of the model is that there is no external insurance provider or
insurer involved, and no subsidy support for premiums. Rather, MIA provides its services to




                                                                                                      13
     Figure 7. Implementation Phases for MIA Community-Run Health Insurance


            Initiation            Involvement              Launch                Post-launch

      •	 Identify local        •	 Generate           •	 Provide support in    •	 Assess/ensure
        partners for             awareness and         creating the claims      viable claims
        implementation           engage target         committees,              ratio that is
        and undertake            population            identifying              settled within
        due diligence.           to prepare            insurance                satisfactory time
      •	 Gather informa-         customized            activities, creating     and sustainable
        tion through             benefit package.      insurance                affiliation.
        baseline survey to                             packages and
        estimate the will-                             establishing
        ingness to pay,                                systems.
        incidence of illness
        and local costs
        that will enable
        actuarial calcula-
        tions and other
        technical inputs.




     community-based schemes through a series of steps, each building on previous ones in succes-
     sion to create cost-effective and efficient micro insurance units. The framework is implemented
     in four phases as outlined in Figure 7.

     Inclusiveness and Community Rating
     Today, many micro insurance schemes
     work along exclusion rather than inclusion:
     exclusion of certain groups (such as the
     elderly and young children); exclusion
     of certain benefits covered (such as pre-
     existing diseases and maternity); focus
     only on the poor in a community (targeted
     schemes); or excluding them de facto by
     setting premiums that exceed prevailing
     ability to pay. Exclusion usually leaves the
     most vulnerable groups unprotected, and
     as a result, the whole community suffers
     because they continue paying for the weaker members out of pocket when the need arises.
     Existing schemes that include weaker members often discriminate against them by applying a
     risk rating and thus making membership unattractive by way of higher premiums for perceived
     higher risks. MIA’s model applies community rating and favors inclusion, which allows for a
     better diversification of the risk and lowering of overall costs.

     En-bloc Affiliation
     Individual subscription (or group subscription as an aggregation of individual contracts) in
     micro insurance is often synonymous with adverse selection, since people who expect to be
     ill (“bad risks”) sign up and those that do not expect to be ill (“good risks”) opt out. Under
     such a scenario, actual costs quickly exceed the cost of the (random) risk covered and make
     the product unattractive or unsustainable.

14
   En-bloc affiliation of entire communities changes this paradigm by expanding the pool
and diversifying the risk among all individuals in the group—the “good” and the “bad” risks
combined. This has the potential to enable both lower transaction costs and reduced adverse
selection. In MIA’s approach, communities are only eligible for insurance if they join the en-bloc.
This principle draws from the positive lessons learned from peer pressure and social capital
in microfinance (Dror 2008).

Action-Research
MIA conducts action-research to collect
evidence that can advance the under-
standing of micro insurance, challenges
faced by vulnerable communities and factors
affecting the uptake of and demand for
micro insurance. The research also helps MIA
understand prevalent ground realities and
assess the potential impact of the project.
For example, the MIA team has developed
a novel method to estimate morbidity data
needed to calculate premiums (Binnendijk,
Gautham, Koren and Dror 2012) and another
to estimate willingness to pay for health insurance (Binnendijk, Dror, Gerelle and Koren 2013).
    Another important insight gained has been how community buy-in is reached through
awareness creation (Panda et al 2015) followed by a process of consensus building, in which
the community adopts both a single package and the premium it commands (Dror, Panda, May,
Majumdar and Koren 2014). In addition, a new theory of demand for micro health insurance in
the informal sector has been formulated (Dror and Firth 2014), in view of the many difficulties to
explain behavior by classical demand theories. MIA disseminates its research results through
peer-reviewed journals, and works toward leveraging the findings to encourage policymakers
and practitioners to push forward the adoption of CBHI schemes.

Insurance Education and Advisory Services
MIA uses innovative techniques such as CHAT, games, songs, plays and murals to create
awareness and educate the BoP about health insurance. The campaigns aim to equip the
BoP with the skills to design, manage and govern their own insurance scheme in a structured,
responsible and affordable manner.
    MIA provides consultancy services to organizations involved in insurance, social protection,
financial inclusion and risk management. Non-profits, governments and the private sector seek
MIA services when they want to reach the BoP population. Advisory services include:
    •	 Creating demand for insurance at the BoP level
    •	 Increasing insurance literacy
    •	 Collecting and analyzing baseline data
    •	 Implementing multi-risk insurance products
    •	 Developing capacity of senior level officials
    •	 Facilitating public-private partnerships
    •	 Advocating for insurance awareness
    MIA conducts training on various insurance-related topics, including an overview of micro
health insurance; data collection, analysis and research; premium calculation, package design
and pricing; insurance operations, including education and awareness, enrollment, claims
processing and data management; establishment of an insurance infrastructure; and supervi-
sion and regulation.



                                                                                                      15
     Resource Centers
     MIA operates micro health insurance schemes throughout several parts of the world. Many of
     these schemes operate in isolation and with limited technical capacity. Recognizing this gap in
     technical skills, MIA has established member-based resource centers in Cambodia (and signed
     MOUs to develop similar centers in Bangladesh and Nepal), which should be the main hub for
     demand-driven access to insurance domain knowledge, independent from any sales function.
     MIA provides the centers’ members with technical assistance to strengthen their operational
     capacity, advocate for a supportive regulatory environment and develop standardized tools
     for package design, marketing, enrollment and claims processing.

     Partnerships

     Implementation Partners
     The capacity of the partnering organization—especially the depth of its links with the
     community—determine the success of the CBHI scheme implementation. Therefore, MIA
     conducts rigorous due diligence by checking on the potential partners’ (1) capacity, (2) expe-
     rience and (3) trustworthiness before formalizing the partnerships.
        MIA appraises partner organizations on the basis of criteria such as:
        •	 Community focus: The organization should have established credentials of working
            with the communities, not merely as a support agency or as a service delivery organiza-
            tion, but as a facilitator/capacity builder of community organizations using community-
            centered approaches. MIA’s partners in India include Mahashakti Foundation (Kalahandi
            district, Orissa), Nidan (Vaishali district, Bihar), Shramik Bharti (Pratapgarh and Kanpur
            Dehat districts, Uttar Pradesh) and DEPROSC and Nirdhan Utthan Bank Limited (NUBL)
            (Dhading and Banke districts, Nepal).
        •	 Capacity of the organization: The organization should have the capacity to guide the
            community in setting up the necessary systems and processes for developing and
            managing community-based insurance. Other aspects such as governance, leadership
            quality, management capacity, systems, practices, financial and non-financial perfor-
            mance and track record of making payments to the communities are also assessed.
        See Appendix V for the criteria, indicators and means of verification developed by MIA for
     their partner assessment framework.

     Financial Donors
     After one year of establishment, MIA began receiving grants from various donor agencies
     such as the European Union, Malteser International, Misereor (Katholische Zentralstelle für
     Entwicklungshilfe (KZE), DFID, Save the Children, DGRV (Cooperative Federation of German
     Cooperatives), Climate Resilience through Risk Transfer using Microinsurance Solutions (RES-
     RISK), the World Bank Development Marketplace and others. Over the years, MIA has managed
     to expand its donor base and has a mix of implementation and research grants. Donors from
     Europe provide more than 90 percent of the total funds received due to the strong credibility
     of the Founding Chairman and Managing Director, Professor David Dror, among donors in
     Europe.




16
Impact
MIA does not sell or underwrite insurance. Rather, it has developed a voluntary and contrib-
utory CBHI model that involves the BoP in the design and management of the mutual-aid
scheme. According to MIA annual reports, MIA-supported micro insurance schemes have
covered more than 40,000 people in India and Nepal.

Community Empowerment
MIA solutions are tailored to the local context with
heavy involvement from communities. They provide
local partners with the technical skills and guidance
to design, operate and govern their own insurance
schemes, because insurance is more efficient and
valuable if it reflects community needs and has full
community ownership. Research studies suggest
insurance education and understanding of the
community has increased by 80 percent, while
preventive care awareness and practice has increased
by 34 percent and 48 percent, respectively (Panda,
Chakraborty, Dror and Bedi 2014).

Evaluations
As of January 2014, MIA, in collaboration with Erasmus University Rotterdam and the Univer-
sity of Cologne, has been analyzing the data from three separate CBHIs (supported by MIA in
rural areas of northern India that have been operating since 2011), to establish the impact of
being insured on the members. The micro insurance schemes are being implemented by three
Indian charitable NGOs (BAIF, Nidan and Shramik Bharti) with technical support from MIA.
    Each evaluation is organized as a cluster randomized controlled trial, in which randomly
selected members of a network of women’s microfinance groups are offered the option to
affiliate to a CBHI scheme that they design and manage. Results of these evaluations will
provide information on intermediate outcomes and development impacts of enrolling in
MIA-supported CBHI schemes. Table 1 provides interim results highlights gathered from
published sources.




                                                                                                 17
                Table 1. Summary of Impact from MIA Model

                An assessment of the MIA business model based on an analytical framework

     Reach            •	 Coverage: Since its inception, MIA-supported micro insurance schemes have covered more
                        than 40,000 people in India and Nepal (MIA Annual Report 2013).
                      •	 Increasing acceptance among the poor: There has been an increase in enrollment and
                        renewal rates. For instance, for the CBHI scheme launched in the Kalahandi district of
                        Odisha in 2010, membership increased almost three times in the first two years from 1,397
                        to 3,700 (MIA Annual Report 2013).

     Effectiveness    •	 Responsiveness to needs: MIA’s process of involving prospective insurers in package
                        design increased the population’s understanding about the insurance and led to different
                        coverage choices than other micro insurance schemes (Dror et al 2014).
                      •	 Renewal rates: In India the rates range between 35-50 percent (in 15 villages in Raniganj
                        block, Pratapgarh district-Uttar Pradesh implemented by BAIF, and in 46 villages in
                        Rasoolabad block, Kanpur Dehat district-Uttar Pradesh implemented by Sharmik Bharti).
                        Over 2,000 people were covered under these schemes by the end of 2012 (MIA Annual
                        Report 2012).
                      •	 Growth rate and claims settlement:
                         oo MIA reports that 11,698 insurance claims amounting to USD 119,000 have been settled
                            since 2010 under various schemes in India and Nepal. About 50 percent of the claim
                            amount has been paid for benefits other than hospitalization. Under the Niramaya
                            CBHI scheme, the claims ratio was 82 percent in the first year for reimbursement other
                            than hospitalization expenses (lab tests, imaging, etc.), which are not covered by
                            traditional insurance products being offered by the government or private insurance
                            companies.
                         oo The Tibetan Medicare Scheme implemented in 39 Tibetan settlements across 13 states
                            in India supports over 10,000 insured members, has a growth rate of more than 15
                            percent and settles claims within an average of 25 days (MIA Annual Report 2013).
                      •	 Insurance education: Research studies suggest insurance education and understanding
                        of the community about insurance has increased by 80 percent, while preventive care
                        awareness and practice has increased by 34 percent and 48 percent, respectively (Panda et
                        al 2014).

     Accountability   •	 MIA quality management system: MIA performs due diligence on its NGO partners
                        and conducts baseline studies, trainings for facilitators on how to use CHAT and benefits
                        packages workshops.
                      •	 Quality of care: Qualitative field work of three MIA-sponsored CBHIs revealed that a
                        minority of insured were dissatisfied with the absence of trained medical practitioners in
                        villages, and the uneven quality of service by Rural Medical Practitioners (RMP) they could
                        access. Also, because the insurance did not cover all forms of care, some respondents had
                        to pay fees beyond the amounts insured. Of the 33 CBHI households that were interviewed
                        at regular intervals, 16 reported that they still had to pay for services/medicines provided by
                        the RMPs. Six of these households dropped out of the scheme. This sample is too small to
                        allow for conclusive generalization or disaggregation by site. It points to the confusion that
                        can occur between what members expect from the insurance and what they expect from
                        medical practitioners. It is important to emphasize that CBHIs do not link with providers
                        (the choice of provider is left to each member), do not engage in control of quality of care
                        and do not develop provider payment incentives. Therefore, these aspects of large formal-
                        sector health insurance systems cannot be examined for impact in the case of CBHI.




18
Cost-            •	 Typical premium: USD 1.60 to 4.33 per person in the household for one year of insurance
effectiveness      coverage. Each year, households can re-enroll in the scheme.
and              •	 Complement existing schemes: A study of MIA-sponsored CBHI indicates that households
Affordability      with greater financial liabilities found CBHI more attractive, and interestingly, enrollment in
                   the national government program did not reduce enrolment to CBHI. This highlights the
                   need for greater development of self-governed and context-relevant insurance solutions
                   for those in rural India, and the importance of designing benefit packages that can
                   complement existing insurance schemes (Panda et all 2014).

Impact on        •	 MIA is conducting impact evaluations of the three CBHI schemes that were operated
Development        in rural areas of northern India. Results of these evaluations will provide information on
Outcomes           intermediate outcomes and development impacts of enrolling in MIA-supported CBHI
                   schemes.

Potential for    •	 Initial findings from an impact evaluation of three MIA-sponsored CBHIs reveal positive
Sustainability     effects of CBHI on reduction of self-medication by insured compared to uninsured, and
                   lower health-related borrowing by the insured to deal with out-of-pocket spending. The
                   MIA-sponsored CBHI schemes operated by local NGOs offer limited benefit packages,
                   but they have been successful in dealing with managerial challenges related to the
                   reimbursement of members, at fast turn-around time and with good renewal rates
                   suggesting satisfaction of members with such schemes (Dror et al 2015, forthcoming).

Potential for    •	 The adoption of the MIA model in various parts of the world shows that the model can be
Scalability        replicated to serve the BoP population.
                 •	 MIA plans to continue to work as a non-profit entity and concentrate on generating
                   sufficient evidence and enhancing the confidence of donors to support replication in other
                   geographies within and beyond India.




                                                                                                                     19
     Sustainability and Scale-Up
     MIA offers an independent, grant-based model with sound financial donors. Some factors to
     consider moving forward include:

     Pooling of Community Contributions
     In the MIA model, the size of individual units—
     the community groups where the pooling of
     contribution takes place—is very small. This puts
     the individual units at risk in case of catastrophic
     co-variant events that could wipe out the entire
     resource pool of the unit. In addition, these units
     normally receive technical support for the under-
     writing and managerial skills needed to operate
     a full-fledged insurance scheme.
         MIA believes that scaling-up the model by
     creating federated structures and capacity-
     development at “competence center” levels could mitigate these risks. The federated struc-
     tures would retain the operational autonomy of each scheme while spreading the risks across a
     larger group. The structures offer several benefits: larger aggregation leading to lower variance,
     and thus reduction in the cost of risk; reduction in the likelihood of catastrophic events; and
     avoidance of the need to retain surplus capital by each unit separately. In addition, the struc-
     tures could potentially benefit from re-insurance, where an established insurance underwrites
     some of the outlier risks for the federated structure. The federated structure would also add
     efficiency in allocating technical capacities (e.g. actuarial and ceding decisions) that are needed
     at the level of each CBHI only from time to time.
         Scaling-up through federated structures will require engaging with both the government
     and private sector. Government should provide the enabling regulatory environment and
     can fund the outlier risks of catastrophic events, while the private sector can provide the
     underwriting of risks that go beyond those covered by each CBHI on a mutual-aid basis. The
     private sector could also have a role in providing technical assistance on aggregation into
     the federated structure.

     Partnerships for Scale-Up
     MIA is devoting resources to research to generate evidence on impact of CBHI for its benefi-
     ciaries, and the results could be leveraged for partnering with the government and private
     sector. These partnerships in turn could ensure that government and private sector schemes
     offer and encourage more supply of insurance options that the target population of CBHI
     considers both relevant and affordable; this would help improve insurance penetration in the
     informal sector even when the basis of transacting is voluntary and contributory enrollment
     to insurance.
         MIA envisions that the government could support the outlier risk for catastrophic events,
     and the private sector could provide its knowledge and experience in redistribution of risk
     through reinsurance. Specifically, the partnership with the government will help mainstream

20
micro insurance by creating and establishing regulations that are proportional to the risks
covered under CBHI. The regulations will further help create an enabling environment for
reinsurance and establishing direct links between the community and reinsurance service
providers. The partnerships would also generate the capital needed to take CBHI to scale.
   MIA also contributed to a study, “Factors Affecting Voluntary Uptake of CBHI Schemes in
Low- and Middle-Income Countries (LMIC).” The findings from the study suggest that LMIC
governments can play a proactive, non-financial, role in extending the outreach of social
protection by creating a CBHI-friendly regulatory and political environment.

Financial Sustainability
The financial sustainability of the CBHI schemes themselves is secured from premium income,
since the CBHI schemes do not benefit from premium subsidies. The process of generating
sufficient revenues to constitute contingency reserves takes several years and depends on the
number of members and level of the premium. All MIA-supported CBHI schemes have recorded
increases in premium income due to a higher number of members and, to a lesser extent, to
a higher premium per person per year. In the initial years, MIA subsidizes the administrative
costs of the schemes, but this support is temporary, and the income of the CBHI is supposed
to cover the local administrative costs once the CBHI has reached operational maturity.
    MIA’s financing model is grant-based. The model relies on funding from donor agencies
to initiate activities and meet the costs of providing technical assistance. Technical assistance
includes conducting research to understand the health-seeking behavior of people in the area,
and facilitating design and selection of insurance packages.
    In a scenario where external funding is not available, it would not be possible to continue
to deliver technical assistance. In this case, MIA will find it difficult to geographically expand
the base of its model. From a policy viewpoint, the question is whether the cost of supporting
MIA’s services is more advantageous than direct interventions at grassroots level. The results
of the CBHI (solvent demand created, and voluntary and contributory enrollment where there
was neither demand nor insurance cover before) are desirable outcomes, but the dependence
on donor funding represents a certain vulnerability for MIA’s model.
    MIA has analyzed the data available to it from several years of CBHI activities in India and
Nepal to develop a business case for CBHI. The study, once it passes peer review, will provide
quantitative evidence of how much reserve each new scheme needs at inception, how large
is its potential to scale, and how long it would take for the scheme to function as a viable
profit-sharing entity.
    MIA plans to continue to work as a non-profit entity and concentrate on generating suffi-
cient evidence and enhancing the confidence of donors (including government) for funding
support for replication in other geographies within India.

Use of Information Technology
To take the innovation to scale, MIA requires
making a substantial IT investment to support:
   •	 Periodic monitoring on a real-time basis.
   •	 Renewal alerts/automatic renewal.
      Currently renewal or reinforcement at the
      end of the policy period is done through
      paper records, and managing this manually
      requires much effort.
   •	 Awareness generation beyond CHAT.
      Due to the nature of CHAT and its standard
      operating procedures applicability, the time taken to administer the tool is substantial.
      This limits scalability when seen as a function of time. Therefore, there is a need for

                                                                                                     21
            standardized approaches/tools that use IT and support awareness generation at scale
            in less time.
         In 2016, MIA developed an e-learning facility, MIA ONLINE, to share knowledge and
     best practices about CBHI schemes and give people access to insurance education without
     financial constraints. MIA ONLINE offers courses on micro insurance, in four “streams”—Core,
     Advanced, Implementation, and Management Information Systems for micro insurance. The
     Core stream has been accessible free-of-charge since the end of 2016, and additional courses
     within this and the other streams will be added over time. To assist in mainstreaming micr
     insurance studies, MIA is reaching out to academic institutions to establish cooperation on
     course accreditation and delivery.




22
Lessons Learned
Importance of Raising Community Awareness
MIA’s model is based on an assessment
of beneficiaries’ willingness to pay for
health insurance that follows a process
of interactions through which they are
made fully aware about the purpose
and benefits of insurance and assisted
in prioritizing needs. This assessment
enables the beneficiaries to make
collective and conscious decisions
about the insurance package.
    MIA has demonstrated that
dedicated efforts to raise community
awareness to the value of insurance
and to its operating rules is the essential first entry point; void of the awareness campaign,
other community insurance schemes failed to achieve similar buy-in as they failed to realize
that most of the target population has never been exposed to the concept of micro insurance
and were uncomfortable to agree to pay for something they are not able to relate to. MIA has
designed insurance education and willingness-to-pay assessment tools to implement tailored
insurance packages with community engagement.

BoP Populations Prefer Health Insurance to Cover Events that Cost Little
but Occur Multiple Times
Independent studies conducted by MIA highlighted the requirement of the BoP population
for health insurance coverage of events such as the cold or flu that happen multiple times and
eventually turn out to be more expensive (when aggregated, due to the cost of medicines,
consultation fees, etc.), as compared to covering only rare events such as hospitalization for
major ailments (that may be expensive but have low probability of occurrence). Many people
felt that rare events are covered under government-sponsored healthcare schemes in any
case, whereas outpatient care was not. This discrepancy indicated the need for customized
packages under CBHI to provide coverage for common, low-cost outpatient expenses.

Disseminate Research for Greater Recognition and Replication
MIA needs to disseminate its model, research methods and findings more proactively. This
can be done through annual seminars and experience-sharing workshops at different centers
with donors, administrators, scholars, opinion makers and insurers. The dissemination will help
MIA build synergies with other development organizations as well as fundraise with donors.
MIA should also enhance their efforts working with policymakers to increase the visibility of
micro insurance and build links to explore scaling-up operations. 	




                                                                                                  23
     APPENDIX I

     References
         Ahuja, R. and J. Jutting. 2003. Design of incentives in community-based health insurance
     Schemes. ICRIER Working Paper.
         Balarajan, Y., S. Selvaraj and S.V. Subramanian. 2011. Health care and equity in India. Lancet
     377(9765): 505-15.
         Berman, P.A., R. Ahuja and L. Bhandari. 2010. The impoverishing effect of healthcare
     payments in India: New methodology and findings. Economic and Political Weekly 45:65-71.
     doi:10.1186/1472-6963-12-23.
         Binnendijk, E., R. Koren and D. Dror. 2012. Hardship financing of healthcare among rural
     poor in Orissa, India. BMC Health Services Research. 12:23. doi:10.1186/1471-2288-12-153.
         Binnendijk, E., M. Gautham, R. Koren and D. Dror. 2012. Illness mapping: A time and cost
     effective method to estimate healthcare data needed to establish community-based health
     insurance. BMC Medical Research Methodology 12. doi:10.1186/1471-2288-12-153
         Binnendijk, E., D. Dror, E. Gerelle and R. Koren. 2013. Estimating willingness-to-pay for
     health insurance among rural poor in India, by reference to Engel’s law. Social Science &
     Medicine 76:67-73.
         Chawla, S. 2013. Health insurance in India. Slide presentation.
         Conor, D., P. Panda, E. Poel, R. Radermacher and D. Dror. 2011. Reconciling research and
     implementation in micro health insurance experiments in India: study protocol for a random-
     ized controlled trial. Trials Volume 12. http://www.trialsjournal.com/content/12/1/224.
         Devadasan, N., Kent Ranson, W. Damme and B. Criel. 2004. Community health insurance
     in India: An overview. Economic and Political Weekly 39(28):3179-3183.
         Dror, D., A. Majumdara, P. Pandaa, D. Johna and R. Koren. 2014. Implementing a partici-
     patory model of micro health insurance among rural poor with evidence from Nepal. The
     Geneva Papers (1–24).
         Dror, D., P. Panda, C. May, A. Majumdar and R. Koren. June 2014. “One for all and all for
     one”: Consensus-building within communities in rural India on their health microinsurance
     package. Risk Management and Healthcare Policy 2014(7):139-153.
         Dror, D. and L Firth. July 2014. The demand for (micro) health insurance in the informal
     sector. The Geneva Papers on Risk and Insurance Issues and Practice 39 (16) 693-711.
         Dror, I. 2008. Community-based micro health insurance as an enabler of solidarity and self-help
     amongst poor communities. Microfinance Focus 2(8). http://www.microinsuranceacademy.
     org/publication/community-based-micro-health-insurance-as-an-enabler-of-solidarity-and-
     self-help-amongst-poor-communities.
         Jakab, M. and C. Krishnan. 2004. Review of the strengths and weaknesses of community
     financing. Health Financing for Poor People: Resource Mobilization and Risk Sharing. The
     World Bank.
         Kishor, N. Ratna. 2013. Micro insurance in India: Protecting the poor. Journal of Business
     Management and Social Sciences Research. 2(3).
         Lahkar, R. and R. Sundaram-Stukel. 2010. Protecting the poor through community based
     health insurance. Accessed at http://www.isid.ac.in/~pu/conference/dec_10_conf/Papers/
     RatulLahkar.pdf.
         MIA. 2014. Annual Report 2013. Available at www.microinsuranceacademy.org
         MIA. 2015. Annual Report 2014. Available at www.microinsuranceacademy.org




24
   Panda, P., A. Chakraborty, D. Dror. 2015. Building awareness to health insurance among
the target population of community-based health insurance schemes in rural India. Tropical
Medicine and International Health. DOI 10.1111/tmi.12524.
   Panda, P., A. Chakraborty, D. Dror and A. Bedi. 2014. Enrollment in community-based health
insurance schemes in rural Bihar and Uttar Pradesh, India. Health Policy and Planning 29:960–74.
   Wameq , R., E. Poel, P. Panda, D. Dror and A. Bedi. 2013. “Healthcare seeking behaviour
among self-help group households in rural Bihar and Uttar Pradesh, India.” Working Paper No.
575, International Institute of Social Studies, Erasmus University, Rotterdam, the Netherlands.




                                                                                                   25
     APPENDIX II

     Organizational Structure




26
APPENDIX III

Example of the CHAT Decision Tool
MIA uses the CHAT tool to facilitate group discussions and decision-making around the micro-
insurance scheme options and trade-offs within a limited budget. It is designed like a game,
built around a circular board that displays insurance benefit options as slices of a pie chart.
The CHAT exercise makes complex decisions more feasible by incorporating complicated
data such as actuarial costs into a simply presented exercise board. Using CHAT helps in
designing health care plans that reflect community priorities. MIA customized the CHAT tool
as part of the EU-India Economic Cross-Culture Programme project, “Strengthening micro
health insurance units for the poor in India.”




                                                                                                  27
     APPENDIX IV

     Revenue and Expense Sheet




28
APPENDIX V

Partner Assessment
This framework provides the criteria, indicators and means of verification developed by MIA
for partner assessment.
 Criteria            Level                     Indicators                             Means of Verification
 Community         Basic       •	 Promotion and nurturing of                •	 Vision and mission of promoter NGO
 focus                            community-based organizations             •	 Forms and number of community-
                               •	 Working through community groups             based organizations promoted by NGO
                                  (self-help groups, federations,           •	 Activities pursued by community-based
                                  cooperatives etc.)                           organizations

                               •	 Belief in the ability of community;
                                  enabling approach
                   Advanced    •	 Belief in the principle of subsidiarity   •	 Discussions with various stakeholders
                               •	 Responsive to community’s needs              (including community) to see whether
                                                                               the promoter NGO is actually using
                               •	 Willingness to listen to community
                                                                               subsidiarity mechanisms in operations
                                  and design appropriate products
                                                                            •	 Minutes of meetings held at CBO level
                               •	 Openness to listen to new ideas
                                                                            •	 Records and MIS maintained at CBO
                               •	 Willingness to explore new initiatives
                                                                               level

 Characteristics   Basic       •	 Poor, with some capacity to pay (cash     •	 Economy of the area, livelihood
 of community                     economy to a reasonable extent)              sources and BPL data
                               •	 Not endemically affected by serious       •	 Studying health history of the area
                                  epidemics                                    (health records/official statistics where
                               •	 Most members suffering from same             available)
                                  health hazard
                               •	 Communities targeted

                   Advanced    •	 Having faith in the organization/         •	 Proxies of ability to pay (spending)
                                  federation/cooperative, microfinance      •	 Discussions with community and other
                                  institution                                  stakeholders on HH goods, etc.

 Capacity of       Basic       •	 Scale and outreach                        •	 Annual reports
 NGO                           •	 Execution and background of Chief         •	 Website
                                  Executives and core team                  •	 Other publications
                               •	 Education and background of
                                  Promoters/Board of Directors
                               •	 Years of existence
                               •	 Representation in government/
                                  autonomous organizations

                   Advanced    •	 Quality of Management/Chief               •	 Discussions with CEO/core team
                                  Executive Officer                         •	 HR management and development
                               •	 Extent of professionalism, knowledge         systems and policies
                                  and skill set                             •	 Management Information System
                               •	 Quality of reporting and monitoring          reports
                                  systems; quality of programs              •	 Annual progress report for financial
                                  undertaken                                   performance: balance sheet, and
                               •	 Financial and non-financial; sources         repayment rate, dropout rates etc.
                                  of funds                                  •	 Discussions with various stakeholders
                                                                               including community



                                                                                                                           29
     Criteria          Level                      Indicators                           Means of Verification
     Existence of    Basic      •	 Number of community organizations          •	 Promoter NGOs Annual Reports of last
     Community                  •	 Forms of community organizations              2-3 years
     organizations                                                            •	 Website/donor website or donor
                                •	 Roles and responsibilities of
                                   community organizations                       reports

                     Advanced   •	 Level of acceptance among members          •	 Records and minutes books of CBO;
                                •	 Relationship with primaries                   Financial records of CBO; Other
                                                                                 reports, publications
                                •	 Extent of dependence on promoter;
                                   financial dependence                       •	 Location of office of community
                                                                                 organization
                                •	 Day-to-day management
                                                                              •	 Discussions with member
                                •	 Locus of control: internal, external
                                                                              •	 Discussions with leaders, and CEO of
                                •	 Who is the CEO? NGO professional
                                                                                 community organization
                                •	 Community selected
                                                                              •	 Discussions with external stakeholders
                                •	 Kind of activity undertaken: financial;       such as bankers, government officials,
                                   social                                        etc., in case CBO is a financial
                                •	 Sustainability: financial; institutional      intermediary
                                •	 Ability of community organization to       •	 Discussions with staff of promoter
                                   influence members to pay premiums             NGO
                                   regularly                                  •	 Income and expenditure statements
                                •	 Role divisions (subsidiarity)                 of community organization and other
                                •	 Role of apex                                  financial statements

     Assurance of    Basic      •	 Capacity to pay                            •	 Review secondary data on the overall
     payment                    •	 Good financial performance of                 economy of the area, livelihoods of
                                   microfinance program, in case there           people, and income sources
                                   exists one                                 •	 Annual reports published by promoter
                                •	 Corpus with SHGs/Cooperatives                 NGO

                     Advanced   •	 Willingness to pay                         •	 Studying various reports, MIS, financial
                                •	 Availability of corpus, revolving             reports of SHGs, cooperatives and
                                   fund, other saving mechanisms                 federations
                                   available with groups, federations and     •	 Discussions with community and other
                                   co-operatives                                 stakeholders
                                •	 Faith of members in apex body
                                •	 Past record of payment for services by
                                   community

     Other factors   Basic      •	 Existence of reasonable health             •	 Secondary data on health
                                   infrastructure: SHCs, PHCs, referral          infrastructure, local economy
                                   facilities                                 •	 Details of programs run by NGO on
                                •	 Opportunity to dovetail other                 insurance
                                   insurance schemes/products                 •	 Number of policyholders served by
                                •	 NGO/MFI/Apex structure already                NGO under partner-agent model
                                   involved in insurance by self or in
                                   partnerships
                                •	 Relatively developed local economy
                                •	 Availability of training infrastructure
                                   locally, with NGO

                     Advanced   •	 Opportunity to dovetail other              •	 Details of programs run by NGO on
                                   insurance schemes/products                    insurance
                                •	 NGO/MFI/Apex structure already             •	 Number of policy holders served by
                                   involved in insurance by self or in           NGO under partner-agent model
                                   partnerships
                                •	 How important is the income from
                                   partner-agent model for the NGO


30
31
     In India, healthcare financing largely relies on direct out-of-pocket
     spending, which causes immense health-related financial burdens for the
     poor. Despite recent efforts by the government and the private sector,
     only 15 percent of the population in India is covered by health insurance.

     The Micro Insurance Academy (MIA) extends health insurance at the last
     mile through a bottom-up approach to the design, implementation and
     management of community-based health insurance. MIA develops an
     understanding of each community and delivers customized tools and
     frameworks that build a community’s capacity to self-manage micro
     insurance schemes.

     MIA bridges the gap between insurers and the bottom of the pyramid
     by providing advisory support and insurance education to establish
     insurance schemes. To date, MIA-supported micro insurance schemes
     cover more than 40,000 people in India and Nepal.




32
