The Sunflower Sector in Tanzania – A Great Potential for
              Industrial Competitiveness


                  (A Sectoral Policy Study)




                   Douglas Zhihua Zeng

                     Senior Economist




         Trade and Competitiveness Global Practice

                  The World Bank Group




                                                           1
Abstract:

Tanzania has great potential in the sunflower oil seeds sector, which can be scaled-up as one of
its key sectors for industrial development. This policy note provides an overview of the
government policies and initiatives in this sector, including the RLDC initiative and Dodoma
cluster, financing scheme as well as the monitoring & evaluation framework. It also identifies
the key constraints for scaling-up the sector and the possible solutions.




                                                                                               2
      The Sunflower Sector in Tanzania – A Great Potential for Industrial Competitiveness

                                            Douglas Zhihua Zeng1

Tanzania is one country among others in the world producing sunflower oilseeds for raw
materials in processing cholesterol-free edible cooking oil with a by-product used as livestock
feeds. Currently sunflower oil makes about 13% of the world edible oil production.

Sunflower was introduced in Tanzania during colonial times and it was found to grow in almost
all parts of the country. Interestingly, the crop grows well in the dry weather conditions of the
Central Corridor compared to other crops like maize and wheat. Sunflower in the Central
Corridor is also interesting from a pro-poor or welfare perspective as most of the sunflower is
grown by small farmers. In Dodoma, for example, about 50% of farmers are engaged in oilseeds
production. 2 With a population of about 43.7 million people, Tanzania’s minimum national
demand for edible oil is expected to be about 219,000 tons per year, but the actual national
demand is probably much higher, although there are no reliable figures available. Demand for
vegetable oil is at least growing with the rate of population growth. The production of oilseeds
in Tanzania mainly focuses on ground nuts (40%), sunflower (36%), sesame (15%), cotton (8%),
and palm oil (1%). The palm tree nuts have the highest oil content (46% – 67%) than its
counterpart; however the palm tree requires specific climatic conditions which are only found
in some parts of Tanzania, such as Kigoma.3 While there is a large production of other oilseeds
such as groundnuts and sesame, there has been no substantial oil production from these seeds,
thus making sunflower oil the most important vegetable oil produced in Tanzania.

While the production of sunflower oil seeds varying between 75,000 to 100,000 tons from year
2001 to 2005, it increased in the last two seasons dramatically to more than 350,000 tons since
2006 (Figure 1).

            Figure 1: Sunflower Seeds Production in Tanzania (2000-08; unit: 1000 tons)




1
  The author is a Senior Economist at the World Bank and he is very grateful to Yoshiyasu Mizuno (Senior Advisor,
Ministry of Industry, Trade and Marketing (MITM) of Tanzania, secondee from JICA). The case is based on a World
Bank mission to Tanzania in May 2011.
2
  Brochure by the Oilseeds Dodoma Cluster Initiative. Dodoma, 2010.
3
  RLDC: Sunflower Sector Market Development Strategy, Nov 2008.

                                                                                                                    3
                   Source: MAFSC (Ministry of Agriculture, Food Security and Cooperatives).

This sharp increase since 2005/06 crop season was achieved largely thanks to the promotion
and mass-production of quality seeds, through partnerships between the government,
international donors and the private sector. Steady joint efforts between donors, central and
local governments expanded quality seeds production to small farmers through contract
farming and successfully cleared the barrier for mass-production of quantity seeds at lower
price.


Government Policies and Regulations

Seed production and certification in Tanzania is governed by the Seed Production Act 2003,
amended in 2007, and administered by the Ministry of Agriculture, Food Security, and
Cooperatives. There are currently 20 registered entities in Tanzania whose work is being
monitored by TOSCI (Tanzania Official Seed Multiplication Institute). The process of seed
production goes through three different levels:
    Breeder Seeds: They are produced in very small quantities by research centres, like
       Ilonga
    Foundation/Basic Seeds are produced by the Agricultural Seed Agency based on the
       breeder seeds. These farms are Msimba farm in Kilosa and Naliendele farm in Mtwara.
    Certified Quality Seeds are then produced on the basis of foundation seeds by other
       registered seed producers. In the Central Corridor producers licensed for production of
       certified quality seeds are STRAD, and TANSEED.

As there are only two seed producers in the Central Corridor, the Ministry has encouraged
selected small farmers to produce Quality Declared Seeds (QDS) in collaboration with the local
District Councils.

The effect of high quality seeds to triple or quadruple the yield has been widely observed but
did not spread due to limited availability of the high quality seeds and their high price. Steady
joint efforts between pro-poor NGOs, Ministry of Agriculture, Food Security and Cooperatives
and local governments expanded quality seeds production to small farmers through contract
farming and successfully cleared this barrier realizing mass-production of quantity seeds at
lower price.


The RLDC Sunflower Sector Initiative and the Dodoma Cluster

The Rural Livelihood Development Company (RLDC) is an initiative of the Swiss Development
Cooperation (SDC) formally founded through the registrar of companies as a non-profit
company by two Swiss foundations: Intercooperation (IC) and Swisscontact (SC). Technical
assistance to RLDC is provided by a consortium of IC and SC. In addition to the two founding
members, the Council of RLDC also includes four associate members: Ministry of Industry,

                                                                                                    4
Trade and Marketing (MITM), Confederation of Tanzanian Industries (CTI), Muungano wa
Vikundi vya Wakulima Tanzania (MVIVATA) and SDC, which provides a great platform for the
public-private and donor partnerships.

RLDC undertook an in-depth market assessment of the entire sunflower sector. The results of
this market assessment were integrated in the design of a sunflower sector strategy, which
focuses on seed production and seed marketing, sunflower production through contract
farming, a light version of a warehouse receipt system, pollination for increased yield, business
plans for refineries, and sunflower oil branding and marketing. The sunflower sector initiative
was implemented through a number of private business partners.4

RLDC provides grants through a challenge fund to seed producers for establishing sunflower
seed farms and to improve the quality of the sunflower seeds. Via the challenge fund, RLDC also
supports training of farmers and establish extension services for seed production. More
specifically, RLDC interventions helped rural sunflower producers in two major ways: the first
was helping sunflower producers gain access to agro-inputs to enhance their production and
the second was helping them gain access to reliable markets and processors to ensure a base
for continued income.

RLDC’s first collaboration has been with STRAD Co. Ltd., a private enterprise that works with
farmer groups to produce and distribute certified and Quality Declared Seeds (QDS) to
sunflower farmers. RLDC designed an intervention to assist the company to mobilize farmers
into groups, provide seeds production trainings, inputs, ploughing, supervision, certification and
extension services, and later buy the seeds from farmers at premium price. An example of
contracting farming is provided in Box 1.

       Box 1. Contract Farming in the Kiteto Districts, Tanzania

       In 2007, the RLDC business partner in Kiteto started to run a sunflower oil processing plant in
       Kibaya. The partner processes 40-50 bages of sunflower seeds per day, operating the plant 7-9
       months per year, processing a total of 9,000-13,000 bags per year. While there are other
       smaller processors in the region, the RLDC business partner is the only one filtering and packing
       the oil into containers of 1, 5 and 20 liters. He assures the seed supply through a diversified
       system:
           1. Contract farming and credit scheme for tractor ploughing and agro-inputs;
           2. Payment of premium price for sunflower seeds;
           3. Warehouse receipt system (farmers deposit sunflower seed in the warehouse and sell
                later when the price is better; at the same time, the stored seed serves as a guarantee
                for the RLDC business partner to give credits to farmers);
           4. Credit for supplies sold in own shop in Kibaya.

       Source: RLDC: Growing Sunflower for Employment, Dodoma, Tanzania, 2010.



4
    RLDC: Growing Sunflower for Employment, Dodoma, Tanzania, 2010.

                                                                                                           5
STRAD Co has managed to work with a total of 5 farmer groups from 5 different villages,
cultivating a total of 273 acres which yielded 22.2 tons of sunflower seeds. RLDC has also been
working with Tanzania Official Seed Certification Institute (TOSCI) to ensure seeds were
properly inspected and ultimately certified and to build self-sufficiency within the regulatory
body. Facilitation focused on training, production and certification with good progress made in
7 district council local authorities in Tabora, Singida, and Dodoma in terms of preparing and
producing Quality Declared Seeds in Sunflower. A total of 50 farmers were able to go into
production of QDS in 2009 producing 35.9 tons of sunflower seeds which were marketed and
distributed at the local level.5

 RLDC also collaborated with Honey Care Ltd. (HACT), to install 40 uncolonized beehives on a 40
acre farm in Kibaya in Kiteto. The aim of the pilot project was to explore the complementary
role of pollination in increasing sunflower yield while at the same time producing high quality
honey which would provide additional income to small scale sunflower farmers. Despite the
drought, 9 hives were colonized by bees in 2009, and so far all 40 hives have been colonized.

Through these activities, RLDC managed to make considerable impact on three core
intervention areas: seed production and marketing; improvement of production and sales
through contract farming, and pollination for increased yields.

Furthermore, in Dodoma Region, inspired by the RLDC initiative, a group of newly entered oil
expellers formed an association and systematically introduced contract farming model. Each oil
processor participates in the association with 300 to 700 contracted farmers around and the
processors lend high quality seeds and tractor tilling operation to the farmers in return of their
priority procurement right for the harvested sunflower (table 1). New entry to the processing
business is relatively easy and requires only 15 - 20 million T. Shillings as the initial capital for
processing capacity of 40 bags of sunflower a day to produce 80 liters of oil per day. Thanks to
the increased yield of quality seeds and favorable price condition in international market for
2009/2010, business of the association has grown and it is ready to take a next step to add
further value by establishing an oil refining facility, which will enable them to sell high grade oil
products to supermarkets in larger markets.6

Table 1: Contract Farming by Central Zone Sunflower Oil Processing Association in 2006




5
    RLDC Annual Report 2009, Dodoma, Tanzania.
6
    MITM: Integrated Industrial Development Strategy 2025, Dar es Salaam, 2010.

                                                                                                    6
  Source: MITM: Integrated Industrial Development Strategy 2025, Dar es Salaam, 2010.



Financing Scheme

In order to support the sunflower sector in Tanzania, various financing mechanisms have been
harnessed. Except for the grants and credit programs and the warehouse receipt system
(farmers deposit sunflower seed in the warehouse and sell later when the price is better; at the
same time, the stored seed serves as a guarantee for the RLDC business partner to give credits
to farmers) used by the RLDC, the Government of Tanzania is also exploring different ways to
support the agribusiness and priority sectors:

      Industrial Development Support Loan. It is an interest subsidized loan to promote local
       investment for agro-processing industries amounting min. Tsh 50 million to max Tsh
       1,000 million, implemented by the MITM jointly with the Tanzania Investment Bank.
       See figure 2 for details.




                                                                                                 7
    Source: Mizuno, Yoshiyasu, MITM.

   SIDO (Small Industry Development Organization) Credit Guarantee Scheme. This is a
    credit guarantee scheme for agro-processing and agro-business sectors combined with
    technical assistance extended by SIDO. The amount ranges from Tsh 5 millions to Tsh 50
    millions. In order to improve and verify project feasibility, SIDO provides technical
    assistance to MSMEs from business planning stage and undertakes repayment
    guarantee only for loans which SIDO can be confident for the repayment credibility. See
    figure 3 for details.




                                                                                          8
                   Source: Mizuno, Yoshiyasu, MITM.



Monitoring and Evaluation

To effectively capture the program progress and evaluate its impact, RLDC has completed a
monitoring manual in 2009, which includes relevant target goals and performance indicators,
such as sunflower seeds yield, number of farmers producing QDS, etc. The purpose of the RLDC
M&E system is to maximize project effectiveness by guiding RLDC operations and management
decision making. It does this by tracking and documenting project activities, outputs and
outcomes and by generating information on the changes occurring over time at the enterprise
and sector levels.

Meanwhile, COSTECH (Tanzania Commission for Science & Technology) and PACF (Pan Africa
Competitiveness Forum) are also producing a monitoring and evaluation framework for the
Tanzania cluster initiatives, which involves thinking, systems, people and action.7

All these systems will serve as useful tools for improved project design and implementation as
well as reporting to the stakeholders.


Challenges for Scaling Up

Despite of the initial success and great potential of the sunflower seeds oil sector in Tanzania, it
also faces many challenges for scaling up. These include8:
     Unavailability of technology/machines. While the small processors in Manyara are
        organizing themselves to look for possibility of obtaining machine for refining, their
        colleagues in Singida seem to be reluctant in adopting the new standards at the
        beginning. However, both regions are complaining about the high price for technologies
        and machineries for refining, and inadequate knowledge of appropriate technology for
        processing and packaging of sunflower oil (both raw and doubled refined). Currently
        there is only one operating oil refinery for sunflower seeds oil in Arusha. Sunflower
        farmers and oil extractors wish to have local refineries to avoid monopoly.
     Lack of awareness of TBS (Tanzania Bureau of Standards) Standards and Procedures.
        Awareness of the sunflower oil standards is needed to all stakeholders in the whole
        value chain (supplier of quality seeds, farmers, processors, and traders). Also, food
        safety is increasingly a concern, which means a stakeholder training on TBS standards is
        quite necessary. So far only 8 oil extractors among estimated 500 have acquired TBS
        certificates.
     Lack of bulk provisions. Bulk provision is low due to weak associations and poor
        marketing systems. While there is a strong association in Manyara known as UMAMBE,

7
    COSTECH, “National Stakeholders Workshop on Cluster Development in Tanzania”, March 2011, Dar es Salaam.
8
    Mainly draws on Yoshiyasu Mizuno, “Progress in Finalization of Sunflower Oil Specifications,” MITM, 2011.

                                                                                                                9
       associations in Singida are still weak though the plan of joining their colleagues in
       Dodoma to form TASUPA is under way. In addition, while the sunflower warehouse
       receipt system is operational in Singida since 2009, Manyara is still in the early stage.
      Poor infrastructure. Although the construction of tarmac road in both regions has
       reached far to attract reasonable investment, the storage facilities and working sites are
       still in poor conditions. Majority of the small processors are working at their backyard
       and not oriented to Good Hygienic Practices (GHP).
      Lack of business linkages between large and small enterprises. While linkage between
       large and small producers could facilitate market access, evidence shows that there is
       no good linkage between big oil refinery operators and small processors.


Possible Solutions

The above mentioned challenges are calling for collaborative measures to build confidence
among the sector’s different actors by encouraging public-private partnership (PPP) and
commitment in formulating and implementing long-term and short-term policies to sustain the
sector.

In the short term to medium term, the following measures could be proposed:
     Improving the oil quality through standards. This could be achieved through a public
        campaign though media, associations and TBS seminars to call public awareness for
        safety food products certified by TBS, and urge oil extractors to apply for TBS certificate.
     Promoting oil refining. It is important to break the monopoly in the sunflower oil
        refinery sector in Tanzania. With collaboration of RLDC and JICA, a pilot plant of mini
        refinery is proposed to be installed in Dodoma to examine the economic and technical
        viability. Once it is successful, SIDO and other relevant agencies can help to promote it
        in other regions.
     Further rolling out the warehouse receipt system. While proving to be effective, the
        warehouse receipt system needs to be implemented in other regions other than Singida.
        In collaboration with RLDC, CRDB Bank is developing its own warehouse receipt system
        for sunflower seeds, in which CRDB provides loans to farmers who have harvested
        sunflower seeds as collateral. This will help to scale up the system.

In the long run, efforts need to be made to strengthen the clusters in the making for edible oil
industries. Currently the government (especially the MITM and Commission of S&T) and the
private sectors are keen in pushing forward the clusters for edible oil industries, which are still
at the early stage. Clusters will make it possible for mass production and bulk transactions
which will help to solve the supply side constraints. They are also sources of sustainable jobs
and income for farmers. Several initiatives are already taking place. Through Manyara
Agricultural Development Initiative, an extractors association in Babati is negotiating with
Babati Municipality to obtain a 4-acre plot for a cluster operation. Singida Regional
Commissioner Office has promised to allocate a 5-acre plot to establish a Micro Manufacturing


                                                                                                 10
   Enterprise Park proposed by MITM and agreed to develop the area as a model of sunflower oil
   cluster.

   To implement these measures and initiatives successfully and sustainably, a concerted effort
   and a strong public-private and donor partnership is definitely needed. The RLDC’s initiative
   has provided a great example in this regard.


   A Summary of the Public-Private Interactions

                Regulatory & tax            Infrastructure        Access to           Skilled and        Access to
                environment                                       finance             trained labor      technologies
                                                                                                         and R&D
Public          - Seed production &                               - Industrial                           -Public
actions         certification is governed                         development                            universities, such
                by the Seed Production                            support loan,                          as University of
                Act 2003, amended in                              ranging from Tsh                       Dar es Salaam
                2007, and administered                            50 million to Tsh                      provides some
                by the Ministry of                                1,000 million;                         technical support
                Agriculture, Food                                 implemented                            to the clusters
                Security and                                      jointly by the
                Cooperatives;                                     Ministry of
                - There are 20 registered                         Industry and
                entities whose work is                            Tanzania
                being monitored by                                Investment Bank;
                TOSCI (Tanzania Official                          - SIDO credit
                Seed Multiplication                               guarantee
                Institute);                                       scheme, ranging
                - The Ministry of Agr                             from Tsh 5
                encourages selected                               millions – Tsh 50
                small farmers to                                  millions.
                produce Quality
                Declared Seeds.
Joint public-                               -RLDC, supported                          -Training          - RLDC, in
private                                     by the Ministry of                        workshops for      partnership with
                                            Industry & Trade                          farmers/produc     private firms,
sector                                      and                                       ers by the         such as STRAD Co.
actions                                     Confederation of                          industrial         and the Tanzania
                                            Tanzanian                                 associations, in   Official Seed
                                            Industries,                               partnership        Certification
                                            collaborates with                         with global        Institute (TOSCI)
                                            private sector                            institutions       to provide Quality
                                            such as Honey                             such as TCI,       Declared Seeds,
                                            Care Ltd to install                       government         technical
                                            beehives;                                 and assistance     assistance, and
                                            - Government                              agencies such      certification
                                            works with RLDC                           as RLDC            - The MIT, in
                                            and JICA to                                                  collaboration with
                                            acquire land for                                             RLDC and JICA, to
                                            upgrading the                                                set up a pilot oil

                                                                                                                  11
          sunflower cluster,                                         refining plant to
          such as in Babati                                          demonstrate and
          and Singida.                                               disseminate new
                                                                     technologies
Private   Household            - Challenge Fund     -On-the-job      -Support from
sector    premises, such as    by the Swiss NGO     training and     business
          backyards            RLDC;                apprenticeship   associations for
actions                        - Contract farming   -Training by     better production
                               and credit           RLDC via the     methods
                               scheme for seed      Challenge Fund
                               farmers by RLDC;
                               - Warehouse
                               receipt system




                                                                             12
