             International Water
             Management Institute
             Open source mobile weather
             stations for flood resilience



             Relying only on manual precipitation measurements to manage reservoirs, the Irrigation
             Department of Sri Lanka was often unprepared for flood waves, resulting in rapid releases,
             breaches, and increased flood damages. The International Water Management Institute (IWMI)
             was asked by the Irrigation Department in January 2015 to provide a solution for improving
             flood resilience. The department needed data on hourly rainfall intensity so it could prepare
CONTEXT




             reservoirs to receive and store intense rainfall, but traditional weather stations were too
             expensive for this application.
             To provide an effective and affordable solution, IWMI developed a low-cost mobile weather station
             that transmits data through SMS, using open-source hardware and software. Five stations are
             being piloted in the catchment of the Nachchaduwa reservoir in Anuradhapura. The operation
             and maintenance of the stations are being studied to identify avenues for technical and policy
             development to better support flood risk reduction policies. LINK TO INFOGRAPHIC




                      5
HIGHLIGHTS




                 5 cost-effective          A community of            A citizen science      Seventeen public and
               weather stations are    practice around open-       group installed IWMI      private organizations
                being piloted in Sri   source mobile weather      stations in 20 schools     across the globe are
             Lanka, made from open      stations was initiated   in Sri Lanka schools for     building their own
             source technologies and     in Sri Lanka at the      educational and early-    weather stations using
                  local materials.         project’s launch.        warning purposes.            IWMI manuals.
              IWMI responded to the Irrigation Department’s request and installed 5 mobile weather stations in the upper catchment
              of the Nachchaduwa Reservoir, at locations identified by the Department, in April 2016. The weather stations record
APPROACH




              data to a microSD card every 5 minutes, and send a text message to the cellphones of the reservoir managers once
              per day or whenever a rainfall threshold of 10 mm/hour is exceeded. These notifications can be tailored to individual
              environments and needs. IWMI also organized a workshop to train key individuals in the technology and operation
              of these weather stations, thus linking users (such as the Irrigation Department and the Coordinating Secretariat for
              Science Technology & Innovation) to developers (such as the University of Moratuwa and A&T labs) and establishing a
              community of practice. The next phase of the project, in parallel with projects by other members of the community of
              practice, will test the weather stations at larger scales in Sri Lanka.




             “Sri Lankans are becoming increasingly affected by flooding. An early warning system is badly
                      needed, and this project will help make our systems safer and more efficient.”
                           - Wimalananda Ratnayake, Secretary of the Ministry of Irrigation and
                                       Water Resources Management, Sri Lanka


              In the second phase of the GFDRR Challenge Fund project, the achievements the first phase will be used to support
NEXT STEPS




              creation of conducive policy and institutional environments for using weather stations at larger scales. IWMI will
              collaborate with the Coordinating Secretariat for Science Technology & Innovation in the effort, who have been working
              on developing a national climate observatory. IWMI will also create an online knowledge platform to link potential users
              of these devices with developers, and will serve as the policy and institutional collaborator for the 4ONSE project, a
              collaboration between the University of Moratuwa, the Irrigation Department, and the Institute of Earth Sciences aimed
              at improving sensor technologies.




                                                                                                 LEARN MORE AT
                                                                                            GFDRR.ORG/CHALLENGEFUND
