                                 Executive Summary of Evaluation

    Name of Evaluation                                      Process Evaluation of Component III of Bangladesh
                                                            Water PaCT: Partnership for Cleaner Textile
                                                            (Midline assessment)
    Date of final Report                                    January, 2017
    Author of Final Evaluation Report                       Ernest & Young
    Date of this executive Summary                          January, 2017
    Author of this Executive Summary                        Sumit Manchanda, IFC
    Number of pages of this Executive Summary               6
    Modifications from original executive Summary           Without modifications
    Executive Summary Approved for public                   Mohan Seneviratne, Program Manager – PaCT,
    disclosure by (name) and (date)                         MSeneviratne@ifc.org, February, 2017
                                                            Hulman Soaloon, Results Measurement Specialist,
                                                            CEDVP, hsoaloon@ifc.org; February, 2017


Public-Private Dialogues (PPDs) are known to convene policy makers, regulators, administrators and
private sector participants to the same table and collaboratively address particularly stubborn issues relating
to business-enabling reforms. PPDs foster a culture of democratic problem-solving, drive awareness and
consensus among participating stakeholders and aid the transcendence of reform impacts beyond the
handful few. The Component III of the “Water PaCT: Partnership for Cleaner Textile” or PaCT Program
in Bangladesh was modeled on similar tenets of PPD. While the first two components targeted a finite set
of beneficiaries (“participating or PaCT” brands and textile factories), Component III strategized to build
on these findings and to create a wider sectoral impact (thereby, impacting even “non-participating or non-
PaCT” brands and textile factories). Ernest & Yong (EY) was appointed by the International Finance
Corporation (IFC), which manages the PaCT Program, as an independent process evaluator of Component
III.

This report follows up on EY’s baseline analysis, completed back in May 2014 and presents the findings
from EY’s midline assessment. The midline analysis explores (i) how the processes of Component III have
evolved since the baseline study and how they are expected to evolve going forward, (ii) what are the
present levels of perceptions and attitudes among different stakeholders on the issue of water management
practices and (iii) what have been the key observations around the dialogue process adopted by IFC for
Component III and how it can be fortified to further the agenda under discussion. The report was developed
based on:

      ► A series of consultations with IFC staff members and Policy Research Institute (PRI) 1, who were
          probed on the evolution of the dialogue processes, the rationale behind chosen design approaches,
          course corrections and way forward


1
  The Policy Research Institute of Bangladesh (PRI) is a private, nonprofit, nonpartisan research organization dedicated to
undertaking and disseminating policy-oriented economic research among public policymakers, business professionals, and the
academic community. PRI was appointed by the IFC to anchor the research-driven public-private dialogue under Component III
of the PaCT Program.

                                                       Page 1 of 6
    ► A Perception Survey (comprising questions around attitude, perceptions and trust between
        stakeholders on the issue of water sustainability) of a sample of respondents across stakeholder
        categories including Government Policy Makers, Brands, Textile Factories, Banks & Financial
        Institutions, and Opinion Leaders (including civil society organizations (CSOs), research
        institutions, think tanks, etc.)
The development of the above methodology involved detailed discussions with IFC PaCT team to
understand the full scope and design of the assignment and went through a thorough vetting process with
the IFC Monitoring & Evaluation team.

The baseline assessment had revealed the general circumspection among stakeholders about the utility of
dialogues in Bangladesh, especially in solving issues of environmental sustainability. Common pitfalls
identified were: (i) lack of adequate knowledge and awareness on water sustainability of textile operations,
(ii) distrust between stakeholders impeding collaborative engagement and (iii) absence of connection
between relevant stakeholders. The midline assessment, however, revealed the following about the
Component III PPD process and its participants:

    ► The PPD process has been unprecedented in its ability to bring together a wide group of
        stakeholders like textile factories, brands, national policy makers, banks and financial institutions
        and think-tanks on the subject of water sustainability in the textiles sector thus adequately
        addressing concerns around connection gap.
    ► All Component III participants agreed that the dialogue processes have been successful in elevating
        the general awareness and consciousness levels of stakeholders around water sustainable practices,
        thereby implying knowledge could be built through the sensitization efforts of PPD and ground
        could be laid for informed problem-solving.
    ► All the participants claimed to have seamlessly collaborated with each other and contributed
        towards problem solving on textile water sustainability of Bangladesh. This suggests that a well-
        orchestrated PPD can effectively overcome trust issues, if any.
    ► The original Component III design has evolved organically to focus exclusively on national-level
        policy reforms. With a singular focus on identifying enabling environment improvements and
        strengthening affordability of sustainable technologies, the dialogues have successfully managed
        to bring about one key reform – establishment of a national fund for environmentally friendly
        technologies – and set in motion two other focusing on penalizing hazardous chemical discharge
        and incentivizing import of environmentally friendly technologies. This clearly demonstrates the
        Component III’s success in defeating the common rhetoric that dialogues are merely for show.
The midline assessment concludes that Component III has succeeded in establishing the necessary
institutional architecture and processes to drive meaningful dialogues around sustainability-oriented
policy reforms in Bangladesh. In fact, the current pipeline of reforms holds the potential to transcend the
impacts of Components I and II;, without Component III, the other components’ outcomes would likely
have lacked the necessary institutional framework and relied entirely on word-of-mouth to reach out
beyond the targeted PaCT entities.

In focusing on the above-mentioned policy reforms, Component III acted on the following key
recommendations made at the baseline assessment stage:


                                                Page 2 of 6
    ► Focus on developing stakeholder awareness on business benefits of pursuing water/resource
        efficiency
    ► Investigating the existing fiscal and market-based financing mechanisms to support sustainable
      water management
    ► Facilitation of direct communication between brands and government – two stakeholders
      previously disconnected in the Bangladesh industrial water management eco-system – on
      sustainable practices and solutions
    ► Engagement of think-tanks – PRI as the anchor of the dialogue processes – to support dialogues
      with research-based, data-driven solutions
Despite its concerted focus on policy reforms, however, Component III continues to be challenged by the
difficult political economy of Bangladesh. There is still a lack of sufficient number of forward-thinking
decision makers to quickly streamline an environmental policy reform process. This is demonstrated in the
lengthy cycle of Component III outcomes, with only one reform seeing the light of the day as of March 2016
and two others still some way from full implementation, despite the reform process starting almost three
years earlier.

Protracted policy reform processes aside, the Component III has also struggled to expand its participation
base beyond the core group of participating stakeholders. The Midline Assessment contends that, beyond
policy reforms, Component III should have engaged in sensitization of a wider audience, over and beyond
the PPD participants, on the big picture i.e. the need for and viability of water sustainable textile wet
processing operations. A dedicated communication channel, print and video media publications beyond
official PaCT website, could have been established to achieve this purpose to influence public perception
and behavior.

The outcomes of the Trust survey, a component of the Perception Survey which was conducted on wider
group of stakeholders involving both Component III participants as well as external members, indicated
that there have been no sizeable change in trust perceptions from the baseline stage. This was expected as
Component III made little effort to reach out to the broader public – in fact, the impact of Component III
on driving public trust cannot be measured. This suggests another potential shortcoming of PPD in its
current form - it has struggled to be a truly inclusive and democratic process by adopting limited advocacy
efforts to disseminate dialogue findings and potentially failing to invite and influence general public
perception on textile water sustainability. However, greater public participation in a politically complex
context as Bangladesh would likely have dragged the policy reform process even further. Here, it can thus
be admitted that IFC and PRI likely compromised on inclusivity and focused on a result-oriented approach
to arrive at achievable outcomes within the project life-cycle of PaCT Program (within June 2017).

The midline assessment recommends the following measures to take the dialogue processes to their logical
conclusion by the end of the PaCT Project in June 2017:

    1. Pour resources to ensure fruition of the two outstanding policy reform areas focusing on (i)
       penalizing non-compliance of zero discharge of hazardous chemicals and (ii) waiver of tax and
       duty on import of environmentally friendly technologies by end of June 2017
    2. Enhance existing research capacity of the PPD platform to further facilitate analytical insights
       around environmental and technical aspects (quantification of water savings, chemical usage,



                                               Page 3 of 6
        wastewater discharge profile, technological specifications of environmentally friendly equipment,
        etc.) of potential policy reforms, especially the two outstanding ones
    3. Explore the possibility of including technology suppliers within the dialogue process to allow hand-
       holding of textile factories in choosing appropriate technology partners
    4. Ensure continuity in the participation of stakeholders – specifically, delegation to non-decision
       making subordinates to be avoided
    5. Foster a culture of dialogue-driven collaborative problem-solving in working group participants to
       ensure the legacy of PPD beyond the PaCT Program lifetime
    6. Component III should explore opportunities for conducting outreach and advocacy efforts and
       attempt higher inclusivity and democratization of their processes – this, however, should continue
       to be treated with caution so that reform processes are not derailed.
It is recommended that the following synergies between different components and stakeholders of PaCT
and the role of World Bank Group, as a whole, be explored further till the end of Component III’s lifetime:

  Stakeholder Category                          Recommendation
                     As have been noted in the aforementioned recommendations in
                     this chapter, the PPD team can potentially take a larger role
                     towards the following:
 PaCT PPD (Component ► engaging, especially, the government stakeholders, ensuring
 III) Team                the continuous participation of decision makers in the
                          dialogue process, and
                     ► developing consensus around the pending policy reforms
                          among the higher echelons of the national administration
                     As also noted earlier, Component III should explore opportunities
                     for conducting outreach and advocacy efforts. Such strategic
 PaCT Project Team
                     efforts should be initiated by the PaCT Project Team to ensure
                     that the progress of Component III is publicly disseminated.
                     It has been noted that sustainability is yet to gain any major
                     precedence in the buying behavior of brands, which in turn calls
 Brands              for a wider sensitization and consensus development among the
                     brands operating in Bangladesh. This may be achieved through
                     wider participation of brands in Component III.
                     Donors continue to play a catalyzing role in promoting the public
                     and private sector development in Bangladesh. The role of donors
                     is particularly critical in driving public sector policy reforms – this
 Donors              may be leveraged by Component III to drive some of the
                     outstanding reform agendas. Per se, the involvement of donors in
                     the dialogue processes has been minimal, with only a World Bank
                     official attending the initial exploratory meetings.

Without drawing definitive conclusions, it can still be noted that PaCT Component III has put in motion the
processes necessary for some much-needed enabling-environment reform supporting water sustainability.

                                               Page 4 of 6
However, it would be remiss to call PPD a success just yet, especially with two pending reform proposals
in the pipeline. It is crucial to understand and ascertain the continuity of PPD going forward. As it stands
on June 2016, IFC will likely transition the dialogue processes to Business Initiative Leading Development
(BUILD)2. BUILD has established a Working Committee on Sustainability & Green Growth with a
particular focus on textiles sector. The committee is expected to be co-chaired by BGMEA and MoEF and
will focus on tackling reform areas relevant to climate and other resiliency issues of the textiles sector
through the dual mode of awareness creation of the private sector and taking up of policy reforms to the
Government.
BUILD’s successes around policy reform using PPD suggest that, as an institution, it would be able to
attract a wider group of stakeholders within its ambit, build on the culture of dialogue that it has already
fostered among key government decision makers and private sectors alike and drive a focused outreach
effort to be increasingly inclusive and democratic in its policy reform agenda. This augurs particularly well
for Component III and aligns with recommendations 3, 4, 5 and 6 mentioned above. Also, BUILD’s close
working relationship with the Policy Coordination Unit in Prime Minister’s Office (PMO) of Bangladesh
suggest that it is perfectly positioned to lead the pending reform agenda from Component III to fruition,
which aligns well with recommendation 1.

In sum, the following diagram summarizes the Midline Assessment findings and recommendations:

Figure 1: Summary of Key Findings & Recommendations from Midline Assessment




2
  Business Initiative Leading Development (BUILD) was launched jointly by the Dhaka Chamber of Commerce and Industry
(DCCI) in partnership with the Metropolitan Chamber of Commerce and Industry (MCCI) and Chittagong Chamber of Commerce
and Industry (CCCI) in October 2011 as a Public Private Dialogue (PPD) platform to facilitate structured dialogues between the
public and the private sectors under an institutional framework. BUILD facilitates the connection between the public and private
sector for better communication, coordination and collaboration in bringing reforms in business policies and procedures to improve
the country's investment climate in Bangladesh.

                                                          Page 5 of 6
Copyright and Legal Disclaimer
The material in this publication is copyrighted. IFC encourages the dissemination of the content for educational purposes. Content from this
publication may be used freely without prior permission. Provided that clear attribution is given to IFC and that content is not used for
commercial purposes.

The findings, interpretations, views, and conclusions expressed herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the
Executive Directors of the International Finance Corporation or of the World Bank or the governments they represent.

The views expressed in this publication are those of its authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the wider institution. Some of the
information used in this document may come from publicly available sources such as company websites and publications. The lessons of
Experience series does not represent a commitment by IFC to require projects it finances to take certain or all of the actions specified in the
publication. Instead, any issues arising in an IFC-financed project will be evaluated and addressed in the context of the particular circumstances
of the project.




                                                                 Page 6 of 6
