          THE TOLL OF




THE ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL CONSEQUENCES
       OF THE CONFLICT IN SYRIA
        THE TOLL O F WA R
THE ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL CONSEQUENCES
       OF THE CONFLICT IN SYRIA
        THE TOLL O F WA R
THE ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL CONSEQUENCES
       OF THE CONFLICT IN SYRIA
© 2017 The World Bank.




does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The boundaries, colors,

on the part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or
acceptance of such boundaries.




Rights and Permissions



license, you are free to copy, distribute, transmit, and adapt this work, including for commercial




Third-party content—The World Bank does not necessarily own each component of the content
contained within the work. The World Bank therefore does not warrant that the use of any
third-party-owned individual component or part contained in the work will not infringe on the

you. If you wish to re-use a component of the work, it is your responsibility to determine whether
permission is needed for that re-use and to obtain permission from the copyright owner.
Examples of components can include, but are not limited to, tables, ﬁgures, or images.

With support from:




Front cover:
A Syrian woman waits with her daughter near the Syria border at the southeastern town of Suruc
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This study was prepared by a multidisciplinary team led by Harun Onder (Senior
Economist, TTL) and Faya Hayati (Young Professional, TTL) comprising Haneen Ismael
Sayeed (Program Leader, HDN Group Coordinator), Ibrahim Khalil Dajani (Program
Leader, SDN Group Coordinator), Peter Mousley (Program Leader, EFI Group
Coordinator), Aakanksha Pande (Senior Health Economist), Abdulhakim Al-Aghbari
(Senior Transport Specialist), Amal Talbi (Senior Water and Sanitation Specialist),
Anders Jagerskog (Senior Water Resources Management Specialist), Andrea Petrelli
(Consultant), Andrew James Judaprawira (Consultant), Angela Elzir (Senior Professional
Associate), Angela S. Lisulo (Consultant), Anya Vodopyanov (Consultant), Asbjorn Wee
(Senior Operations Oﬃcer), Ashwaq Maseeh (Consultant), Barbro Hexeberg (Lead
Economist), Bartol Letica (Senior Financial Sector Specialist), Bekzod Shamsiev (Senior
Agriculture Economist), Burton Bollag (Consultant), Carlo Rossotto (Lead ICT Policy
Specialist), David Andrew Stephan (Economist), David Robalino (Manager), Dhiraj
Sharma (Young Professional), Dino Merotto (Lead Economist), Dominick Waal (Senior
Economist), Dorte Verner (Lead Agriculture Economist), Ece Ozcelik (Consultant), Ejona
Fuli (Consultant), Erhan Artuc (Senior Economist), Eric Roland Metreau (Senior
Economist), Eyup Ozveren (Consultant), Hiromi Yamaguchi (Analyst), James Fearon
(Consultant), Jan Van Der Goltz (FCV and Jobs Economist), Joern Huenteler (Young
Professional), Jose Valdes Martinez (Senior Economist), Joy Aoun (Disaster Risk
Management Specialist), Israel Osorio-Rodarte (Consultant), Kent Garber (Consultant),
Kinley Salmon (Young Professional), Kirk Hamilton (Consultant), Kohei Ueda
(Consultant), Lina Fares (Senior Procurement Specialist), Lisa Stewart (Consultant),
Manal Quota (Education Specialist), Mohamed Ali Maourani (Consultant), Nabila Assaf
(Senior Economist), Natasha Maherali (Consultant), Paul Prettitore (Senior Public
Sector Specialist), Peter McConagy (Financial Sector Specialist), Phoram Shah (Urban
Specialist), Rabie Nasr (Consultant), Raja Arshad (Lead Disaster Risk Management
Specialist), Raﬃ Garcia (Consultant), Ray Salvatore Jennings (Consultant), Sally Zgheib
(Water Supply and Sanitation Specialist), Shahrzad Mobasher Fard (Consultant), Soraya
El Khalil (Research Analyst), Syed Mehdi Hassan (Lead Financial Sector Specialist), Tahir
Akbar (Senior Disaster Risk Management Specialist), Tobias Schneider (Consultant),
Tracy Hart (Senior Environmental Specialist), Trang Thuy Nguyen (Research Analyst),
Tulu Balkir (Consultant), Usaid El Hanbali (Consultant), Waad Tammaa (Consultant),
Zaki Mehchy (Consultant), and Ziad Nakat (Senior Transport Specialist), and under the
guidance of Eric Le Borgne (Acting Practice Manager, GMF05).

The team is grateful for guidance and support from Hafez M. H. Ghanem (Vice
President, MNAVP), Ferid Belhaj (Chief of Staﬀ, EXC), Saroj Kumar Jha (Senior Director,
GCFDR), Shantayanan Devarajan (Chief Economist, MNACE), Kanthan Shankar (Acting
Country Director, MNC02), Claire Kfouri (Country Program Coordinator, MNC02), and
Janet Minatelli (Senior Country Oﬃcer). The team has received valuable comments
from our peer reviewers for the ﬁnal report, Abdallah Al Dardari, Alan Gelb, Tito
Cordella, and Xavier Devictor, and for the concept note, Andrew Harper, Joe Saba, Jose
Araujo, and Paolo Verme, as well as from the following colleagues: Andrew C. Kircher,
Hideki Matsunaga, Lili Mottaghi, Paul Bance, Omer Karasapan, Sajjad Ali Shah, Siobhan
McInerney-Lankford, Stefanie Onder, William Stebbins, and Yezid Sayigh. The team
also received excellent support from Katia Stefanova and Syvie Creger.

Finally, generous ﬁnancial support from the State and Peacebuilding Fund, technical
and ﬁnancial support from the European Space Agency EO4SD agriculture and rural
development activity cluster (provided by eLEAF and GeoVille), and technical support
from various UNESCWA, UNHABITAT, UNHCR, IOM, FAO, WFP, SCPR, and REACH
Initiative are gratefully acknowledged.
                                         TA B L E O F C O N T E N T S :




i     Key Findings

iii   Executive Summary

1     CHAPTER 1: Syria Before the Conﬂict
3       The Long History of Syria
8       Syria at the Dawn of the Conﬂict

17    CHAPTER 2: The Wrath of Conﬂict
18      Physical Damage
47      Demographic Dispersion and Loss of Lives and Opportunities
54      Eﬀects of the Conﬂict on Economic Activity
68      Human Development Outcomes

77    CHAPTER 3: Disentangling the Economic Impact of the Conﬂict
79      Aggregate Impact
85      Integrative Framework

101 Concluding Remarks

      Appendices
104     A. Methodology of Physical Damage Assessments
107     B. Sectoral Situation Reports
111     C. Technical Speciﬁcations of the Simulation Model

119 References
                                                    LIST OF FIGURES




i   Figure ES.1: Organization of the study
10  Figure 1.1: Labor Force Participation Rate, 2010
10  Figure 1.2: Structure of the Working-Age Population in Syria, 2010
15  Figure 1.3: Governance Indicators in Syri
33  Figure 2.1: Sources of Electricity Supply in Three Conflict-Affected Cities
35  Figure 2.2: Damages to Intra-City Roads
37  Figure 2.3: Changes in Connectivity: Pre-Conflict versus De Facto Distances,
    March 2017
39 Figure 2.4: Damage to Total Health Facilities, by City
40 Figure 2.5: Damage to Health Facilities, by Facility Type, February 2017
51 Figure 2.6: Destination and Origin Governorates of IDPs
51 Figure 2.7: Direction of Flight for the Forcibly Displaced, by Governorate
55 Figure 2.8: Economic Activity during the Years of the Conflict
62 Figure 2.9: Investment and Trade Dynamics
64 Figure 2.10: Fiscal Deficit and Debt
66 Figure 2.11: Exchange Rates and the Consumer Price Index
70 Figure 2.12: Labor Market Indicators: Pre-Conflict versus Conflict
71 Figure 2.13: Structure of the Working-Age Population in Syria, 2015
72 Figure 2.14: Simulated Poverty Rate With and Without the Conflict,
    2007–16 (%)
73 Figure 2.15: Food and Non-Food Foreign Aid Flows in Syria
74 Figure 2.16: Trends in Reported Funding, by Source, 20017–16 (US$,
    millions)
80 Figure 3.1: Conceptualization of Pre-Shock, Post-Shock, and Counterfactual
    Relationship
81 Figure 3.2: Comparing the Counterfactual Real GDP per Capita by
    Different Methodologies with Actual Estimates
83 Figure 3.3: Actual and Counterfactual GDPs and Cumulative GDP Losses
84 Figure 3.4: Indifference Map for Income and Life Expectancy in Syria
87 Figure 3.5: Simulation Diagram
93 Figure 3.6: Dynamics of Impact under Various Shock Scenarios
98 Figure 3.7: Dynamics of Impact under Different Migration Restriction
    Scenarios
100 Figure 3.8: Dynamics of Impact under Various Conflict End-Date Scenarios
                                                        L I S T O F TA B L E S




11    Table 1.1: Incidence of the Abject, Extreme, and Overall Poverty Rates and
      the Gini Coefficient, 1997–2007
12    Table 1.2: Incidence of Extreme Poverty, by Region, 1997, 2004, and 2007
21    Table 2.1: Housing Damage in Cities
26    Table 2.2: Housing Damage Estimates across Governorates
30    Table 2.3: Damage in Water and Sanitation Infrastructure (Eight Governorates)
32    Table 2.4: Status of the Electricity Grid and Major Power Infrastructure in
      Seven Cities in Syria (%)
48    Table 2.5: Key Demographic Indicators
50    Table 2.6: Total Registered Syrian Refugee Population, by Country/Region,
      2012–16
52    Table 2.7: Push/Pull Factor Matrix for Aleppo, Homs, and Dar'a (1: Primary
      Driver, 2: Secondary Driver, 3: Tertiary Driver)
58    Table B2.2.1: Sample of ISIS Crude Oil Production
61    Table 2.8: Damage by industrial area in nine cities
89    Table 3.1: Structure of the Simulation-Based Analysis
92    Table 3.2: Combined and Isolated Impacts of Shocks
96    Table 3.3: Economic Outcomes under Risk Neutrality
99    Table 3.4: Economic Outcomes under Various Conflict End-Date Scenarios
104   Table A.1: Number of Facilities Assessed per Sector, by City
106   Table A.2: Conflict-Induced Damage Inference Matrix
107   Table B.1: Situation Report: Water and Sanitation Infrastructure
108   Table B.2: Situation Report: Power Infrastructure
109   Table B.3: Situation Report: Health Care Facilities
110   Table B.4: Situation Report: Education Facilities
                                                           LIST OF MAPS




3    Map 1.1: Land Utilization in Syria
5    Map 1.2: The Ottoman Administration of Geographical Syria
6    Map 1.3: Caravan Routes, 16th to 20th Centuries
19   Map 2.1: Incidence of Conflict, 2011–17
22   Map 2.2: Neighborhood-Level Housing Damage
24   Map 2.3: Governorate-Level Estimates of Housing Damage
27   Map 2.4: Reconstruction, by Governorate and District
28   Map 2.5: Calculated Debris Accumulation, as of February 2017
32   Map 2.6: Estimated Damage to Major Power Sector Assets
35   Map 2.7: Major Roads and Railways
42   Map 2.8: Governorate-Level Damage to the Health Sector
45   Map 2.9: Governorate-Level Damage to Syria’s Education Sector Facilities
49   Map 2.10: Primary Reported Routes through Turkey and the "Balkan
     Corridor" (as of September 2015)
57   Map B2.2.1: Oil Economy during Conflict
60   Map B2.3.1: Study Areas Included in the Demonstration
60   Map B2.3.2: Change in Vegetation Cover for February in March (Al Hassakeh)
     from Pre-Conflict in 2011 to Conflict in 2016
75   Map 2.11: Number of Beneficiaries, by Sub-District (December 2016)




                                                         LIST OF BOXES




4    Box 1.1: Key Historical Dates
49   Box 2.1: The Terminology of Forced Displacement
57   Box 2.2: Oil Production by Non-State Groups
59   Box 2.3: Effects of the Conflict on Syrian Agriculture: A Pilot Study
81   Box 3.1: Counterfactual GDP Calculations
88   Box 3.2: Simulation Model
KEY FINDINGS

• This study assesses the economic and social consequences of the Syrian conﬂict
  as of early 2017. The conﬂict has inﬂicted signiﬁcant damage to the Syrian
  Arab Republic’s physical capital stock (7 percent housing stock destroyed
  and 20 percent partially damaged), led to large numbers of casualties and
  forced displacement (between 400,000 and 470,000 estimated deaths and
  more than half of Syria’s 2010 population forcibly displaced), while
  depressing and disrupting economic activity. From 2011 until the end of
  2016, the cumulative losses in gross domestic product (GDP) have been
  estimated at $226 billion, about four times the Syrian GDP in 2010.

• Disruptions in economic organization have been the most important driver of the
  conﬂict’s economic impact, superseding physical damage. The conﬂict has not
  only ended lives and destroyed productive factors; it has also severely
  diminished economic connectivity, reduced incentives to pursue productive
  activities, and broken economic and social networks and supply chains.
  Simulations show that cumulative GDP losses due to such disruptions in
  economic organization exceed that of capital destruction by a factor of 20 in
  the ﬁrst six years of the conﬂict. This is mainly because a “capital destruction
  only” shock works like some natural disasters (unanticipated and sudden
  onset): in a well-functioning economy, its eﬀects on investments are limited
  (only a 22 percent reduction in simulations). Thus, capital is rapidly rebuilt
  and further economic repercussions are contained. In comparison,
  disruptions in economic organization decrease investments signiﬁcantly (a
  simulated 80 percent reduction) by reducing proﬁtability; therefore, the
  initial eﬀects are propagated strongly over time. This contrast between
  diﬀerent types of shocks helps us to put future reconstruction eﬀorts into
  perspective. Without rebuilding economic institutions and restoring
  economic networks, replacing the capital stock by itself will not go far in
  helping the economy recover.

• The longer the conﬂict continues, the more diﬃcult the post-conﬂict recovery
  will be. Although the rate of deterioration moderates over the course of the
  conﬂict, the eﬀects become more persistent. Should the conﬂict end in its
  sixth year (baseline), GDP recoups about 41 percent of the gap with its
  pre-conﬂict level within the next four years. Overall, the cumulative GDP
  losses will reach 7.6 times the 2010 GDP by the 20th year. In comparison,
  GDP recoups only 28 percent of the gap in four years if the conﬂict ends in
  its 10th year (alternative scenario), and cumulative losses will be at 13.2
  times the 2010 GDP. Simulations also show that outmigration could double
  between the sixth year of the conﬂict and the 20th year, in the case of a
  continued conﬂict. These results do not capture many other complications,
  like political economy challenges such as conﬂict-driven grievances. Adding
  these factors would only reinforce the main ﬁndings of the report: the
  longer the conﬂict persists, the deeper the grievances and divisions will run
  in the Syrian society, rendering it very diﬃcult to build eﬃcient institutions
  and eﬀective economic mechanisms.
THE TOLL OF WAR                                                                                              iii




EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

The Arab Spring protests marked the beginning of a new era in the Syrian
Arab Republic in 2011. Minor public protests began almost immediately after
the initial protests in Cairo in January 2011. The ﬁrst large demonstrations
began two months later in March, and the following months saw a process of
escalation as demonstrations spread and increased in size within the country.
By the summer of 2011, the armed conﬂict was already unfolding. Now in its
sixth year, the Syrian conﬂict remains active and is bringing much pain and
tragedy on a daily basis.

This study provides an assessment of the conﬂict’s impact on economic and
social outcomes in Syria as of early 2017. Conﬂicts destroy tangible and
intangible assets and leave deep marks on a country’s social fabric, culture,
and collective memories. The Syrian conﬂict has quickly become a particularly
harsh example of this. It is, unfortunately, not possible to capture all of these
consequences in a comprehensive manner. As of March 2017, the conﬂict was
active, and some longer-term outcomes and political, social, security-related,
and institutional eﬀects were not yet observable beyond anecdotal evidence.
In addition, because of the ongoing conﬂict, the country has remained
inaccessible to the team who produced this report, and severe data shortages
forced the team to leave out much-needed analysis. Given these constraints,
the analysis focuses on taking stock of the eﬀects of the conﬂict in four areas:
(i) physical damage, (ii) loss of lives and demographic dispersion, (iii) economic
outcomes, and (iv) human development outcomes.

The strength of this study lies in its scope and methodology. The novel part
of the data used in this study is provided by remote sensing assessments (with
media veriﬁcation), which focused on ten cities1 and six sectors2, and then
extrapolated to eight governorates3 by using conﬂict intensity and asset base
comparisons. Information from partner agencies in demography and sector
and economic outcomes supplemented these assessments. The novelty of the
analysis itself lies in its integrative framework. The results of the physical
damage and loss of lives are used to employ an integrative model to match
observed economic outcomes, including GDP patterns and demographic
mobility (inter-governorate and outmigration from Syria). This approach
provided several advantages. First, the distinct roles played by physical
destruction, casualties, and economic disorganization in how conﬂict has
manifested its impacts were separated. This separation is important because
it could help prioritize actions in a future recovery and reconstruction process,
by facilitating a comparison between alternative scenarios of aid composition.


1
  These cities are Aleppo, Raqqa, Dar'a, Douma, Dayr az-Zawr, Homs, Hama, Idlib, Kobani, and Tadmur (also
  called Palmyra) which were chosen on the basis of several criteria, including conﬂict intensity, geographical
  representation, and being an important source or destination of internally displaced persons.
2
  These sectors are education, energy, health, housing, transportation, and water and sanitation.
3
  These governorates are Aleppo, Dar'a, Dayr az-Zawr, Hama, Homs, Idlib, Raqqa, and Rif Dimashq, which were
  chosen because of conﬂict intensity.
iv                                                                                                Executive Summary




Second, it helped compare the results of alternative scenarios that are not
observable from actual data: for example, what is the role played by migration
in the conﬂict’s economic impact? How far can the impact of the conﬂict on
economic outcomes prevail after the cessation of the conﬂict? The report
discusses these in detail. (Figure ES.1 shows the organization of the study.)

Figure ES.1: Organization of the study


Final Report                                Synthesis Report - Syria ESIA
Background
Papers
                                      Background Papers - Results by sector
Integrative
Model
                                                 Integrative Framework

Sectoral       Macroeconomics    Trade     Environment      Water & Sanitation   Agriculture Poverty   Education    Health
Reports        Governance   Finance    Transport & ICT    Energy & Extract   Urban DRM     Social Protection Labor & Jobs

Crosscutting
                      Demography                          National Accounts                  Conﬂict Analysis
Studies
Data
                    Remote Sensing                       Partner Agency Data                     Public Data
Sources




Syria Before the Conflict

On the eve of the 2011 unrest, Syria was a fast-growing, lower-middle-income
country. In aggregate terms, the Syrian economy was improving, albeit starting
from an unfavorable base, during the 2000s. Gross domestic product (GDP)
grew at an average of 4.3 percent per year from 2000 to 2010 in real terms,
which was almost entirely driven by growth in non-oil sectors, and inﬂation
averaged at a reasonable 4.9 percent.

The strong growth performance, however, did not translate into broad-based
economic and political inclusion and further transparency and civil liberties.
Syria was comparable to other regional economies in many socioeconomic
indicators in 2010. The multidimensional poverty rate (5.5 percent) and
income inequality (Gini index: 32.7) stood close to regional averages.
However, the labor force participation (LFP) rate in Syria (43.5 percent) was
one of the lowest in the world, low even by regional standards (the Arab
Republic of Egypt and Tunisia had 49 and 47 percent LFP, respectively). This
was primarily driven by the extremely low, and decreasing, role of women in
the economy (LFP about 5 percentage point lower than the average for the
Middle East and North Africa (MENA), which is already low by global
standards, and female unemployment, at 25.2 percent, the highest in the
region). Similarly, the country consistently performed unfavorably in
governance and civil liberties–related indicators during the 2000s. Syria’s
THE TOLL OF WAR                                                                    v




ratings on measures of freedom of association and assembly, and freedom of
expression and belief, were low even compared with other countries in MENA.

Another important feature of Syria’s governance landscape prior to 2011 was
the country’s high levels of perceived corruption and low trust in public
institutions. According to global indexes, Syria’s rankings on control of corruption
and control of economic monopolies declined after 2005. Although the country
had already trailed the middle-income MENA peers, like Egypt, Jordan, and
Tunisia, on both fronts in 2005, the gap widened substantially by 2010. These
trends also undermined citizen trust in public institutions. Gallup surveys from
2009–10 show that the percentage of Syrians expressing trust in key public
institutions, such as local police and the judicial system, was lower than
comparators. For instance, in 2010, only 48 percent of Syrians reported trust in
local police; in comparison, about 87 percent of Jordanians responded favorably.

Added to these enabling conditions were external factors that contributed to
the onset of the conﬂict. The Arab Spring and a sudden shift in the regional
context, where armed rebellions became easier, as well as the actions chosen
by various parties, led to a quick escalation of the initial protests, from civil
unrest to a long and intense armed conﬂict. Fueled by a “loser loses all” logic,
which prevented a reasonable and compromising resolution, the conﬂict has
persisted and intensiﬁed over time, leading to devastation for all.

The Wrath of Conflict

The conﬂict has inﬂicted extensive damage on Syria’s physical infrastructure.
Cities like Homs, Aleppo, and Damascus, and many smaller towns, have served
as battlegrounds for government and rebel oﬀensives, with tragic
consequences for their inhabitants. Over time, the conﬂict has caused the
partial or full breakdown of urban systems in many cities by destroying houses
and public service–related infrastructure like roads, schools, and hospitals,
while leading to economic collapse in many areas. As bridges, water resources,
grain silos, and other economically signiﬁcant assets became strategic targets,
the physical damage ratios increased. Across the 10 cities on which this study
focuses, 27 percent of the housing stock has been impacted, with 7 percent
destroyed and 20 percent partially damaged. The percentage varies across
cities, with the highest full destruction occurring in Dayr az-Zawr (10 percent)
and the highest partial damage in Tadmur (also called Palmyra, 32.8 percent).
With 8 percent destroyed housing units and 23 percent partially damaged,
Aleppo is also among the worst impacted cities. Across the eight
governorates, about 8 percent of the housing stock has been destroyed and
23 percent partially damaged. The damage has been particularly high in the
health sector, as medical facilities were speciﬁcally targeted. Estimates show
that about half of all medical facilities in the eight governorates studied in this
report have been partially damaged, and about 16 percent of them were
destroyed. The results are similar in education sector facilities (53 percent
partially damaged, and 10 percent destroyed).
vi                                                               Executive Summary




Disruptions in economic networks, human capital, and connectivity have
greatly magniﬁed the eﬀects of physical damage on public service delivery.
Physical damage reﬂects only a subset of the eﬀects the conﬂict has imposed
on public service delivery in Syria. The available evidence suggests that
physical damage to the electricity infrastructure has been severe, but not
devastating: all the country’s hydroelectric dams and six of 18 power plants
remain operational, while four more power plants are partially damaged, and
one has been destroyed. However, fuel shortages and conﬂict-driven
constraints to operation and maintenance have led to a sharp drop in public
power supply. Power generation declined to 16,208 gigawatt-hours (GWh) in
2015, compared with 43,164 GWh in 2010, a drop of 62.5 percent. Much of
this decline appears to be due to fuel shortages, as available generation
capacity declined by about 30 percent in the same period. The decline in
electricity supply has caused major disruptions. The majority of cities receive
only a few hours of electricity a day. The government has applied a rationing
policy via load shedding throughout the country, which aﬀects the delivery of
other services, like water, education, and health care services.

Among all the consequences of the conﬂict, the eﬀects on human lives and
demographic displacement have been the most dramatic. The pre-conﬂict
population of Syria was estimated at 20.7 million in 2010 (World
Development Indicators). Since 2011, the conﬂict has created a complex set
of pressures on the country’s population. The most recent calculations by the
International Organization for Migration (IOM) put the population within Syria
at 18.8 million as of November 2016. Data limitations render a precise and
comprehensive decomposition of the demographic changes impossible:
conﬂict aﬀects fertility rates and life expectancy alike. In addition, an
important portion of demographic movements takes place informally: some
refugees remain unregistered and, in certain cases, migrants do not factor into
in-country population or refugee totals. The casualties that are directly related
to conﬂict are estimated between 400,000 (UN, as of April 2016) and
470,000 (Syrian Center for Policy Research, as of February 2016).

Syria has become the largest forced displacement crisis in the world since
World War II. Over half of the country’s pre-conﬂict population has been
forcibly displaced. According to the United Nations High Commissioner for
Refugees, the total number of Syrians presently registered as refugees outside
the country in Lebanon, Turkey, Jordan, Iraq, Egypt, and North Africa is 4.9
million. In addition, more than 800,000 Syrian nationals are estimated to have
sought asylum in Europe in 2015 and 2016. Many of these individuals have
moved more than once, and have not been removed from registration lists in
their ﬁrst country of refuge. These numbers also do not include an estimated
0.4 million to 1.1 million unregistered Syrian refugees in Lebanon, Jordan,
Turkey and Iraq. The number of internally displaced persons was at 5.7 million
as of January 2017, with 56 percent of them remaining within their own
governorates. Although those who moved within their governorate may be
more likely to return to their original communities, the return migration so far
has been small (0.56 million) compared with the total numbers of displaced.
THE TOLL OF WAR                                                                                                 vii




The losses in GDP between 2011 and 2016 sum to about four times the size
of the Syrian GDP in 2010. The destruction of physical capital, casualties,
forced displacement, and breakup of economic networks has had devastating
consequences for Syrian economic activity. Syria’s GDP was estimated to
have contracted by 61 percent between 2011 and 2015 in real terms, and by
an additional 2 percent in 2016—a 63 percent decline compared with its 2010
GDP. Estimates of national account indicators, including counterfactual GDP
numbers estimated by using statistical estimation methods, show that the
actual GDP fell $51 billion (in 2010 prices) short of the counterfactual GDP in
2016. Aggregating these diﬀerences between counterfactual and actual GDP
numbers between 2011 and 2016 shows that the cumulative loss in GDP
amounts to $226 billion in 2010 prices, about four times the 2010 GDP.

Economic disruption has been particularly devastating in the hydrocarbons
sector. The oil GDP declined by 93 percent during the same period, while the
non-oil economy contracted by 52 percent due to the severe destruction of
infrastructure, reduced access to fuel and electricity, low business conﬁdence,
and disruption of trade. Hydrocarbon production plunged from 383,000
barrels per day (bpd) in 2010 to 10,000 bpd in 2015 and 2016, due to Islamic
State control over most of the oil-producing areas.4 Agricultural production
also registered signiﬁcant losses as a result of damage to irrigation systems
and shortages of labor and inputs such as seeds, fertilizers, and fuel. The most
severe contraction of the economy took place in 2012 and 2013, when
economic activity shrank by 29 and 32 percent, respectively, as ﬁghting
intensiﬁed and spread across the country.

The Syrian economy suﬀers from severe twin deﬁcits, depleted foreign
exchange reserves, and an unsustainably high public debt. Conﬂict-related
disruptions and international sanctions reduced Syrian exports by 92 percent
between 2011 and 2015. The current account deﬁcit was estimated to have
reached 28 percent of GDP in 2016, up from 0.7 percent of GDP in 2010. The
gap has increasingly been ﬁnanced by withdrawing foreign exchange reserves,
which declined severely, from nearly US$21 billion in 2010 to less than US$1
billion in 2015. Fiscal revenues dropped from 23 percent of GDP in 2010 to
less than 3 percent of GDP in 2015. This was mainly due to losses in oil and
tax revenues, the collapse of international trade due to sanctions, a growing
informal economy, and weak administrative collection capacity. In response to
this shortfall, government spending was cut back (especially capital
expenditures), but these measures were not enough to oﬀset the fall in
revenues. As a result, gross public debt rose from 30 percent of GDP in 2010
to a staggering 150 percent of GDP in 2015.

Rapidly shrinking job opportunities and scaled down social security
programs have further aggravated a mounting humanitarian crisis. Since the


4
    This refers to oil in areas under government control, but with the ﬁelds under rebel control, oil production is
    estimated at 40,000 bpd.
viii                                                            Executive Summary




onset of the conﬂict, jobs were destroyed at an estimated rate of
approximately 538,000 per year on average between 2010 and 2015, adding
482,000 people to the unemployment pool every year. More than three in
four Syrians of working age (7.7 percent, or nine million individuals) are not
involved in any economic value generation: 2.9 million of them are
unemployed and 6.1 million are inactive. Unemployment among youth
reached 78 percent in 2015. Facing a mounting ﬁscal problem, the Syrian
Government dramatically decreased subsidies. Prices of fuel oil increased
10-fold from 2011 to 2015. As for rice and sugar, prices increased 2.3-fold in
the same period. Estimates for this report suggest that approximately six in 10
Syrians live in extreme poverty today. As of December 2016, 5.8 million
individuals received in-kind food assistance. The World Food Programme
alone distributes more than four million food baskets (supplements for about
1,700 kilocalories per day) each month.

Disentangling the Economic Effects of the Conflict

Which channel has been the most important in delivering the conﬂict’s
impact on the Syrian economy? The discussions have so far focused on many
of the conﬂict-driven factors that have aﬀected the well-being of Syrian
citizens. These include casualties, forced displacement, physical destruction,
limitations on the mobility of goods and people, and a vast amount of
foregone opportunities. These multidimensional eﬀects, however, comprise
overlapping components. Some of the most useful pieces of information, for
example, the relative importance of physical destruction, migration, and so
forth, in generating the economic impact of the conﬂict, are not directly
observable. To address some of these concerns, this study adopted an
integrative framework that helps disentangle the channels of transmission of
the eﬀects of the conﬂict. The analysis also introduced several policy-related
scenarios that could inform future recovery and reconstruction eﬀorts.

Capital destruction, by itself, accounts only for a small share of the conﬂict’s
economic impact. If the conﬂict only destroyed capital (at the same rate it has
done so far), without other eﬀects (capital-destruction-only scenario), its
impacts on income and welfare would be relatively limited. By the sixth year
of the conﬂict, the cumulative losses in GDP would only be 5 percent of the
actual loss if the conﬂict destroyed only capital without leading to casualties
and economic disorganization. This is mainly because without further
economic disorganization, casualties, and migration, the eﬀects of physical
destruction on proﬁtability remain relatively limited. Thus, investments remain
relatively resilient, and the destroyed capital is rebuilt relatively quickly.
Simulations show that investments decrease by 80 percent in the baseline,
where all shocks associated with the conﬂict are imposed, and they decrease
by only 22 percent in the capital-destruction-only scenario. This mechanism
highlights a remarkable diﬀerence between natural disasters and conﬂicts.
When a natural disaster destroys built capital in a well-functioning market
economy with strong institutions, the recovery of capital stock is rapid, and
THE TOLL OF WAR                                                                ix




impacts are not persistent. Civil wars are diﬀerent: casualties, demographic
movements, and lower returns to investment compound the damage to
physical capital. As a result, eﬀective losses due to physical capital damage are
more pronounced, and they can linger into the future at a much higher rate
than natural disasters.

Casualties impose insuﬀerable distress and psychological impacts on
families. Although their direct economic impact is comparable to that of the
capital-destruction-only scenario, this impact is much more persistent. When
conﬂict leads to casualties and no other eﬀects (casualty-only scenario),
change in GDP is comparable to that of the capital-destruction-only scenario:
in both scenarios, the decrease in GDP during active conﬂict years remains
lower than 5 percent of pre-conﬂict levels. Behind this similarity, however, lies
a major diﬀerence between the two. Casualties are the primary drivers of
outmigration: conﬂict-related casualties have led to a massive exodus of
Syrians, whereas capital destruction has not. Simulations show that more than
two-thirds of all outmigration can be attributed to casualty-related factors
alone. Security-related factors dominate over economic reasons in explaining
migration patterns: people move to have better life quality, but better life
quality is largely about a lower probability of being killed in this case, not
higher incomes. Another result from this analysis is that the economic impact
of casualties is much more persistent than that of other factors. Even if the
conﬂict ends in its sixth year, GDP continues to be signiﬁcantly below its
pre-conﬂict level: only a sixth of cumulative GDP losses within the ﬁrst 20
years after the onset of conﬂict takes place during the six years of the conﬂict.
The rest happens after the end of the conﬂict.

Disruptions in economic organization have been the most important channel
through which the conﬂict has manifested its economic impact. Where does
the bulk of economic impact stem from if not capital destruction and
casualties? It stems from disruptions in how economic activity is organized.
Conﬂict not only destroys productive factors, it also prevents the connectivity
of people, reduces their incentive to pursue productive activities, and breaks
economic networks and supply chains. Our simulations show that, by the end
of the sixth year of the conﬂict, the cumulative GDP losses in the
economic-disorganization-only       scenario      exceed     those      of    the
capital-destruction-only and casualties-only scenarios by about 20-fold each.
These results suggest that even reinstating lost capital, by itself, would not be
suﬃcient to bring the economy back to its pre-conﬂict level, if institutional
and organizational challenges are not tackled simultaneously. Regardless of
the source of ﬁnancing, boosting public investments without a comprehensive
approach would trigger further rent seeking and cronyism, which were
important enabling factors in the conﬂict’s onset, as described in the ﬁrst
section. Thus, recovery and reconstruction are by no means an engineering
issue; our results show that the issue is primarily an economic and social one,
where the incentives of Syrian citizens are at the core.
x                                                               Executive Summary




As the conﬂict continues, economic outcomes will further deteriorate and
Syrians will continue to migrate. To provide an assessment of the possible
recovery paths, the analysis employed diﬀerent conﬂict end-date scenarios.
These include a baseline, where the conﬂict ends in the sixth year, and two
alternative scenarios, where the conﬂict ends in its 10th year or does not end
in the near future. In all three cases, capital destruction, casualties, and
economic disorganization shocks are employed. Accordingly, in the baseline,
GDP recovers by about 20 percentage points (as a share of pre-conﬂict GDP)
within four years after the conﬂict. In comparison, GDP will continue to
deteriorate if the conﬂict does not end in the near future. In both alternative
scenarios, the conﬂict will continue to be devastating for the country. When
the conﬂict ends in its sixth year, the cumulative loss in GDP reaches 7.6 times
the annual pre-conﬂict GDP by the 20th year. With a continued conﬂict, this
loss stands at 13.2. Simulations also show that outmigration doubles between
the sixth year of the conﬂict and the 20th year. Thus, the supply of migrants
and forcibly displaced persons will not cease as long as there is conﬂict. The
rate of deterioration slows, because the conﬂict is geographically limited,
migration drains the labor force in conﬂict-aﬀected regions, and capital stock
reaches a stable level with new damage and investment ratios. As a result, the
economy converges to a new equilibrium.

The longer the conﬂict continues, the slower the post-conﬂict recovery will
be. Another important result from the conﬂict end-date scenarios is that the
duration of the conﬂict also aﬀects the pace of recovery. Although the rate of
deterioration moderates over the course of the conﬂict, the eﬀects become
more persistent. When conﬂict ends in its sixth year (baseline), GDP recoups
about 41 percent of the remaining gap with its pre-conﬂict level within the
next four years. In comparison, it recoups only 28 percent of the gap in four
years if the conﬂict ends in its 10th year (alternative scenario). These results
do not capture much of the complications like political economy challenges,
such as conﬂict-driven grievances. Adding these factors would only reinforce
the main ﬁnding here: the more the conﬂict persists, the deeper will run the
grievances and divisions in Syrian society, rendering it very diﬃcult to
reinstate eﬃcient institutions and economic mechanisms.
                                    1
                   The ablution fountains of the Great Mosque of Aleppo or the Umayyad Mosque of Aleppo, Ancient City of Aleppo, Syria.
                                                                                     Photo Credit: Yann Arthus-Bertrand, Getty Images.




            CHAPTER                          SYRIA BEFORE THE CONFLICT


When the Arab Spring protests took place in the Syrian Arab Republic in early
2011, few would have anticipated the forthcoming agony on a mass scale.
Although it is not diﬃcult to ﬁnd “evidence” for the approaching conﬂict in
retrospect, standard development indicators, including inequality and poverty
measures, failed to predict what has become one of the most brutal conﬂicts of our
time. Syria was following the regional trends in economic progress: extreme
poverty was low; hunger and child and maternal mortality were decreasing; and
school enrollment was increasing. However, there were factors that distinguished
Syria from others. These included an unfavorable proﬁle of employment and labor
force participation, especially those of women; low and deteriorating indicators of
governance, including lack of political pluralism and civil liberties; and high levels of
perceived corruption. These characteristics have emerged historically from a
complex interplay between geography and institutions, which was also manifested
in a rapid centripetal momentum that accompanied the independence of the
Syrian Arab Republic.
2                                                                                      Syria Before the Conflict




C H A P T E R 1 : SYRIA BEFORE THE CONFLICT

The Arab Spring protests marked the beginning of a new era in the Arab
Republic of Syria. Minor public protests by the Syrian opposition began
almost immediately after the initial protests in Cairo in January 2011. The ﬁrst
large demonstrations began two months later in March, and the following
months saw a process of escalation as demonstrations spread and increased
in size within the country. By the summer of 2011, the armed conﬂict was
already unfolding. Now in its sixth year, the Syrian conﬂict remains active and
is bringing much pain and tragedy on a daily basis.

Notwithstanding present perceptions, few would have anticipated the
forthcoming cataclysm in Syria back in 2010. Syria is now deeply associated
with conﬂict, refugees, and agony on mass scale. In retrospect, it is not diﬃcult
to ﬁnd “evidence” for the approaching conﬂict in the previous decade. Yet, a
conﬂict at this scale was not anticipated before its eruption. Ianchovichina,
Mottaghi, and Devarajan (2015) suggest that the standard development
indicators, including growth, inequality, and poverty measures, failed to predict
the Arab Spring, including in Syria. The region had been making progress in
eliminating extreme poverty and boosting shared prosperity; the poverty rate
was declining in all economies (except the Republic of Yemen); hunger and child
and maternal mortality were decreasing and school enrollment was increasing.
An eyewitness to the developments in Syria reported: “…2008-2010 were years
of uneasy calm, a period of superﬁcial normality on the brink of revolution. I
certainly didn’t sense that a civil war would erupt in Syria in March 2011, a few
months after my last visit, and I’d venture to say most Syrians did not either”
(Sahner, 2014).

This chapter describes the pre-conﬂict conditions in Syria to understand how
a seemingly stable, middle-income country like Syria experienced a brutal
conﬂict and endured devastating impact. Although the Arab Spring marked
the beginning of the events that evolved into a fully-ﬂedged conﬂict, it is not
enough to conclude without further analysis that “the Arab Spring caused the
Syrian conﬂict.” One reason is that the same external shock hit all Arab
countries, while full-on conﬂicts developed only in Syria, Libya, and the
Republic of Yemen.5 The other republican governments in the region almost all
faced protests and riots, but did not have conﬂicts develop. Similarly, the
monarchies of the region experienced even less in the way of protests and no
conﬂicts. Therefore, even if the Arab Spring triggered the conﬂict, there must
be domestic factors that made this possible. These factors are also key to
understanding the manifestation of the economic impact of the conﬂict.




5
    In the Republic of Yemen, the Arab Spring did not start a civil war, but played into what was already a set of
    ongoing civil wars.
THE TOLL OF WAR                                                                                              3




The Long History of Syria
The geography of Syria has played an important role in the formation of its
institutions.6 The Syrian landscape comprises immense deserts with stretches
of arable land along the coastline as well as oases of major cities (map 1.1).
From deserts to arable strips of land, population densities vary signiﬁcantly.
This landscape and corresponding demographic adjustment have worked
against the establishment of a powerful centralized administration through
two channels.

Map 1.1: Land Utilization in Syria




                                     Cotton     Fruits
                                     Olives     Wheat
                                          Tobacco




       Cultivated land with livestock, emphasis on grains, cotton, fruits and olives
       Forest area
       Steppe land with nomadic herding (sheep) and scattered cultivation.
       Desert and steppe lands with some nomadic herding
Source: Cole (2010)


Administration of this diverse geography required adaptive solutions. First, in
pre-modern times, the necessity of major irrigation schemes fostered the
development of centralized states. This “Oriental Despotism” or “Asiatic mode
of production” was prominent in the Arab Republic of Egypt, and to a lesser
extent in Mesopotamia. Syria formed an outlier among these cases. With
limited prospects and returns to large irrigation projects, the capacity of
centralized powers to provide public goods and services was diminished and,
unlike other places in Mesopotamia, private property and use-right-based
exploitation of land prevailed longer (Issawi 1995). The exercise of private
property rights was further reinforced by the 19th century, as communal

6
    The role played by geography and institutions, and their interaction, in shaping political economy outcomes
    has become an increasingly popular area of discussion in the economic development literature. For an
    interesting discussion on this, see Acemoglu and Robinson (2013), Gallup, Sachs, and Mellinger (1999), and
    Nunn and Puga (2012).
4                                                                                      Syria Before the Conflict




tenure (musha) became increasingly marginalized. Second, vast, thinly
populated desert territories rendered it diﬃcult to maintain law and order.
Central authorities have often relied on a coalition of nomad and semi-nomad
populations (for example, Bedouins, but also Druses, Kurds, Circassians, and
others) in providing security. Historically, there was always a segment of the
population potentially ready to provide such armed “protection services” as an
alternative to engaging in strictly economic activities for making a living
(Douwes 2000).

Alternating centripetal and centrifugal cycles are commonly observed in
Syrian history (box 1.1). Occasionally the central authority lost power and the
local potentates took up arms overnight and posed themselves as local “mini
states,” as has been the case recently with the so-called Islamic State that
ruled over a vast yet thinly populated territory comprising much of Syria’s
uncultivable land.7 At other times, the central authorities have time and again
reasserted their rule, the last instance of which has been witnessed during the
conﬂict. Some of the zones of inﬂuence of the various ﬁghting forces during
the conﬂict, especially the areas controlled by the Islamic State (also called
ISIS or ISIL) and the Syrian army, are traceable to the ancient geographical and
demographic fault lines.


     Box 1.1: Key Historical Dates
     1516–1918     Syrian territories ruled as provinces of the Ottoman Empire
     1920–1946     Syria under French Mandate
     1946          Syria gains independence from France
     1963          Baath Party comes to power, economic development policy
                   characterized by state dominance and inward-looking import
                   substitution model
     1970          Hafez Assad becomes president of Syria, launches Corrective
                   Movement that gives more space to the private sector while
                   keeping the state’s dominant role in the economy
     2000          Bashar Assad becomes president of Syria
     2005          Tenth Five-Year Plan signals break with Syria’s state-led economic
                   development model, move toward “Social Market Economy”
     2011 January. Regional “Arab Spring” uprisings
     2011 January. First instance of Arab Spring-inspired unrest, in Damascus souq
     2011 March Unrest begins in Daraa
     2011 Spring Unrest spreads, driven primarily by rural and peri-rural mobilization
     Mid-2011- … Escalation of conﬂict


7
    Among the most important historical examples along these lines are the following. In 1857 when the Maronite
    peasants took up arms against their landlords in the Mount Lebanon region, the popular hero, Tanyus Shahin,
    acted in the name of “republican government” or “peasant commonwealth”; see Khalaf (1987). During the early
    period of the French Mandate, two regions became hotbeds of resistance to paciﬁcation in the countryside.
    One was the Alawite Mountain and the other, the northwestern districts of the Aleppo state; see Khoury
    (1987). Alawis revolted during the French Mandate in 1919–21, seeking their own State of the Alawis and
    demanding they not be placed under the State of Syria. In Jebel Druze, the Druzes revolted in 1925 to preserve
    their practical autonomy and resisted the French until 1927; see Hourani (1946).
THE TOLL OF WAR                                                               5




The peculiar characteristics of the Syrian landscape also augmented the role
of external linkages. Before its independence, the geographical Syria
historically often resided as a province of large empires. This meant that it
received international “protection”—provided at little or no cost—by larger
powers, most notably the Ottoman Empire (map 1.2). This special relationship
involved “political and economic exchanges” between the empires and
geographical Syria. For instance, the Ottoman Empire provided protection at
home as much as it could, and protection from foreign interference, from the
early 16th century to the early 20th century, except for a brief intervention in
1860 when French forces intervened in response to the civil war.
Geographical Syria also beneﬁtted economically from being integrated into
imperial-scale economic networks, which paid oﬀ handsomely, albeit
unevenly, as will be discussed below.

Map 1.2: The Ottoman Administration of Geographical Syria




Source: Sullivan (2013).


Syria’s access to long-distance trade networks under the protection of large
empires shaped its economic and political topography. Geographical Syria
comprised two major centers of economic activity: Aleppo and Damascus.
During Ottoman Rule, the Eyalet (province) of Aleppo and the Eyalet of
Damascus played vital roles in connecting trade routes, the organization and
provisioning of periodic caravans, and the regular extension of credit, as well
as protection to the merchants and their merchandise. Aleppo was historically
integrated more into the Anatolian networks of trade, while Damascus looked
in the opposite direction, south. Aleppo was the third largest city (after
Istanbul and Cairo) of the Ottoman Empire in the 17th and 18th centuries, as
well as “the leading commercial and handicraft center of southwest Asia”
(Issawi 1988, 4). Thanks to its easy access to the Mediterranean via
Alexandretta, it was the major entrepôt for European goods just as it exported
6                                                           Syria Before the Conflict




its famous manufactures (map 1.3). In the early 19th century, each year four
caravans left Aleppo for Iraq and Anatolia and two for Persia and Iraq. On
average, a caravan consisted of about 1,500 camels. It took 25–30 days to
cross the desert directly between Aleppo and Bagdad, and 45 days via
Diyarbakır (Owen 1981, 53–54). Damascus was also well connected in general
and, to its beneﬁt, it served as the historic point of departure for the annual
Hajj caravan. Two or three caravans a year traversed the desert between
Damascus and Bagdad in the late 18th century. Yet, Damascus lacked easy,
quick, and safe access to the coastline, which only came with the construction
of the Beirut-Damascus road (1863) and ultimately the railway (1895). Before
then, the dangerous trip of only 70–80 miles from Damascus to Saida or
Beirut cost more than crossing the entire Syrian Desert as late as 1848 (Owen
1981, 54). This made Aleppo the preferred location for foreign merchants who
could maintain relatively easy ties with Europe via Alexandretta.

Map 1.3: Caravan Routes, 16th to 20th Centuries




Source: Owen 1981
THE TOLL OF WAR                                                               7




The establishment of nation states in the region shook the foundations of the
traditional Syrian economy. Broken trade networks and newly introduced
trade frictions at the borders posed signiﬁcant costs on Syria. After the
secession of Beirut and Alexandretta from the historical greater Syria, Aleppo
and Damascus lost their strategic and commercial access to the
Mediterranean, which has only been partly compensated by the costly
development of the lesser Port of Latakia. The merchants of Aleppo, who were
dependent on long-distance trade, were cut oﬀ from their historical
connections. So were the merchants of Damascus; however, their losses could
be compensated by expanding the service sector in the new nation’s capital.

The truncation of Syria from its economic networks boosted the
centralization momentum that came with independence. After
independence, the Syrian government launched a path of agriculture-based,
increasingly import-substituting industrial and economic development
strategy. This required strong “vertical” connections between the
foundational agriculture and to-be-developed industrial and service sectors.
However, Syria’s land was much exhausted by hundreds of years of hard use,
climatic change, and scarce water resources. Hence developing agriculture
was a challenge in which Syria had scant comparative advantage. Even so, the
Baath government pushed agriculture to the limits of the possible. By doing
so, the central government instituted itself in the allocation of resources, in
particular via land redistribution and access to irrigation.

The reinforcement of a centralized state came with complications. The new
government in Damascus faced complex challenges in promoting a cohesive
nation state. The policies of empires tolerated, if not emphasized, sectarian
and ethnic diﬀerences. For instance, under the French administration,
minorities were aﬀorded autonomy and rights vis-a-vis neighboring
ethnicities, and regional and communal representation was established in the
Parliament. Centralization meant the complete absorption of certain groups,
like the Alawites, into the young state apparatus and the exclusion of others,
like the Kurds. Alawites became reconciled to common Syrian citizenship, and
gave up the dream of a separate Alawite state. Kurds faced a harsh transition.
With the 1962 census, nearly 120,000 Kurds, 20 percent of the resident
Kurdish population, found themselves “stateless” overnight in the Jazira
province (HRW 1996). Other harsh measures included the implementation of
an “Arab Cordon” on the lands that bordered Turkey. Kurds were expelled, and
Arab Bedouins were brought in to resettle the area. As the cordon ended,
some 140,000 Kurds had been relocated to the southern desert of Al-Raad
(Vanly 1992).

By the new millennium, Syria was ruled by a well-established, authoritarian,
and seemingly stable central administration. Since 1970, the last successful
coup, which brought Hafez al-Assad to power, presidential elections have
never been contested and the single candidate (Hafez al-Assad, then his son
Bashar) has never won less than 99 percent of the vote. The executive and
8                                                           Syria Before the Conflict




Baath Party have dominated all three branches of government (parliaments
have been handpicked by the Baath Party and the president). In the economic
and social spheres, the government was considered as inclusive with a broad
popular base (Batatu 1999). The government distributed relatively generous
rewards, especially to those who took the extra step to join the ranks of the
Baath Party.

Syria at the Dawn of the Conflict
The decade before the conﬂict witnessed a transition from four decades of
socialism toward a “social market-economy.” In 2001, Syria requested to
become a member of the World Trade Organization and, in 2007, a free trade
agreement with Turkey came into eﬀect. In 2004, the government permitted
private banks to operate in Syria for the ﬁrst time after more than 40 years,
and in 2009, it opened the stock market. This trend accelerated from 2005,
when Syria embraced “Social Market Development” in its Tenth Five-Year
Plan. In the period that led up to 2011, Syria undertook several
market-friendly reforms. The Syrian government focused in particular on
improvements to the business environment and took measures to reduce
tariﬀs, lower the top income tax rate, and unify the exchange rate. The decline
in oil production in many ways served as the motivation for these reforms.

On the eve of the 2011 unrest, Syria was a fast-growing, lower-middle-income
country. In aggregate terms, the Syrian economy was improving, albeit
starting from an unfavorable base, during the 2000s. Gross domestic product
(GDP) grew at an average of 4.3 percent per year from 2000 to 2010 in real
terms, which was almost entirely driven by growth in the non-oil sectors, and
inﬂation averaged a reasonable 4.9 percent. The current account was largely
in balance and, by the end of 2010, Syria was estimated to have international
reserves to cover more than nine months of imports. Despite the
improvements, however, Syria’s GDP per capita in 2010 (at current prices,
US$2,949) was signiﬁcantly lower than those of its neighbors (Iraq: US$4,521,
Lebanon: US$8,846, and Israel US$31,665).

The opening of Syria was also reﬂected in its booming international trade.
The value of Syrian trade with the rest of the world reached 76.5 percent of
GDP just before the global ﬁnancial crisis, which was relatively high compared
with the average for the Middle East and North Africa (MENA) (excluding
oil-exporting high-income countries) of 70.3 percent of GDP. Tariﬀs in Syria
were slightly high by regional standards, with a weighted mean rate of 7.2
percent in 2010, compared with 6.1 percent for MENA (excluding
high-income countries). However, there was relatively little foreign direct
investment through this period. Foreign investment represented 1.3 percent
of GDP on average during this period and focused mainly on pharmaceuticals,
food processing, and textiles. Therefore, the impact of the global ﬁnancial
crisis on Syrian GDP was relatively moderate, and it was primarily transmitted
by changes in the major export markets of Syrian producers, mainly the
European Union and Gulf economies.
THE TOLL OF WAR                                                               9




Despite the increasing momentum, however, the Syrian economy exhibited
several risk factors that may have contributed to the onset and escalation of
the conﬂict. The conventional risk factors that are associated with armed
conﬂict include absolute (objective) and relative (subjective) levels of
socioeconomic deprivation, ethnic/sectarian fragmentation, and unfavorable
governance indicators, including corruption and low institutional capacity.8 In
what follows, the analysis will describe a several areas where improvements in
aggregate economic conditions failed to mitigate these potential risk factors
in Syria.

Employment

Growth and market-oriented reforms created more jobs; however, those fell
short of keeping up with the demographic dynamics. The high economic
growth rate and increasing liberalization eﬀorts led to an expansion of
employment at a rate of 1.3 percent annually, on average, in the decade prior
to the conﬂict. The growth of the population (2.9 percent annually) and labor
force (1.7 percent annually) dwarfed the growth in employment. Agriculture
experienced a contraction in employment in the same period. The sector’s
share of employment fell from 32.9 percent in 2000 to just 13.2 percent by
2011, in part because of the droughts that struck the country from 2006 to
2011, which contributed to a major demographic shift from rural areas to urban
centers, increasing the shares of employment in services and industry to 55.3
and 31.4 percent, respectively. It has been argued that the 2006–09 drought
and concomitant migration to cities was a major risk factor that contributed to
the events in 2011; however, it is diﬃcult to verify this empirically.

The excess labor, especially women, were pushed out of the labor force. With
labor markets failing to absorb the growing size of the labor force, from 2001
to 2010, the aggregate labor force participation rate decreased by about 7
percentage points (from 50.2 to 43.5 percent). The adjustment was more
severe for women: their labor force participation (LFP) rate decreased by more
than 10 percentage points (from 20.4 to 13.2 percent). By 2010, Syria had one
of the lowest LFPs in the world, low even by regional standards (Egypt and
Tunisia had 49 and 47 percent LPF rates, respectively). The gap was primarily
driven by the extremely low, and decreasing, participation of women in the
economy. Female LFP in Syria was about 5 percentage points lower than the
MENA average (excluding high-income countries) and 10 percentage points
lower than Egypt and Tunisia. Similarly, the unemployment rate among
women (25.2 percent), more than four times higher than that of men (6.1
percent), was the highest in MENA (ﬁgures 1.1 and 1.2).




8
    See Fearon and Laitin (2003) for a detailed discussion on this.
           10                                                                              Syria Before the Conflict




           Figure 1.1: Labor Force Participation Rate, 2010


            TUN                           24%                      EGY                             76%
            EGY                       23%                         TUN                  70%
            JOR                15%                                 SYR                 69%
            SYR               14%                                  JOR               68%


           MNA                      19%                           MNA                        72%
            LMC                                      38%          LMC                                     79%

                   0%   10%     20%        30%      40%     50%          60%   65%     70%    75%        80%    85%


           Source: World Development Indicators; Syria Central Bureau of Statistics.

           Note: The MNA average excludes high-income countries. EGY = Egypt; JOR = Jordan;
           LMC = lower-middle-income countries; MNA = Middle East and North Africa;
           SYR = Syrian Arab Republic; TUN = Tunisia.




           Figure 1.2: Structure of the Working-Age Population in Syria, 2010

                                          Working age population
                                             13million 63%

                             Inactive                              Active
                         7.2million 55.4%                      5.8million 44.6%

                                                   Employed                      Unemployed
                                                5.3million 91.4%                0.5million 8.6%

                                                              Men                             Women
                                                          0.3million 61%                   0.2million 39%

Wage-employed               Self-employed                        Employer                    Unpaid worker
3.3million 63.2%           1.5million 28.8%                   0.2million 4.2%                0.2million 3.8%

Private sector                 Public sector
1.9million 57%                1.4million 43%

           Source: Central Bureau of Statistics Labor Force Survey 2010.
THE TOLL OF WAR                                                                                11




Poverty and Inequality

During the 2000s, poverty rates registered small increases, but overall
remained within regional norms. Table 1.1 summarizes poverty
measurements and Gini index over the three periods of surveys covered in
UNDP (2005) and UNDP (2011). In 1996–97, the national extreme poverty
rate was 14.3 percent and the overall poverty rate was 33.2 percent, with a
Gini coeﬃcient of 33.7. In 2003–04, the extreme poverty and overall poverty
rates had declined to 11.4 and 30.1 percent, respectively, while the Gini index
increased to 37.4. Thus, growth was not pro-poor, as the expenditure
distribution became more unequal, but it was more than oﬀset by increased
per capita expenditure. In 2006–07, the poverty rates rose slightly (12.3
percent extreme poverty and 33.6 percent overall poverty), reversing the
gains between 1997 and 2004, whereas inequality fell to a Gini index of 32.6.
According to UNDP (2014), multidimensional poverty in Syria (5.5%) stood
above those in Tunisia (1.2 percent) and Jordan (2.4 percent), but below that
of Egypt (6.0 percent) in 2010. The inequality measure in Syria was well within
the range observed in other countries during the 2000s; the Gini index varied
from 41 percent in Tunisia in 2000 to 31 percent in Egypt in 2008.

Table 1.1: Incidence of the Abject, Extreme, and Overall Poverty Rates and the
Gini Coefficient, 1997–2007

            Abject poverty Extreme poverty Overall poverty Gini coeﬃcient
               rate (%)        rate (%)       rate (%)
 1997                                   14.3                  33.2                 33.7
 2004              2.2                  11.4                  30.1                 37.4
 2007              1.2                  12.3                  33.6                 32.6

Source: UNDP 2011.

Note: The estimates reﬂect UNDP’s cost-of-basic-needs methodology-based poverty assess-
ments. Abject poverty deﬁnes the share of population whose expenditure lies below the food
poverty line. Extreme poverty deﬁnes the share of population whose per capita expenditure is
less than the cost of food plus expenditure on absolute-minimum essential nonfood goods.
Overall poverty deﬁnes the share of population whose per capita expenditure is less than the cost
of food and a reasonable minimum expenditure on nonfood items. UNDP = United Nations
Development Programme.

Poverty in Syria has been concentrated in the northeast region, especially in
rural areas. Rural areas in Syria have consistently been poorer than urban
centers, and the urban-rural divide has grown since 1997 (table 1.2). The
poorest part of the country in 2007 was the rural northeast, with a headcount
ratio of 19.7 percent, seven percentage points higher than the next area (12.8
percent in rural areas of the southern region). While 44 percent of the total
population lived in the northeast, it accounted for 56 percent of the extreme
poor. The rural northeast was also the only area that experienced an increase in
12                                                                        Syria Before the Conflict




poverty between 1997 and 2004. The least poor area in 2007 was the coastal
region, with an extreme poverty rate of 7.7 percent. The southern and central
regions enjoyed a huge drop in the poverty rate between 1997 and 2004, which
drove poverty reduction for overall Syria in 2003–04. Comparing the urban-rural
discrepancies in the headcount ratio in Syria with those in comparator countries,
the diﬀerences were not particularly pronounced in Syria. In 2007, the
diﬀerence in urban versus rural poverty rate was 6 percentage points. This was
higher than the spatial inequity in Jordan, but far more moderate than the
situation in Egypt in 2010, where the headcount ratio in rural areas was 17
percentage points higher than in urban areas (32 versus 15 percent).


Table 1.2: Incidence of Extreme Poverty, by Region, 1997, 2004, and 2007

                                       1997          2004        2007

                          Urban        10.69        5.82          10.6
Southern region           Rural        15.19        10.67         12.8
                          Total                                   11.2

                          Urban        13.94        11.16         10.8
North-East region         Rural        15.24        17.91         19.7
                          Total                                   15.4

                          Urban        14.80         9.02         7.76
Central region            Rural        22.58        11.10         9.05
                          Total                                    8.4

                          Urban        11.34         9.34          5.6
Coastal region            Rural         9.52         9.70         9.09
                          Total                                    7.7

                          Urban         12.6          8.7          9.9
Syria                     Rural         15.9         14.2         15.1
                          Total         14.3         11.4         12.3

Source: UNDP 2011.

Note: For ease of exposition, the table focuses on the extreme poverty rate for the discussion of
regional diﬀerences. The interpretations are qualitatively the same for the overall poverty rate.
Regions comprise the following governorates: South – Damascus, Rural Damascus, Deraa, El
Suaida, and El Quneitra; Northeast – Idleb, Aleppo, Al Raqqa, Deir Ezzor, and Hassakeh; Central
– Homs and Hama; Coastal – Tartous and Latakia.
THE TOLL OF WAR                                                                                             13




Several external factors reinforced the deterioration of poverty in the south-
ern and northeast regions. Syria and the greater Fertile Crescent region experi-
enced moderate-to-severe drought from 1998 to 2009, with the winter of
2007/08 being the driest since records were kept starting in 1931 (Kelley et al.
2015). This caused large-scale failure of crops and livestock deaths, displacing
as many as 1.5 million people from rural farming communities to urban areas in
the south, in search of alternative jobs and livelihoods. This displacement
coincided with the arrival of 1.2 million to 1.5 million Iraqi refugees between
2003 and 2007, who settled primarily in the urban regions in the south. The
large inﬂow of internal migrants and Iraqi refugees could depress wages in the
urban south, especially in the informal sector, where many of the displaced
would be employed or seek work, and drought-driven increases in food prices
could further depress the real incomes of the poor (UNDP 2011).

Governance

Unlike the economic dimensions discussed so far, Syria consistently ranked
low in ratings on basic indicators of governance, including institutional checks
and balances and political pluralism (ﬁgure 1.3). In governance indicators, the
country hovered at the bottom of the scale or saw a visible deterioration during
the 2000s. Similarly, the country scored substantially below Organisation for
Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) and middle-income MENA
comparators, including Egypt, Jordan, and Tunisia.9 These rankings reﬂect the
closed nature of Syria’s governance system and considerable concentration of
power in the executive, even by regional standards. The country also
performed poorly on administrative and policy implementation functions in
absolute terms and relative to other middle-income MENA states and the
OECD, although after 2008 its absolute rating showed signs of modest
improvement. Studies from that period reveal that the quality of regulatory
functions and services to citizens and businesses were low and stagnant
(International Crisis Group 2009). The government’s Mid-Term Evaluation
Report of the Tenth Five-Year Plan documented poor implementation of
planned institutional reforms and insuﬃcient progress on administrative
reform measures (Syrian Center for Policy Research 2013).

The lack of civil liberties and freedom was more prominent in Syria than in
the other Arab Spring countries, based on low ratings on several governance
and institutional indicators. Syria’s ratings on measures of freedom of
association and assembly, and freedom of expression and belief, are low not
only relative to young OECD members (for example, Estonia), but also relative
to other MENA comparators. Relevant global indicators suggest that, during
the 2000s, Syria’s coercive capacity was in line with that of other MENA


9
    The Bertelsmann Transformation Index data (note shown) suggest that Syria also signiﬁcantly underperformed
    on freedom of association relative to comparators. This is supported by many scholarly accounts from the
    pre-2011 period, documenting Syria’s extremely constrained spaces for independent civil society (Hinnebusch
    1995; Baroutt 2011).
14                                                                                     Syria Before the Conflict




comparators, which is particularly noteworthy, given Syria’s geographic
proximity to countries that were experiencing or recently emerging from
violent conﬂict (for example, West Bank and Gaza, Lebanon, and Iraq).

Another important feature of Syria’s governance landscape prior to 2011 was
the country’s high levels of perceived corruption. According to global indexes,
Syria’s rankings on control of corruption and control of economic monopolies
sharply declined after 2005. Although the country had already trailed MENA
middle-income peers on both fronts in 2005, the gap widened substantially by
2010. These trends also undermined citizen trust in public institutions. Gallup
surveys from 2009–10 show that the percentage of Syrians expressing trust
in key public institutions, such as local police and the judicial system, was
lower than comparators. For instance, in 2010, only 48 percent of Syrians
reported trust in local police; in comparison, about 87 percent of Jordanians
responded favorably.10

Overall, the inability to match the aggregate economic developments with
further economic and political inclusion, transparency, and civil liberties
constituted major risk factors. The analysis so far has shown that the strong
growth performance in the decade before the conﬂict was not accompanied
by an equally strong performance in several areas. Although Syria did not
compare unfavorably with other regional economies in many areas, including
aggregate inequality and rural-urban disparity of poverty, in certain areas it
did. These included deterioration in labor market conditions, especially for
women. These various factors, in turn, constituted enabling conditions for the
onset of the conﬂict before the Arab Spring events kindled the ﬁre.11




10
    In Syria, the Gallup survey did not ﬁeld questions on trust in the executive or government more generally.
   Data limitations inhibited a comprehensive comparison of Syria with MENA peers other than Tunisia.
11
   The main causes of the onset of the conﬂict in 2011 should be separated from the main drivers of its duration
   and intensity. Whereas the former is largely determined by domestic factors and the Arab Spring eﬀect, the
   latter are purely determined by the characteristics of the Syrian political economy. For an analysis on this, see
   Fearon (2017); for a broader assessment of the socioeconomic drivers of the Arab Spring, see Ghanem (2016).
THE TOLL OF WAR                                                                                                                                             15




   Figure 1.3: Governance Indicators in Syria
     SEPARATION OF POWERS                                                                            POLITICAL PLURALISM & PARTICIPATION
                                           12                                                                                         16
                                                                                                                                                                     Estonia
Separtation of powers (1-10 max)




                                                                                                                                      14




                                                                                                Political pluralism & participation
                                           10                                         Estonia
                                                                                                                                      12
                                            8
                                                                                                                                      10

                                            6                                                                                          8

                                                                                      Egypt                                            6
                                            4                                                                                                                        Jordan
                                                                                      Jordan
                                                                                      Tunisia                                          4                             Egypt
                                                                                      Syria                                                                          Tunisia
                                            2
                                                                                                                                       2

                                            0                                                                                          0                             Syria
                                             2006              2008                 2010                                               2006   2007   2008   2009   2010
     Source: Bertelsmann Transformation Index                                                        Source: Freedom in the World, Freedom House

     FREEDOM OF ASSOCIATION & ASSEMBLY                                                               FREEDOM OF EXPRESSION & BELIEF
                                           12                                                                                         16                             Estonia
Freedom of association/assembly




                                                                                      Estonia                                         14
                                           10
                                                                                                Freedom of expression & belief




                                                                                                                                      12
                                            8
                                                                                                                                      10

                                            6                                                                                          8                             Jordan
                                                                                      Egypt                                                                          Egypt
                                                                                      Jordan                                           6
                                            4
                                                                                      Tunisia                                          4                             Tunisia
                                            2                                         Syria                                                                          Syria
                                                                                                                                       2

                                            0                                                                                          0
                                             2006              2008                 2010                                               2006   2007   2008   2009   2010
     Source: Bertelsmann Transformation Index                                                        Source: Freedom in the World, Freedom House

     CONTROL OF CORRUPTION (PERCENTILE RANK)                                                         CONTROL OF MONOPOLIES
                                           1.5                                                                                        12
                                                                                                Control of monopolies (0-10 best)
Control of corruption (-1.5 to 1.5 best)




                                           1.0                                        Estonia                                         10                              Estonia


                                           0.5                                                                                         8

                                           0.0                                        Jordan                                                                          Jordan
                                                                                                                                       6                              Egypt
                                                                                      Tunisia
                                                                                                                                                                      Tunisia
                                           -0.5                                       Egypt                                            4

                                           -1.0                                       Syria                                            2
                                                                                                                                                                      Syria
                                           -1.5                                                                                        0
                                               2005   2006   2007     2008   2009    2010
                                                                                                                                       2006          2008          2010
     Source: World Governance Indicators                                                             Source: Bertelsmann Transformation Index
                                                        2
Musa, a 25-year-old Kurdish marksman, stands atop a building as he looks at the destroyed Syrian town of Kobane, also known as Ain al-Arab, on January
30, 2015. Kurdish forces recaptured the town on the Turkish frontier on January 26 in a symbolic blow to the jihadists who have seized large swathes of
                                                                                                        territory in their onslaught across Syria and Iraq.
                                                                                                           Photo Credit: Bulent Kilic/AFP/Getty Images.




                         CHAPTER                                        THE WRATH OF CONFLICT


The conﬂict has inﬂicted signiﬁcant costs in terms of physical damage, loss of lives,
and demographic dispersion, as well as worsening economic and human
development outcomes in Syria. Across the 10 cities studied in this report, 27
percent of the housing stock has been destroyed or partially damaged. The eﬀects
on human lives and displacement have been even more dramatic. Conﬂict-related
deaths are estimated between 312,000 and 470,000. Many more are estimated
to have died as a result of the indirect eﬀects of the conﬂict, including reduced
access to health care, medicine, and nutrition, and over half of the country’s
pre-conﬂict population has now been forcibly displaced. Overall, Syria’s 2016 GDP
was estimated at only about a third of its 2010 value, and today two of every three
Syrians live in extreme poverty. As the conﬂict remains active, these outcomes
deteriorate further on a daily basis.
18                                                               The Wrath of Conflict




C H A P T E R 2 : THE WRATH OF CONFLICT

Once triggered, the conﬂict quickly escalated to aﬀect Syrians’ lives in
extensive and devastating ways. Conﬂicts destroy tangible and intangible
assets, and leave deep marks on a country’s culture and the minds of its
people. Syria exempliﬁes this. What began as peaceful protests in 2011
escalated into a full-scale armed conﬂict among many parties. The conﬂict has
drawn in other countries in a direct or indirect manner, and it has led to
spillovers in neighboring countries and destinations in Europe.

The intensity and impact of the conﬂict have not been the same everywhere
in Syria. Although the ongoing conﬂict has aﬀected the entire Syrian
landscape and demography one way or another, it has taken diﬀerent forms of
varying magnitude across the country’s vastly heterogeneous geography. Map
2.1 shows the variation in exposure to conﬂict in diﬀerent areas. A large
portion of Syria has experienced extensive low-intensity conﬂict (deﬁned as
more than 70 percent of populated areas within the district experiencing
low-intensity conﬂict). The particularly destructive forms of conﬂict, artillery
shelling and airstrikes, have not been equally distributed. Raqqa, for instance,
has been mostly exposed to extensive airstrikes (deﬁned as more than 2,000
strikes from 2011 to 2017), but it has not experienced heavy artillery shelling
or extensive low-intensity conﬂict. Aleppo (city and district) has experienced
the highest level of conﬂict incidence in all categories.

This chapter takes stock, in a nonexhaustive way, of outcomes associated
with the conﬂict. It was not possible for this study to capture all the
consequences of the conﬂict in a comprehensive manner. Some of those,
including the political, social, security-related, and institutional eﬀects, are not
quantiﬁable. The bulk of these eﬀects will be manifested in the future, or
extend into the future. In the absence of better tools to capture those, the
analysis in this chapter focuses on eﬀects that are observed quantitatively,
and supports them with qualitative observations. More speciﬁcally, we
discuss the eﬀects of the conﬂict by using the following classiﬁcation: (i)
physical damage, (ii) loss of lives and demographic dispersion, and (iii)
economic and human development outcomes. The ﬁndings of this chapter will
then be used in chapter 3, where the analysis will turn to assessing the overall
economic impacts of the conﬂict.

Physical Damage
The conﬂict has inﬂicted extensive damages on Syria’s physical infrastructure.
Cities like Homs, Aleppo, and Damascus, and many smaller towns, have served
as battlegrounds for government and rebel oﬀensives, with tragic humanitarian
consequences for their inhabitants. Over time, the conﬂict has caused the
breakdown of partial or entire urban systems in many cities, by destroying
houses and public service–related infrastructure, like roads, schools, and
hospitals, leading to the collapse of economic activities in many areas. As
bridges, water resources, grain silos, and other economically signiﬁcant assets
became strategic targets, the bill due to physical damage increased.
THE TOLL OF WAR                                                                                19




Map 2.1: Incidence of Conflict, 2011–17




                        Aleppo                         Raqqa
      Idlib

                        Aleppo                                            LOW INTENSITY CONFLICT
                                  Raqqa
                Idlib                                                     By District (ADM2) Relative Prevalence
                        Hama            Dayr Az-Zawr
                                                                             Extensive
                                 Homs
                                                           Dayr Az-Zawr
                                                                             Moderate
     Hama
                    Rif Dimashq                                              Limited to none
                Dar’a

                                                        Homs




                               Rif Dimashq
      Dar’a




                        Aleppo                         Raqqa
      Idlib
                                                                          HEAVY ARTILLERY SHELLING IN
                        Aleppo
                Idlib
                                  Raqqa                                   EACH GOVERNORATE
                        Hama            Dayr Az-Zawr                      By District (ADM2) Relative Intensity
                                 Homs
                                                           Dayr Az-Zawr      Extensive
     Hama                                                                    Moderate
                    Rif Dimashq
                Dar’a
                                                                             Limited to none

                                                        Homs




                               Rif Dimashq
      Dar’a
             20                                                                        The Wrath of Conflict




                 Aleppo                         Raqqa
 Idlib

                 Aleppo
                                                                   AIRSTRIKES IN EACH GOVERNORATE
         Idlib
                           Raqqa                                   By District (ADM2) Relative Intensity
                                 Dayr Az-Zawr
                 Hama
                                                                      Extensive (Recent)
                                                    Dayr Az-Zawr
                          Homs                                        Extensive
Hama                                                                  Moderate
             Rif Dimashq
         Dar’a                                                        Limited to none
                                                 Homs




                        Rif Dimashq
 Dar’a


             Source: World Bank staﬀ calculations.

             This section assesses the degree of physical damage by using remote-sensing
             techniques in conjunction with other available information. In the absence of
             comprehensive access to on-the-ground information, the analysis relies on
             remote-sensing-based calculations, which are then cross veriﬁed by using
             various public information channels, including local news and other media
             outlets and social media analytics (for still or motion pictures of destruction).
             The analysis relies on three components:

             • City-level assessments. These provide damage estimates as of January 2017
               for 10 cities, including Aleppo, Dayr az-Zawr, Raqqa, Dar’a, Idlib, Douma,
               Kobane, Tadmur (Palmyra), Homs, and Hama. The speciﬁc sectors of focus
               for each city are the following: housing, water and sanitation (WASH-public
               network), energy (public network), health (public facilities), education (public
               and facilities), and transportation (primary road network).

             • Governorate-level assessments. These extrapolate the ﬁndings to provide
              damage analysis for the country’s eight most conﬂict-aﬀected governorates:
              Aleppo, Homs, Hama, Dayr az-Zawr, Raqqa, Dar’a, Idlib, and Rif Dimashq.
              The extrapolation relies on city-level damage; however, it utilizes additional
              information like intensity and composition of conﬂict in cities and
              corresponding governorates, as well as the baseline diﬀerences between
              initial stocks of infrastructure.

             • Targeted assessments. These provide assessments in a narrow category that
               may not be comprehensive as a result of data limitations, for example,
               damage in industrial zones, steel and cement factories, and a pilot
               assessment of environmental damage in the cities of Aleppo and Hama, with
               a special focus on conﬂict-driven debris.
THE TOLL OF WAR                                                               21




Housing

Syria is a highly urbanized country. Prior to the conﬂict, Syria was rapidly
urbanizing, with 56 percent of the population living in urban areas, most of
which are in rain-fed agricultural regions, including the basin of the Euphrates
River, or along interior trade routes. The two largest cities, Damascus and
Aleppo, accounted for nearly 37 percent of the urban population and 20
percent of the total population. According to the 2010 Syrian census data,
there were 4,128,941 conventional dwelling units across Syria’s 14
governorates. Residential housing stock in the eight examined governorates in
the same year amounted to 2,881,392 housing units distributed among
diﬀerent housing typologies (Syria Central Bureau of Statistics).

The conﬂict further intensiﬁed the rural-urban migration. Starting from the
mid-to-late 1990s, Syria experienced rural-to-urban migration spurred by
drought and environmental degradation. Around 40,000 to 60,000 families
migrated from rural to urban areas each year because of droughts. The conﬂict
provided a major boost to migration. Today, around 72.6 percent of thE
population (13.7 million people) is living in urban areas in Syria, and these
urban areas have undergone dramatic demographic change. Those directly
impacted by the conﬂict, like Homs and eastern Aleppo, have been
experiencing an exodus of residents that have ﬂed violence, destruction, and
the collapse of basic services. Other areas, promising relative security and
consistency of services, have experienced large inﬂuxes, with the net result
being a signiﬁcant concentration of the population (internally displaced
persons (IDPs) and hosts) in urban areas.

Table 2.1: Housing Damage in Cities

City                 Units in 2010       Damaged units in 2017       Damaged units in 2017
                                                                        (% of 2010 value)
                                        Partial damage Destroyed   Partial damage Destroyed
Aleppo                  662,323           154,465       49,830         23.3          7.5
Raqqa                   55,746              7,214        2,418         12.9          4.3
Dar'a                   30,532              3,678         922          12.0          3.0
Douma                   18,786              3,476         884          18.5          4.7
Dayr az-Zawr            48,430             15,107        4,849         31.2         10.0
Homs                    216,191            37,350       12,526         17.3          5.8
Hama                    101,902             2,531        3,020          2.5          3.0
Idlib                   46,014              1,164        2,916         25.3          6.3
Tadmur                   3,178              1,042         272          32.8          8.6
Kobani                  20,801              2,226         814          10.7          3.9
Total                  1,181,813          238,311       78,339         19.8          6.5


Source: World Bank staﬀ calculations.
22                                                                                        The Wrath of Conflict




In conﬂict-aﬀected cities, physical destruction has been extensive. The
conﬂict in Syria has severely impacted the housing sector, where a huge
number of residential units have been partially damaged or fully destroyed,
housing investment disrupted, quality of living space deteriorated, and land
and property rights severely challenged. At the city level, an estimated total of
316,649 housing units were exposed to impact, with Aleppo bearing the
largest share at 64 percent of the impacted urban housing, followed by Homs
at 16 percent. The damage across the examined cities constitutes an
estimated 78,339 residential units destroyed and 238,311 units partially
damaged (table 2.1). Across the 10 cities, 27 percent of the housing stock has
been impacted, with 7 percent destroyed and 20 percent partially damaged.
The percentage vary across cities, with destroyed building percentage ranging
between 3 and 10 percent of the baseline housing stock, while the percentage
of partially damaged units ranges from 2.5 to 33. Similarly, damage varies
across neighborhoods within cities as well (maps 2.2 and 2.3).

Governorate-level assessments provide a broader sense of the damages in
the housing sector across Syria. The damage across the eight governorates
translates into an estimated 220,826 residential units destroyed and 649,449
partially damaged.12 In total, about 32 percent of the housing stock in the
eight governorates has been impacted, with 9 percent destroyed and 23
percent partially damaged (table 2.2). The percentages vary among
governorates, with the percentage of destroyed units ranging between 3 and
10 percent of the baseline housing stock, while the percentage of partially
damaged units ranges from 3 to 31 percent.


Map 2.2: Neighborhood-Level Housing Damage

Aleppo                                                     Dar’a




12
     The physical status of each unit was classiﬁed in three categories: destroyed (> 40 percent damage), partially
     damaged (< 40 percent damage), and no damage.
THE TOLL OF WAR                                           23




Dayr Az Zawr                             Douma




Hama                                    Homs




Idlib                                   Kobani




Raqqa                                            Tadmur




Source: World Bank staﬀ calculations.
                               24                                                                                                  The Wrath of Conflict




                               Map 2.3: Governorate-Level Estimates of Housing Damage

ESTIMATED DAMAGE TO SYRIA’S HOUSING SECTOR (within the 8 surveyed governorates)

                                                                      KOBANI                  22% of all housing partially damaged
                                                          Jarablous
                                                                                                      8% of all housing destroyed
                      ‘Afrin
                                                                        ‘Ayn al-’Arab
                                       ‘Azaz
                                                                          (Kobane)
                                                                                               Tel Abyad
                                                al-Bab
                                          ALEPPO
           Harem                                                                             Central Raqqa
                                Mt. Simeon                                                    (Raqqa City)
                   IDLIB       (Aleppo City)
       Jisr                                                                               RAQQA
  ash-Shughour Central Idlib                   as-Saﬁra     Manbij
            Ariha (Idlib City)
                                                                        ath-Thawra                                    Central Dayr
                                                                                                                as-Zawr (Dayr az-Zawr City)
              Ma’arat an-Nu’man


                                                                                                                             DEIR-EZ-ZOR

Estimated number of damaged housing units
    3,679-7,057                                                                                                              al-Mayadiin
    7,058-12,281
    12,282-17,240                                                                                                                             Albukamal

    17,241-30,749
    30,750-184,847



                    ALEPPO
                                         RAQQA
           IDLIB


                                                     DAYR AZ-ZAWR
                                                                                        Governorate          Est. apt. units           Est. other types
                                                                                          Aleppo               319,209                         461,750
                                                                                           Idlib                46,396                         182,922
                                                                                        Day az-Zawr             28,128                         122,537
                                                                                          Raqqa                 12,669                         114,911

    Governorates not included in coverage

         5.67%                  1.62%                        11.36%                        1.56%       0.55%                           5.23%              1.49%
                                                                            3.25%                          5.57%


                                                                                                       17.05
                             22.33                                                                                                                        22.77
                                                                       15.27


          64%                                             65.65%                           75.27%                                       64%
                                         6.38%                                    4.47%

                                                                                                                                                     6.51%
             IDLIB                                         ALEPPO                            RAQQA                               DAYR AZ-ZAWR

    Partially damaged apartment units                                   Partially damaged other types                     No damage to housing
    Destroyed apartment units                                           Destroyed other types
THE TOLL OF WAR                                                                                                                25




                                                                                               Estimated number of damaged housing uits
                                                                                                                                    2,007-4,895
                                                                                                                                    4,896-10,805
                     as-Suqaylabiyya                                                                                                10,806-21,255
                                       Central Hama
                            Mhardeh     (Hama City)              as-Salmiyya                                                        21,256-38,399
                      Masyaf
                                    HAMA                                                                                            39,400-78,984
                                    ar-Rastan
                                                            al-Makhrem
                      Telkalakh
                                   HOMS
                           al-Qusayr                                                           TADMUR
                                                                                                      Tadmur
                                                 Central Homs                                        (Palmyra)
                                                  (Homs City)



                                   an-Nabk

                         Yabroud

                                    al-Qutayfa
       az-Zabadani
                at-Tal
                           DOUMA

             Darayya                                               Douma
    Qatana       Central Rif Dimashq


        as-Sanamayn


             Izra’

       DAR’A Central Dar’a
              (Dar’a City)

                                                                                                        HAMA




Governorate                 Est. apt. units               Est. other types                                         HOMS




Rif Dimashq                       273,785                       253,610
                                                                                                     RIF DIMASHQ
    Homs                          122,048                       190,882
    Hama                           65,342                       202,779                DAR’A



    Dar’a                          18,080                       120,080
                                                                                         Governorates not included in coverage

     0.87%               2.35%
                                                                               3.11%           3.66%       1.05%                      3.47%
                            5.15%

                                                                 10.87%                                                               9.06%
                            6.67%
                                                                                                           24.34%                          8.21%
                                                                         16.59%

       84.96                                            64.64%                                 64%                              76.03%

                                                                               4.78%                                 6.95%
                                                                                                                                         3.23%

         HAMA                                                   HOMS                             DAR’A                        RIF DIMASHQ

    Partially damaged apartment units                                      Partially damaged other types                  No damage to housing
    Destroyed apartment units                                              Destroyed other types
Source: World Bank staﬀ calculations.
              26                                                            The Wrath of Conflict




              Table 2.2: Housing Damage Estimates across Governorates

Governorate        Units in 2010         Damaged units in 2017     Damaged units in 2017
                                                                      (% of 2010 value)
                                      Partial damage Destroyed   Partial damage Destroyed
Aleppo               889,884              236,947       68,743       23.3              7.5
Raqqa                145,374               27,054        8,899       12.9              4.3
Dar'a                157,430               44,081       12,596       12.0              3.0
Rif Dimashq          600,955              103,794       40,259       18.5              4.7
Dayr az-Zawr         171,679               48,070       13,734       31.2             10.0
Homs                 356,577               97,936       28,144       17.3              5.8
Hama                 305,518               18,402       27,547        2.5              3.0
Idlib                261,302               73,165       20,904       25.3              6.3
Total               2,888,719             649,449      220,826       22.8              8.6


              Source: World Bank staﬀ calculations.


              The damage reported here should be interpreted as lower bound estimates.
              First, the damage assessments are based on actual physical conditions, as
              seen from January 2017. Therefore, the actual damage inﬂicted by the conﬂict
              may be higher if there has been some reconstruction in the area. Although it
              was not possible for this study to estimate the damage without
              reconstruction, rough estimates of reconstruction are summarized in map 2.4.
              Kobane (‘Ayn al-‘Arab) district in northeastern Aleppo governorate has
              witnessed one of the most extensive reconstruction campaigns anywhere in
              Syria over the course of the conﬂict, from the time when predominately
              Kurdish militias drove Islamic State ﬁghters from the area in 2015. Second, the
              analysis presented here does not capture variations in the quality of the
              housing units. UN-OCHA (2016) reports that with massive migration to safer
              areas, adequate housing is simply not available in many locations, resulting in
              people sheltering in substandard housing (UN-OCHA 2016). The pressure on
              rental demand in these perceived safe urban areas has increased rental rates
              at an estimated range of between 500 and 1,000 percent. Families often
              inhabit (sometimes even rent) shells of houses (apartments without ﬁnishing,
              windows, or doors) after sealing the open windows and doors with plastic
              sheets and curtains. These should unambiguously have an impact on the
              actual values of damage. Third, the damage assessment does not capture the
              eﬀects of conﬂict on housing investments that would take place in the
              absence of conﬂict. A background note to this report (Akbar 2017) performs
              back-of-the-envelope calculations to come up with a ballpark measure of
              these foregone investments. Accordingly, the loss of new housing stock is
              estimated at 330,784 unbuilt residential units across the eight governorates.
THE TOLL OF WAR                                                              27




The destruction in Syrian cities has also created another problem: debris. The
conﬂict-related damage has led to large-scale debris accumulation in Syrian
cities, which may require massive amounts of clearance, transportation, and
processing or disposal. In a pilot study conducted for this report,
remote-sensing-based analysis was used to analyze the extent and
concentration of debris accumulation in Aleppo and Homs (map 2.5). The
results show that about 14.9 and 5.3 million tons of debris have accumulated
in these cities, respectively. To put these ﬁgures in perspective, in Aleppo, it
would take about six years of continuous work and 26 million
truck-kilometers to clear the debris. In comparison, in Homs, it would take
about 2.5 years and 2.3 million truck-kilometers. It is also important to note
that the debris removal and processing poses signiﬁcant organizational
challenges: it is costly; it takes time to clear; and the operations impose
further environmental risks, including dust, carbon dioxide emissions, and
water resource pollution. Thus, locating crushing sites often faces resistance
from locals.


Map 2.4: Reconstruction, by Governorate and District




                         Aleppo                         Raqqa
      Idlib

                         Aleppo
                                   Raqqa
                 Idlib
                         Hama            Dayr Az-Zawr


                                  Homs
                                                            Dayr Az-Zawr
    Hama
                     Rif Dimashq
                Dar’a

                                                         Homs




                                Rif Dimashq
      Dar’a


GOVERNORATE RECONSTRUCTION
By District (ADM2) Relative Reconstruction Level
   Extensive
   Moderate
   Limited to none
28                                                             The Wrath of Conflict




Map 2.5: Calculated Debris Accumulation, as of February 2017
Aleppo




Homs




Source: World Bank staﬀ calculations.
THE TOLL OF WAR                                                                                                      29




Water and Sanitation Infrastructure

The Syrian economy became increasingly vulnerable to water scarcity in the
decades preceding the conﬂict. Syria is technically not a water scarce country
like some of its neighbors.13 However, with policies that do not encourage the
sound management of resources, it has been perceived as water scarce
(Barnes 2009). The combination of drought, poor governance, and highly
ineﬃcient ﬂood irrigation, combined with that around half of the irrigation
water comes from groundwater pumping, has led to a situation of rising
production costs as well as depleting groundwater tables (Gleick 2014). Many
households drill their own wells in rural and urban areas; control over drilling
of wells is limited. Around 78 percent of all groundwater withdrawals are
deemed unsustainable in Syria (Wada, van Beck, and Bierkens 2012).

Water shortages were common before the conﬂict. Potable water coverage
was almost universal prior to the conﬂict; however, most regions suﬀered
from shortages, particularly during the summer when supply was rationed to
only for a few hours a day. Demand management has received much less
attention. Illegal connections in new settlements located in urban areas were
common before the crisis, and tariﬀs were at below cost-recovery rates. More
than two-thirds of subscribers paid the lowest tariﬀ, equal to 6 U.S. cents per
cubic meter, as reported in 2009.

The conﬂict has signiﬁcantly deepened the problems in access to water. This
study assessed the physical damage in 457 water supply and sanitation
infrastructure assets across eight governorates (table 2.3). Overall, nearly
two-thirds of the water treatment plants, half of the pumping stations, a third
of the water towers, a quarter of the sewage treatment plants, and a sixth of
the wells have been destroyed or partially damaged across Syria. However, the
damage exhibits signiﬁcant variation across regions. For instance, in Raqqa,
almost all the infrastructure remained damaged at the time of this assessment.
In contrast, almost all assets were intact in Kobani, reﬂecting the extensive
reconstruction eﬀorts after the liberation of the city from the ISIS siege.

Physical damage does not fully reﬂect the mounting complexity of delivering
water and sanitation services. The remote-sensing-based damage
assessments presented here do not identify directly the level of damage to
piped networks for water distribution, drainage, or sewerage, because of
diﬃculties in assessing the functionality of subsurface assets. In addition,
because water is pumped by using electricity, the functionality of water
services is determined by the status of the electric grid and the availability of


13
     Syria is characterized by an arid to semi-arid climate and generally has a high level of climatic variability, that
     is, part of the country is very green and receives ample rainfall; other parts are very dry. Most of the rainfall
     occurs during the winter months. The coastal region receives high levels of rainfall; other parts of the country
     receive signiﬁcantly less. Surface water is estimated at 10 billion cubic meters and groundwater at 6 billion
     cubic meters annually. Irrigation consumes around 87 percent of the available water resources, versus 9
     percent for domestic use and 4 percent for industry.
             30                                                            The Wrath of Conflict




             generators and fuel. Lack of electricity was the main reason for service
             outages, with damage to pumping stations and piping networks being the
             second most common problem.


             Table 2.3: Damage in Water and Sanitation Infrastructure (Eight Governorates)

Asset type                   Baseline Destroyed Partially Total    Percentage of
                             coverage           damaged damaged assets with damage
Well                            234             3    29         32              14%
Water Tower/Tank                176            18    34         52              30%
Water Treatment Plant            8              0     5          5              63%
Sewage Treatment Plant           4              0     1          1              25%
Dam                              6              0     0          0               0%
Other Drainage Str.              3              1     1          2              67%
Pumping Station                  21             0    12         12              57%
Storage Reservoir                2              0     0          0               0%
Water/Sanitation Oﬃce            3              2     1          3             100%


             Source: World Bank staﬀ calculations.

             Water shortages have prompted various coping mechanisms. Syrians have
             reverted to alternative mechanisms to restore water access, especially during
             long episodes of public water network outages. According to the United
             Nations, in Hama, 60 new wells were developed by the water authority, to
             maintain pipeline supply. In Aleppo, more than 300 old and new wells
             provided much-needed water supplies, including private and mosque wells.
             There were more than 65 public water trucks delivering water from more than
             550 holding tanks that ranged in size between 5 and 95 cubic meters, which
             were then reﬁlled by water from wells. The city is working on installing 140
             more holding tanks in eastern Aleppo, and there are more than 1,500 private
             water trucks providing water to residents. In addition to shortages, there are
             also many complaints about the quality of water and the soaring price of water
             trucks ($12 for 1,000 liters of water).

             Power Infrastructure

             The electricity sector was already weak and in need of reform before the
             conﬂict. Demand for electricity was increasing steadily and at a faster rate
             than expansion in generation capacity, leading to outages and load shedding.
             Load shedding in 2009 was 671 gigawatt-hours (GWh), compared with 391
             GWh in 2008, and was expected to continue in the following years. Signiﬁcant
             technical and nontechnical losses and deteriorating infrastructure resulted in
             poor reliability and insuﬃcient supply of electricity, aﬀecting economic and
THE TOLL OF WAR                                                                 31




social development. Technical losses of the transmission and distribution
network amounted to 15.9 percent in 2010. Nontechnical losses (caused by
theft, errors in meter reading and billing, and so forth) were 9.9 percent of the
total system demand in 2010. The demand-supply gap and the high level of
losses reﬂected insuﬃcient investment and poor sector governance. New
investment was diﬃcult to attract because of low domestic electricity tariﬀs,
which averaged to 4.42 U.S. cents/kilowatt-hour (kWh), compared with 12.9
U.S. cents/kWh for electricity exports.

Physical damage to electricity infrastructure from the conﬂict has been
severe, but the functionality of the transmission grid has so far been largely
maintained despite that it spans diﬀerent areas of control. According to
media reports and the damage assessment, secondary infrastructure (power
lines and substations) appears at least partially functional. However, although
the national grid remains largely functional (map 2.6), with major transmission
links still in place, service quality is very poor in most of the country, and some
areas have been disconnected from public supply for years. The three
hydroelectric dams and ﬁve of the 13 major power plants for which
information was available remain fully operational, and two other power
plants are partially functioning (map 2.6). The two major plants that were fully
destroyed by ﬁghting are the Zeyzoun Power Plant in Idlib governorate (544
megawatts (MW) installed capacity) and Aleppo Thermal Power Station in
Aleppo governorate (1,065 MW installed capacity). Al-Teem Power Station, a
minor electricity plant near the city of Deir ez-Zor (100 MW installed
capacity), is also fully destroyed.

Although the institutional arrangement is unclear, electricity is distributed
outside the boundaries of government controlled areas. Anecdotal evidence
shows that the government implicitly and explicitly coordinates with the
diﬀerent rebel groups to ensure that power plants are serviced even if those
plants are under rebel control. There is no further information on how this
arrangement works.

Disruptions to service delivery have been overwhelming, as fuel shortages
and conﬂict-driven constraints to operation and maintenance have led to a
sharp drop in public power supply. Power generation declined to 16,208
GWh in 2015, compared with 43,164 GWh in 2010, a drop of 62.5 percent.
Much of this decline appears to be due to fuel shortages, as available
generation capacity declined by only about 30 percent in the same period. The
fuel shortages appear to apply to heavy fuel oil and natural gas. The
consumption of heavy fuel oil and natural gas for power generation fell by 70
and 54 percent, respectively, between 2010 and 2015. Demand has also
declined due to the conﬂict, with annual peak load falling from 9,595 MW in
2012 to 5,471 MW in 2015. Nevertheless, the fact that the drop in generation
is much sharper than in peak demand suggests that the main constraint is on
the supply side.
             32                                                                        The Wrath of Conflict




             Map 2.6: Estimated Damage to Major Power Sector Assets




                                                            2 Destroyed power plants
                                                            Both power plants are non-functioning
                                                            6 Partially damaged power plants
                                                            4 Power plants are non-functioning
                                                            2 Power plants are partially functioning
                                                            9 Power plants and 3 dams with
                                                            no damage
                                                            8 Power plants are dams are functional
                                                            1 Power plant’s functionality is unknown

             Source: World Bank staﬀ calculations.


             Table 2.4: Status of the Electricity Grid and Major Power Infrastructure in Seven
             Cities in Syria (%)

City               Physical status                     Operational status
         No damage Partial damage Destroyed Functioning Partial function No function
Aleppo     89.39             3.81              6.80    0.33                99.00                    0.66
Idlib      94.29             1.43              4.29   92.86                 2.86                    4.29
Hama       99.24             0.51              0.25    0.25                99.75                    0.00
Kobani     66.67            33.33              0.00   66.67                 0.00                    33.33
Tadmur     30.00            70.00              0.00   10.00                90.00                    0.00
Douma      88.24             5.88              5.88   23.53                64.71                    11.76
Raqqa      94.59             0.00              2.70   13.51                86.49                    0.00

             Source: World Bank staﬀ calculations.
THE TOLL OF WAR                                                                      33




The decline in electricity supply has caused major disruptions in Syrians’ lives
(table 2.4). The majority of cities receive only a few hours of electricity a day.
The government has applied a rationing policy via load shedding throughout
the country. Electricity availability varies considerably among districts within a
single city, as well as between urban and rural areas. Schedules adjust
irregularly and with little warning, primarily in accordance with fuel availability.
Strategic diversion of electricity is common, for example, for harvests,
irrigation, or the need to maintain critical infrastructure, such as hospitals.

Electricity shortages have induced various coping mechanisms. Because of
the crisis, black markets for fuels and electricity-generating supplies have
ﬂourished. Fuel prices vary signiﬁcantly across cities, depending on
accessibility and diﬀerent government pricing schemes across regions.
Commercial and private generators as well as car batteries (charged from the
grid or other sources) serve as the main source of electricity for households in
many conﬂict-aﬀected cities. Surveys conducted in Aleppo, Homs, and Idlib
show that only a small percentage of the respondents relied solely on the
public grid for power generation (ﬁgure 2.1). Many households converted
small electrical appliances to work with 12-volt car batteries.

The Syrian government continues to subsidize electricity, but it is unclear to
what extent. Electricity subsidies continue to pose a burden on government
resources. Although we do not have data on the actual amount of electricity
subsidies, local media sources report targeted increases in electricity prices in
an attempt to free government resources. Electricity tariﬀs vary based on the
type of consumer, volume of electricity used, and voltage. Most electricity
subsidies go to household consumption at lower levels of monthly usage.


Figure 2.1: Sources of Electricity Supply in Three Conflict-Affected Cities


          4.7%        4.7%               4.7%        1.9%                     5.5%        0.9%




                     18.7%                           21.3%             31.8%              29.1%
    49.5%                            49.1%



                 60.7%                          64.8%                          67.3%




           ALEPPO                            IDLIB                             HOMS

    Always from the grid       Car batteries                         No alternative
    Private generator          Purchase from private providers

Source: United Nations.
34                                                          The Wrath of Conflict




Transportation Infrastructure

Syria's roadway network expanded rapidly before the conﬂict, to keep pace
with the fast-growing economy and population. In the decade preceding the
conﬂict, the road network grew by 10 percent, of which 70 percent was
asphalted. This increase was more than matched by the increase in the
number of vehicles. Six years of economic reforms, including a reduction in
import taxes from more than 250 to 50 percent, and the introduction of bank
credits for purchasing cars, created an unprecedented surge in the number of
vehicles on the road. According the Syrian Central Bureau of Statistics, the
total number of registered vehicles registered in Syria increased from 1.2
million in 2006 to 2.1 million in 2010.

Syria’s well-developed network of motorways is located mainly in the
western half of the country (map 2.7). The Motorway System is a divided,
multi-lane highway along the Damascus–Homs–Hama–Aleppo corridor, with
extensions to the Mediterranean Ports of Tartous and Lattakia, and to Jordan
to the south and Lebanon to the west. The secondary road network was
generally in good condition and additional road construction was underway to
extend the major highway network to include a link from Lattakia to Aleppo.
Motorways and secondary roads have weight-load limits, and weigh stations
operate to limit truck overloading. The eastern part of the country is only
connected through two-lane roads due to the sparsity of the population. In
2010, the total distance of the road network in Syria was 69,837 kilometers
(km), of which 45,345 km was paved (including 1,103 km of expressways). M5
is the most important motorway in the country. At 474 km in length, it
functions as the backbone of the national network. It connects the border
with Jordan in the south with Damascus, the capital, and continues further
north to Aleppo, the country's second largest city. Other cities connected by
this motorway are Daraa, Al Nabk, Homs, and Hamah.

The conﬂict has damaged the transport infrastructure signiﬁcantly. The
physical impact of the conﬂict can be classiﬁed in two major categories: (i)
damage due to exploding bombs and ordinance, causing craters and surface
depression; and (ii) collateral damage due to falling debris from destroyed
buildings, road cuts, and checkpoints, making large sections of the road
inaccessible and restricting the movement of people and vehicles. The data
analysis provides an estimate of the total linear length of roads and bridges
damaged and undamaged in the 10 surveyed cities. The estimate extends
beyond the surveyed roads within a city, to include other roads as well.
Interpretation of this type of information comes from comparing satellite
imagery maps with the data.
  THE TOLL OF WAR                                                                             35




   Map 2.7: Major Roads and Railways




  Source: Courage Services.


  Figure 2.2: Damages to Intra-City Roads


                        5.0
                        4.5
                        4.0
Kilometers (Thousand)




                        3.5
                        3.0
                        2.5
                        2.0
                        1.5
                        1.0
                        0.5
                        0.0
                              ALEPPO   HOMS   RAQQA   HAMA    DAYR   TADMUR   DAR’A   IDLIB   KOBANI   DUMA
                                                             AZ-ZAWR


                               Not damaged
                               Damaged

   Source: World Bank staﬀ calculations.
36                                                                                        The Wrath of Conflict




Primary roads and trunk roads have received the most damage within
cities.14 Throughout the 10 cities, a total of 30 km of roads and nine bridges
were damaged or destroyed. The majority of the road damage in the 10 cities
is conﬂict-related, mainly attributed to bombardment, collateral damage, lack
of maintenance, and man-made barricades. Aleppo is the most impacted city,
accounting for the majority of the damages in the 10 cities, in absolute and
relative terms (ﬁgure 2.2). With the latest escalation of the conﬂict, damage to
Aleppo’s road transportation sector doubled from September 2016, reaching
44 percent damage in February 2017. However, the impact on road
functionality extends far beyond direct road damage. Large segments of roads
are often rendered inaccessible due to direct damage to short segments that
has substantial impact on overall mobility.

Airports, railways, and ports have also sustained damage. Syria has 26 airports
with paved runways, and ﬁve airports with runways of more than 3,000
meters. Prior to the conﬂict, Syria’s three international airports, at Damascus,
Aleppo, and Latakia, together handled an annual average of 2.5 million
passengers on 13,000 ﬂights. Currently, the Damascus Airport is the only
airport operating international ﬂights. The Syrian railway system (2,423 km in
total length) is nonoperational due to the conﬂict.

The conﬂict has not only led to physical destruction of the road network, but
also disrupted mobility and eliminated connectivity within the country and
the region. Road-based travel distances across the country have increased as
conditions related to conﬂict, weather, and other factors have forced travelers
to take less direct, alternative routes to reach their destinations. Figure 2.3
shows the minimum road-based travel distance between the most prominent
cities in each governorate before the conﬂict. Next, using publicly available
reporting and satellite imagery on damage and other restrictions, this analysis
assessed the operational status of each route segment (as of March 2017), to
calculate the minimum distance that needs to be traveled by civilians to go
from one city to another. In nominal terms, the connectivity of Dayr az-Zawr
was the most diminished. Compared with pre-conﬂict travel, it took an
additional 155 km to reach Damascus, 170 km to Dar’a, and 187 km to
Hasaka. The latter was the largest proportional increase in travel distance
(42.6 percent) among all the cities analyzed here.

Health Care Facilities

Before the conﬂict, physical infrastructure capacity in health care was below
the averages in the Middle East and varied signiﬁcantly by region. From 2005
to 2010, hospital bed ratios increased from 1.4 to 1.5 per 1,000 people,


14
      The damage assessment for the road transport sector in Syria covers the following road asset classes:
     motorway, trunk road, primary road, secondary road, tertiary road, track, residential road, service road, and
     bridges. The assessment only covers physical damage to roads and bridges, and does not include additional
     inter-urban infrastructure assets, such as traﬃc lights, culverts, road and highway inventories, private cars,
     fuel facilities, and public buses.
THE TOLL OF WAR                                                                                                      37




Figure 2.3: Changes in Connectivity: Pre-Conflict versus De Facto Distances, March 2017

PRE CONFLICT GOVERNORATE CAPITAL, TOTAL TRAVEL LENGTH IN KILOMETERS

               Damascus   Dar'a   Dayr az-Zawr   Aleppo    Idlib   al-Qunaytara   Homs   Hama   Hasaka   Raqqa   Tartous   Latakia   Sweida
Damascus
   Dar'a        101
Dayr az-Zawr    448       544
 Aleppo         350       450       321
   Idlib        306       407       384           62
al-Qunaytara     64        70       512          413      370
  Homs          162       263       359          188      145        226
  Hama          211       311       380          142       99        274           49
 Hasaka         618       718       253          364      425        681          458    442
  Raqqa         432       532       137          197      260        495          272    256    189
 Tartous        253       354       455          233      182        317           97    110    548      362
  Latakia       320       420       496          175      116        383          158    140    538      372     140
 Sweida         101        54       517          438      394         95          250    299    706      520     341       408

CURRENT GOVERNORATE CAPITAL, TOTAL TRAVEL LENGTH IN KILOMETERS

               Damascus   Dar'a   Dayr az-Zawr   Aleppo    Idlib   al-Qunaytara   Homs   Hama   Hasaka   Raqqa   Tartous   Latakia   Sweida
Damascus
   Dar'a        111
Dayr az-Zawr    603       714
 Aleppo         391       502       354
   Idlib        359       470       428           74
al-Qunaytara     68        78       670          458      426
  Homs          170       281       442          221      190        237
  Hama          225       336       421          167      138        292           55
 Hasaka         738       849       441          416      488        805          577    556
  Raqqa         460       570       163          211      285        527          299    278    278
 Tartous        259       370       528          274      206        326           97    110    663      385
  Latakia       328       438       548          213      140        394          164    140    627      405     140
 Sweida         102        83       694          482      450        108          262    316    829      551     350       419

CURRENT GOVERNORATE CAPITAL, TOTAL TRAVEL LENGTH % INCREASE

               Damascus   Dar'a   Dayr az-Zawr   Aleppo    Idlib   al-Qunaytara   Homs   Hama   Hasaka   Raqqa   Tartous   Latakia   Sweida
Damascus
   Dar'a        8.2%
Dayr az-Zawr   25.7%      23.7%
 Aleppo        10.6%      10.2%    9.3%
   Idlib       14.8%      13.4%   10.4%          15.3%
al-Qunaytara    4.9%       9.9%   23.6%           9.7%    13.2%
  Homs          4.8%       6.5%   18.7%           15%     23.7% 4.7%
  Hama          6.3%       7.2%    9.7%          14.7%    28.6% 5.9% 10.9%
 Hasaka        16.3%      15.4%   42.6%          12.5%     13% 15.3% 20.6% 20.5%
  Raqqa         6.1%       6.7%   15.7%           6.6%     8.9% 5.9% 8.9% 7.8% 32.1%
 Tartous        2.2%       4.3%   13.7%          14.9%    11.7% 2.7%   0%   0.1% 17.4%                    6%
  Latakia       2.5%       4.1%    9.4%          17.6%    17.7% 2.8% 3.2%    0% 14.3%                     8%      0%
 Sweida         0.8%      34.4%   25.5%           9.2%    12.5% 12.1% 4.3% 5.5% 14.9%                    5.7%    2.5%      2.7%

Source: World Bank staﬀ calculations.
38                                                               The Wrath of Conflict




hovering slightly below the MENA average of 1.6 beds/1,000 people in 2009
(WDI 2017). According to the Ministry of Health, there were 498 hospitals in
Syria in 2010 (MOH 2011). Bed capacity also showed large geographic
variation: Idlib, with a population of roughly 1.5 million, accounted for only 3.9
percent of total beds, while Aleppo, with a population of about 2.4 million, had
20.1 percent of total beds (Syria Central Bureau of Statistics 2011). Although
this study did not have full access to relevant data, it is likely the governorates
in the northeast, including Hasaka and Raqqa, had signiﬁcantly inferior access
to health care facilities.

Hospitals have not been immune from attacks in the conﬂict; they have been
speciﬁcally targeted and used for military purposes. Physicians for Human
Rights has documented attacks on 400 facilities (some multiple times) and the
deaths of 768 health personnel in Syria between March 2011 and the end of
July 2016. These ﬁgures are corroborated by the Syrian American Medical
Society, which documents a nearly 90 percent increase in number of attacks
on medical facilities and personnel in Syria following the May 3, 2016 passage
of United Nations Security Council Resolution 2286, which condemns attacks
on medical facilities and personnel in conﬂict zones (Syrian American Medical
Society 2017). Unfortunately, since these data were collected in July 2016,
the attacks on health facilities have continued, with further bombing of key
hospitals in Aleppo in April, May, and December 2016. It is now estimated that
an attack takes place on medical facilities or personnel every 48 hours (Syrian
American Medical Society 2017).

Six in 10 health facilities in the 10 surveyed cities, including hospitals,
medical centers, medical points, and polyclinics, have faced some form of
damage as of February 2017. The health infrastructure is in grave condition.
In eight of the 10 cities surveyed, more than half of all types of health facilities
were impacted by the conﬂict. Overall, 16 percent of all health facilities were
completely destroyed and 42 percent were damaged partially. The degree of
physical damage suggests that local communities’ access to the quality health
care services they need is severally limited by the civil conﬂict in all 10 cities.
This situation aﬀects not only those who need emergency medical care, but
also patients who require care for noncommunicable diseases, chronic
conditions, maternal and child health, and mental health services. Activities
related to disease surveillance are also hampered, exposing the population to
the risks of disease outbreaks.

The degree of damage to health infrastructure varies considerably across the
10 cities. In Aleppo, 14 hospitals and 57 medical centers were destroyed as of
December 2016. This corresponds to 35 percent complete destruction of
pre-conﬂict health infrastructure in Aleppo, one of the highest across the 10
cities (ﬁgure 2.4). The damage in Raqqa and Dayz az-Zawr has also been
extensive. As of February 2017, in both cities, almost nine in 10 health facilities
suﬀered some form of damage. The share of health facilities that were partially
damaged reached 80 percent in Raqqa and 79 percent in Dayz az-Zawr. The
 THE TOLL OF WAR                                                                     39




 Figure 2.4: Damage to Total Health Facilities, by City


               120%
               100%
Percentage %




               80%
               60%                                                    25%
                       28%             60%                     79%             80%
                                                                                      100%
               40%
                                               69%     52%
               20%                                                    50%
                       35%                                                                    33%
                                2%     20%             6%      10%              8%
                0%
                      ALEPPO   HAMAH   IDLIB   DARAH   HOMS    DAYR   TADMUR   RAQQA DOUMA   KOBANI
                                                              AZ-ZAWR


                       Completely destroyed
                       Partially damaged

 Source: World Bank staﬀ calculations.

 health infrastructure in Idlib also suﬀered severe destruction. As of February
 2017, eight in 10 health facilities experienced some degree of damage.

 Damage also varied by facility type and ownership. As of February 2017, 54
 percent of all hospitals in the 10 cities received some form of damage. The
 lower levels of care were also not shielded from the conﬂict. As of February
 2017, approximately 68 percent of all medical centers, 84 percent of
 specialized medical centers, 75 percent of medical points, and 51 percent of
 all polyclinics experienced some form of physical damage (ﬁgure 2.5). Among
 damaged hospitals, there was considerable variation between public and
 private hospitals with respect to the degree of damage. As of February 2017,
 an estimated 60 percent of all public hospitals and 48 percent of private
 hospitals were completely destroyed or partially damaged in the 10 surveyed
 cities. More speciﬁcally, about 11 percent of all public hospitals were
 completely destroyed and almost 50 percent of them were partially damaged.
 In the private sector, the proportion of hospitals that were destroyed reached
 9 percent, and almost 40 percent experienced some level of damage.

 The targeting of health facilities and medical personnel has led to provider
 ﬂight and a hollowing out of the entire health system. Data on the number of
 physicians, nurses, and other health workers who ﬂed are limited, but eﬀorts
 are ongoing to map the size of this workforce exodus and the location.
 According to Physicians for Human Rights, at least 15,000 of Syria’s 30,000
 physicians have left. Particularly hard-hit areas have seen even greater losses.
 Of Aleppo’s 6,000 physicians at the start of the conﬂict, fewer than 70 were
 still in the city as of 2014 (PHR 2015).
40                                                               The Wrath of Conflict




United Nations organizations and nongovernmental organizations working
inside Syria report an acute shortage of health professionals. Often medical
residents or, in several cases, veterinarians are the only providers in towns
under siege. There is an especially acute shortage of female doctors (especially
obstetricians and gynecologists), which has severely aﬀected access to health
care for half the population. Due to the unpredictable security situation,
women are increasingly scheduling caesarian sections (as opposed to having a
normal vaginal delivery, which is diﬃcult to predict) and leaving as soon as
they come out of anesthesia due to fear of their hospital being bombed. This
procedure is considered a major surgery and usually requires an inpatient stay
of four to ﬁve days to ensure safe recovery. Health care providers are often
forced to use innovative methods like providing diagnosis via Whatsapp or
other video-over-Internet applications with specialists abroad, due to
physician shortages; training future cadres of health professionals through
online courses held in bunkers; and developing cross-border pharmaceutical
supply chains and payment systems to allow for medicines and salaries to
reach besieged towns.

Figure 2.5: Damage to Health Facilities, by Facility Type, February 2017



                            64%               38%
                                                      79%
                49%                                             75%        38%
     39%                                42%

                            20%               30%
     9%         11%                     11%            5%                  13%
  PRIVATE     PUBLIC    HOSPITAL HOSPITALS MEDICAL SPECIALIZED MEDICAL POLYCLINIC
 HOSPITAL    HOSPITAL (UNKNOWN)    (ALL)   CENTER    MEDICAL    POINT
                                            (ALL)    CENTER

     Completely destroyed (%)
     Partially damaged (%)

Source: World Bank staﬀ calculations.

Physical damage reﬂects only a subset of the eﬀects of the conﬂict on the
health sector (map 2.8). The physical damage discussed here does not capture
many direct inputs to the provision of health care service, including
machinery, tools, and other medical supplies. Moreover, direct destruction of
infrastructure in other sectors, including transportation, energy, and water,
surely further cripples access to health care and service delivery, including
maintenance of critical drug supply chains and referral networks.

More people may have been killed in Syria due to a breakdown of the health
system than due to direct fatalities from the ﬁghting. The destruction of the
existing health infrastructure has led to a deterioration of health status across
the country, with a reemergence of communicable diseases, heightened
impact of noncommunicable diseases, and increasing burden of injuries. For
THE TOLL OF WAR                                                                41




instance, polio, long thought to be eliminated, has reemerged and spread
across the country, due to the inability of routine immunizations to take place
(Sparrow 2014). As summarized by Zaher Sahloul, the head of the Syrian
American Medical Society, some 200,000 people are believed to have died in
Syria because they did not have access to routine medical care as of February
2014 (Baker 2014). These are in eﬀect a “secondary death toll” that is even
higher than those killed by bombs and ﬁrearms (Baker 2014). “These are the
women who died in labor because there was no one to do a C-section, or the
men who have a heart attack and can’t ﬁnd a physician, or have complications
from diabetes. People are dying of chronic diseases that three years ago
would have been completely manageable” (Baker 2014).

Mental health conditions are worsening, with an entire generation of
children showing signs of “toxic stress.” The Syrian Public Health Network
estimated an increase in anxiety, depression, and post-traumatic stress
disease as a direct result of the conﬂict (Syria Public Health Network 2016).
This is especially acute in children, who are being classiﬁed as having levels of
“toxic” stress, with more than 70 percent of children recently surveyed
reporting they were experiencing bed wetting, a sign of post-traumatic stress
disorder (Save the Children 2017). It is not diﬃcult to see why: two-thirds of
children are said to have lost a loved one, or had their house bombed or
shelled, or suﬀered conﬂict-related injuries.
                             42                                                                                                                    The Wrath of Conflict




                             Map 2.8: Governorate-Level Damage to the Health Sector

ESTIMATED DAMAGE TO SYRIA’S HEALTH SECTOR (within the 8 surveyed governorates)

                                                                              KOBANI
                                                              Jarablous
                    ‘Afrin
                                                                                ‘Ayn al-’Arab
                                       ‘Azaz
                                                                                  (Kobane)
                                                                                                               Tel Abyad
                                                    al-Bab
                                ALEPPO

         Harem                                                                                             Central Raqqa
                           Mt. Simeon                                                                       (Raqqa City)
                IDLIB     (Aleppo City)
      Jisr                                                                                           RAQQA
 ash-Shughour Central Idlib                       as-Saﬁra
                                                                 Manbij
           Ariha (Idlib City)
                                                                                ath-Thawra                                            Central Dayr
                                                                                                                                as-Zawr (Dayr az-Zawr City)
             Ma’arat an-Nu’man


                                                                                                                                             DEIR-EZ-ZOR

Estimated number of damaged medical facilities
    0-7                                                                                                                                      al-Mayadiin

    8-18
    19-28                                                                                                                                                     Albukamal

    29-62                                          ALEPPO
                                                                      RAQQA
    63-172                                IDLIB


                                                                                   DAYR AZ-ZAWR




                                                                                                50% of all medical facilities partially damaged
                                                                                                       16% of all medical facilities destroyed



    Governorates not included in coverage




                        22                                                    71                                                                                          30
                                                                                                                           23
        61                                                   156                                          39                                         87
                              23                                                                                                                                               17
                                                                               77                                           5


    5                              5                10                          13                    3                         3                                          3        5

             IDLIB                                             ALEPPO                                      RAQQA                                 DAYR AZ-ZAWR

     Private hospitals partially damaged/destroyed
     Public hospitals partially damaged/destroyed
     Specialized medical center partially damaged/destroyed
     Medical center partially damaged/destroyed
     Health facilities with no damage
THE TOLL OF WAR                                                                                                                       43




                                                                                          Estimated number of damaged health facilities
                                                                                                                                                0-6
                                                                                                                                                7-16
                                                                                                                                                17-28
                           as-Suqaylabiyya
                                  Mhardeh
                                             Central Hama
                                              (Hama City)
                                                                                                                                                29-53
                                                                      as-Salmiyya
                            Masyaf
                                                                                                                                                54-111
                                          HAMA

                                          ar-Rastan
                                                                  al-Makhrem
                           Telkalakh
                                         HOMS
                                 al-Qusayr                                                            TADMUR
                                                                                                              Tadmur
                                                       Central Homs                                          (Palmyra)
                                                        (Homs City)



                                         an-Nabk

                               Yabroud

                                          al-Qutayfa
             az-Zabadani
                      at-Tal
                                 DOUMA

                   Darayya                                              Douma
          Qatana       Central Rif Dimashq


               as-Sanamayn


                   Izra’

             DAR’A Central Dar’a
                    (Dar’a City)
                                                                                                          HAMA



                                                                                                                          HOMS




                                                                                                        RIF DIMASHQ



    Governorates not included in coverage                                                DAR’A




      7                                                                                                           5


          26
                                                                        43                                     23
                                                                                                                                      91        85
                                                                               23
                    170                                     119                                  67                   8

                                                                                                                                           26
                                                       1                            12                                       12   3                  10

          HAMA                                                HOMS                                DAR’A                           RIF DIMASHQ

     Private hospitals partially damaged/destroyed
     Public hospitals partially damaged/destroyed
     Specialized medical center partially damaged/destroyed
     Medical center partially damaged/destroyed
     Health facilities with no damage

Source: World Bank staﬀ calculations.
44                                                            The Wrath of Conflict




Education Facilities

Education outcomes were improving until 2010 in Syria, almost reaching the
education Millennium Development Goal. In 2009, Syria’s primary net
enrollment rate (NER) of 93 percent was equal to the average for the MENA
region and higher than the average for middle-income countries (90 percent).
The NER for secondary school was 67 percent for the same year, above the
MENA average of 60 percent. The gender gap in enrollment was negligible,
with an NER gender parity index of 0.98 in primary and 1.01 in secondary in
2009.15 Student learning outcomes in Syria were below international averages
but higher than most MENA countries. In the 2007 Trends in Mathematics and
Science Study, Syria ranked 32 and 39 of 49 countries for eighth grade science
and mathematics, respectively. Compared with other countries in the MENA
region, Syria’s eighth-grade students ranked third for their performance on the
science assessment and ﬁfth on the mathematics assessment.

Education facilities have become military bases and targets during the
conﬂict. Schools have been used as military quarters and informal shelters for
displaced community members. Vocational institutes, secondary schools, and
education oﬃces were the highest targeted education institutions, with
respective percentages of fully damaged facilities of 14.5, 14.7, and 33.3.
Primary schools and universities remained almost intact, at 6.8 and 5.8
percent, respectively, for full damage. Education facilities in Aleppo have the
highest occurrence of damage, with a total of 49 education facilities
destroyed (map 2.9). Da’ra follows this with 21 education facilities destroyed,
and Raqqa and Tadmur with seven facilities destroyed. Other governorates
such as Kobani, Homs, Douma, and Daya Az-Zawr, have witnessed ﬁve or
fewer facilities fully damaged, while Hama and Idlib had no education facilities
that were fully destroyed. An estimated 57 percent of education facilities are
still functioning in Syria. Many schools have limited access to electricity and
water and sanitation facilities. In some cases, schools are being over utilized,
for instance in Idlib, where the number of students exceeds the capacity of
functional schools to absorb students, versus other governorates in the
country where schools are highly underutilized due to population
displacement and movement.




15
     World Bank EdStats database.
THE TOLL OF WAR                                                                                                                    45




Map 2.9: Governorate-Level Damage to Syria’s Education Sector Facilities

ESTIMATED DAMAGE TO SYRIA’S EDUCATIONAL SECTOR (within the 8 surveyed governorates)

                                                                          KOBANI
                                                          Jarablous
                      ‘Afrin
                                                                            ‘Ayn al-’Arab
                                    ‘Azaz
                                                                              (Kobane)
                                                                                                   Tel Abyad
                                                 al-Bab
                                 ALEPPO

           Harem                                                                                 Central Raqqa
                            Mt. Simeon                                                            (Raqqa City)
                 IDLIB     (Aleppo City)
       Jisr                                                                                   RAQQA
  ash-Shughour Central Idlib                   as-Saﬁra      Manbij
            Ariha (Idlib City)
                                                                            ath-Thawra                                 Central Dayr
                                                                                                                 as-Zawr (Dayr az-Zawr City)
              Ma’arat an-Nu’man


                                                                                                                              DEIR-EZ-ZOR

 Estimated number of damaged educational facilities
      37-110                                                                                                                  al-Mayadiin

      111-202
      203-311                                                                                                                                  Albukamal

      312-523                                   ALEPPO
                                                                  RAQQA
      524-1,831                        IDLIB


                                                                               DAYR AZ-ZAWR




                                                                                  53% of all educational facilities partially damaged
                                                                                         10% of all educational facilities destroyed



      Governorates not included in coverage


                 7.48%                                            5.65%                                 2.84%                                      7.98%



                      23.85%                                          26.62%                                                                          24.1%
                                                                                                           42.11%

             68.67%                                          67.73%                           55.05%
                                                                                                                                            67.92%




              IDLIB                                        ALEPPO                                RAQQA                            DAYR AZ-ZAWR

      Primary school partially damaged/destroyed
      Secondary school partially damaged/destroyed
      Educational facilities with no damage
                               46                                                                                         The Wrath of Conflict



                                                                                 Estimated number of damaged education facilities
                                                                                                                                  1-25
                                                                                                                                  26-73
                                                                                                                                  74-160
                          as-Suqaylabiyya Central Hama
                                Mhardeh    (Hama City)
                                                                                                                                  161-364
                                                                   as-Salmiyya
                           Masyaf                                                                                                 365-804
                                        HAMA


                                        ar-Rastan
                                                               al-Makhrem
                          Telkalakh
                                       HOMS
                                al-Qusayr                                                  TADMUR
                                                                                                     Tadmur
                                                    Central Homs                                    (Palmyra)
                                                     (Homs City)



                                       an-Nabk

                             Yabroud

                                al-Qutayfa
             az-Zabadani
                     at-Tal
                           DOUMA

                  Darayya                                            Douma
         Qatana       Central Rif Dimashq


             as-Sanamayn


                  Izra’

            DAR’ACentral Dar’a
                  (Dar’a City)
                                                                                                 HAMA



                                                                                                                HOMS




                                                                                               RIF DIMASHQ



    Governorates not included in coverage                                          DAR’A




                    1.71%


                  13.2%
                                                    24.97%                             47.64
                                                                                                                       47.64%     45.47%
                                                                   66.2%                            67.21%
                                                 8.83%                             6.89%
         85.08%


                                                                                                                                     6.89%
         HAMA                                              HOMS                            DAR’A                       RIF DIMASHQ

     Primary school partially damaged/destroyed
     Secondary school partially damaged/destroyed
     Educational facilities with no damage

Source: World Bank staﬀ calculations.
THE TOLL OF WAR                                                                47




Demographic Dispersion and Loss of Lives and
Opportunities
Among all the consequences of the conﬂict, the eﬀects on human lives and
displacement have been the most dramatic. The pre-conﬂict population of
Syria was estimated at 20.7 million in 2010 (World Development Indicators).
Since 2011, the conﬂict has created a complex set of pressures on the
country’s population. The most recent calculations by the International
Organization for Migration (IOM) put the population within Syria at 18.8
million as of November 2016 (table 2.5). Data limitations render a precise and
comprehensive decomposition of demographic changes impossible: conﬂict
aﬀects fertility rates and life expectancy alike. In addition, an important
portion of demographic movements takes place informally: some refugees
remain unregistered and, in certain cases, migrants do not factor into
in-country population or refugee totals.

There is signiﬁcant uncertainty over conﬂict-related casualties in the country.
The casualties that are directly related to the conﬂict are estimated to be
between 400,000 (UN, as of April 2016) and 470,000 (Syrian Center for Policy
Research, as of February 2016). This report relies on the IOM demographic
indicators, because IOM provides aggregate numbers and an accompanying
track of population status within the country at monthly intervals.

Syria has become the largest forced displacement crisis in the world since
World War II (box 2.1). Over half of the country’s pre-conﬂict population has
been forcibly displaced. According to the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees (UNHCR), the total number of Syrians presently registered as
refugees outside the country in Lebanon, Turkey, Jordan, Iraq, Egypt, and
North Africa is 4.9 million (table 2.6). In addition, more than 800,000 Syrian
nationals are estimated to have sought asylum in Europe in 2015 and 2016.
Many of these individuals have moved more than once, and have not been
removed from registration lists in their ﬁrst country of refuge. These numbers
also do not include an estimated 0.4 million to 1.1 million unregistered Syrian
refugees in Lebanon, Jordan, Turkey, and Iraq.

The Syrians who ﬂed to reach safety and reasonable living conditions
endured very harsh conditions to get there. Departures were often quite
rapid, with little time to consolidate assets or sell property—averaging fewer
than seven days. Syrians without passports commonly traveled through Syria,
a dangerous and expensive endeavor for those who live in the south of Syria,
Homs, Hama, or Aleppo, then crossed the border into Turkey illegally.
According to the REACH Initiative, the most commonly used crossing point
was near the village of Khirbat al-Joz in Idlib governorate. In nearly all cases,
money for bribes was reported to add to the cost of the journey through Syria.
Once in Turkey, (as of late 2015) Syrians would typically head toward the Port
of Bodrum or Izmir before taking a boat to Greece. Smugglers typically arrange
boats for an average of US$1,200 per person to the Island of Lesbos. Other
boats travel to Chios, Samos, and other islands close to the Turkish coast.
               48                                                                            The Wrath of Conflict




               Depending on the weather and the condition of the boat, the journey was
               reported to take from 45 minutes to several hours. Smugglers did not
               commonly travel in the boats; instead, a passenger was nominated to navigate
               the vessel. Once in Greece, new arrivals often reported walking to points where
               they were registered by the Greek authorities and then boarded boats to
               mainland Greece. In late 2015, preferred onward destinations included Athens
               and Thessaloniki, before traveling by bus toward Evzonoi and the border with
               the Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia. From there, Syrians and others
               typically travel northward (sometimes by train) through Serbia (see map 2.10).

               Table 2.5: Key Demographic Indicators

Indicator                              Number                             Source/Comment

Syria: Pre-war population (2010) 20,720,602           World Bank (WDI ﬁgures) based on UN Population
                                                      Division data and national census reports.

Estimated population within          18,792,029       IOM. UN Population Division projections at
Syria as of December 2016                             18,564,000 for 2016.

Estimated total number of             400,000 –       UN (400,000 as of April 2016); Syrian Center for
deaths as a result of conﬂict          470,000        Policy Research (470,000 as of February 2016).
since 2011

Internally displaced persons          5,715,168       IOM (Jan 2017). UNOCHA lists 6.3 million IDPs in
since 2011*                                           Dec 2016, including the 513,833 persons “aﬀected
                                                      by shelter damage” and displaced within their own
                                                      community as displaced. IOM does not.

Registered Syrian refugees            4,857,617       UNHCR (December 2016, since 2011)

Cumulative Syrian Asylum               884,461        UNHCR (April 2011-Oct 2016). *Note that those
Applications                                          arriving in Europe may remain registered in other
                                                      countries.


               Note: IDP =internally displaced persons; IOM = International Organization for Migration; UN = United
               Nations; UNHCR = United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees; WDI = World Development
               Indicators.
THE TOLL OF WAR                                                                       49




 Box 2.1: The Terminology of Forced Displacement
 Forced Displacement
 “Forced displacement” refers to the coerced and involuntary movement of a person
 or persons away from their home or home region due to a well-founded fear of
 persecution. “Migrants,” as opposed to the “forcibly displaced,” choose to move not
 because of a direct threat of persecution or death, but primarily to improve their
 lives by ﬁnding better employment, education, or family reunion opportunities. It is
 an important distinction, although many population movements (like those to
 Europe from host countries outside Syria) are “mixed migration” ﬂows, motivated
 by a combination of these factors.

 Refugee
 The 1951 United Nations Refugee Convention deﬁnes a “refugee” as any person
 who, “owing to well-founded fear of being persecuted for reasons of race, religion,
 nationality, membership of a particular social group or political opinion, is outside
 the country of his nationality and is unable or, owing to such fear, is unwilling to
 avail himself of the protection of that country.” The Convention deﬁnes a universal
 right of protection from persecution as well as from refoulement, and a right to
 access work, education, and health care. The Convention is nonbinding, although it
 is ratiﬁed by 145 countries. With the exception of Turkey (which retains a
 geographical limitation), the countries hosting the majority of Syrians have declined
 to join the Convention or the subsequent 1967 Protocol.

 Asylum Seeker
 An "asylum seeker" is a person who has applied for asylum under the 1951 Refugee
 Convention and the person remains an asylum seeker for as long as their
 application (or appeal against refusal of an application) is pending. For Syrians, The
 United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees generally approves all asylum
 seekers for refugee status. In its broader context, "refugee" means a person ﬂeeing
 the diverse impacts of conﬂict but not necessarily fearing direct and personal
 persecution as deﬁned by the 1951 Refugee Convention.


Map 2.10: Primary Reported Routes through Turkey and the "Balkan Corridor"
(as of September 2015)




Source: REACH Initiative.
   50                                                                The Wrath of Conflict




   Table 2.6: Total Registered Syrian Refugee Population, by Country/Region, 2012–16


Country          Jan 2012        Dec 2013         Dec 2014    Dec 2015      Dec 2016

Lebanon          6,916            138,213          884,017    1,159,396    1,011,366
Jordan           4,013            116,778          576,354     623,338      655,496
Turkey           9,500            174,598          560,129    1,622,839    2,814,631
Iraq              180             66,920           213,223     233,625      230,836
Egypt. Arab Rep. 924              12,836           131,707     138,212      116,013
North Africa      n/a               n/a              n/a         n/a         29,275
Total           21,533            509,345         2,365,430   3,777,410    4,857,617


   Source: United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees.


   Unlike refugees, most IDPs remained near their place of origin. Among those
   who have ﬂed within Syria, an average of 56 percent has chosen to remain
   within their governorate of origin. As a rule, this is typical of internally
   displaced populations—especially those with fewer resources and among IDPs
   who believe their displacement will be short-lived. The greatest percentage of
   intra-governorate displacement was in As-Sweida, due to its geographic
   isolation and the lines of conﬂict that encircle the province (ﬁgure 2.6). The
   greatest numbers of IDPs within their provinces were in Aleppo and Rural
   Damascus governorates.

   Most of those who ﬂed their residence remained in Syria, with the exception
   of those from Idleb, Al-Hasakeh, and Latakia. The governorate of Aleppo
   reported the highest rate of displacement for ﬂight within and outside Syria,
   however, with almost equal percentages of the displaced population ﬂeeing
   within and outside the country. In contrast, the governorates of Idleb,
   Al-Hasakeh, and Lattakia reported more individuals ﬂeeing out of Syria than
   within Syria (ﬁgure 2.7).

   Migration decisions are determined by shelter, security, and food at source
   and destination. A 2015 World Bank study of push and pull factors driving
   forced displacement and return in the cities of Aleppo, Homs, and Dar’a is
   illustrative of some of the factors informing the calculus of decision making,
   prompting movement (table 2.7). In each location, the dominant push factors
   driving populations from their homes were the lack of shelter, physical
   security concerns, and ultimatums by authorities. Ethnic division and partisan
   factors also drove residents from their home areas. Dominant pull factors
   included access to shelter, availability of food (bakeries/bread in particular),
   security, and kinship/partisan aﬃliations.
THE TOLL OF WAR                                                                                                                                                      51




Figure 2.6: Destination and Origin Governorates of IDPs

      Top governorates of destination for                                                                                             An averagre of 56% of IDPs are displaced
    5,542,996 people ﬂeeing their locations                                                                                              within their governorate of origin...

                                                                                                                                     Intra-governorate displacement in:




                                                                                                                 29% Quneitra
                                                                                                    2% Tartous
                                                                                                                                                            95% As-Sweida
                                                                                         5% Dar’a
                                                                          6% Damascus

                                                                                                                                                           89% Aleppo
                                                               7% Homs
                                                 7% Ar-Raqqa




                                                                                                                                                         78% Dar’a
                                     14% Idlib
                22% rural Damascus




                                                                                                                                                    70% Idlib
29% in Aleppo




                                                                                                                                                 66% Al-Hasakeh

                                                                                                                                               62% Ar-Raqqa

                                                                                                                                              61% Rural Damascus

                                                                                                                                           59% Homs

                                                                                                                                       51% Quneitra
Source: International Organization for Migration, as of December 2016.
Note: IDP = internally displaced person.


Figure 2.7: Direction of Flight for the Forcibly Displaced, by Governorate
                                     FLED INSIDE SYRIA                                                                          FLED FROM:         FLED OUTSIDE SYRIA
1,792,581                                                                                                                         Aleppo                                    1,632,838
                                                   958,782                                                             Rural Damascus                      500,367
                                                               718,420                                                           Damascus                386,006
                                                                  607,943                                                          Homs                   445,223
                                                                         499,878                                                   Hama             218,288
                                                                              328,308                                           Deir-ez-Zor        189,987
                                                                                        201,016                                    Dar’a           174,805
                                                                                        142,688                                    Idlib           179,037
                                                                                             90,294                             Al-Hasakeh           296,942
                                                                                               40,372                             Lattakia         178,357
                                                                                         102,755                                 Ar-Raqqa         75,597
                                                                                               44,550                            Quneitra        17,470
                                                                                                13,138                           As-Sweida       13,684
                                                                                                    2,271                         Tartous        7,384

Source: International Organization for Migration, as of November 2016.
             52                                                                             The Wrath of Conflict




             Table 2.7: Push/Pull Factor Matrix for Aleppo, Homs, and Dar'a (1: Primary
             Driver, 2: Secondary Driver, 3: Tertiary Driver)

Theme        Factor               Description                             Aleppo    Homs       Dar’a
                                                                         Push Pull Push Pull Push Pull
Political    Security             The perception that                       1       1   1     1      1      1
Stability                         departure/ return is related
                                  to physical safety

             Forced               Formal /informal                          1           1     1      1      1
             relocation           authorities in a given area
                                  create conditions that
                                  displace populations

             Available            Sustained access or no                    1       1   1     1      1      1
             shelter              access to safe living space


Accessibility Infrastructure The extent of infrastructure                           2   2     2      2      2
                             damage, irrespective of
                             service provision

             Access to            The absence/presence of                           2   2     2      2      2
             services             service provision, through
                                  public or private networks

             Food                 Access to aﬀordable food                  2       2   3     3      1      1
             availability         through either local
                                  markets or aid
                                  organizations


Aﬃliation    Economic             The prospect of generating                3       3   3     2             3
             opportunity          income

             Kinship ties         Ethno-sectarian, religious,                       2   1     1             3
                                  tribal, and/or family
                                  connections

             Partisanship         Political beliefs that serve                      2   1     1             2
                                  as a reason for departure,
                                  discrimination or return


             Source: World Bank 2015.
             Note: 1 = primary driver; 2 = secondary driver; 3 = tertiary driver.
THE TOLL OF WAR                                                                                                    53




Although some return migration has already taken place, it remains small
compared with the total numbers for displacement. So far, 566,000 returns
have been reported within the country. The greatest proportion of returns
occurred in Aleppo (332,000), followed by Hama (61,000). Nearly all returnees
are staying in their own homes upon return (525,000 or 93 percent of the
total number of returnees). The second most common shelter type for
returnees is abandoned buildings, with about 20,000 returnees living in this
type of shelter. Of the returnees living with host families, 16,000 live in
abandoned buildings. More than 4,400 returnees report that they are paying
for accommodation in their location of origin, with another 1,000 returnees in
camps and formal collective centers in their home areas.

The return decision is a more complex process than departure. Displaced
people often choose not to return, even with security and a political
settlement in place, for a variety of reasons. In some cases, they cannot aﬀord
return travel. In other cases, especially after protracted displacement, IDPs
prefer to stay in urbanized destinations for the livelihood opportunities they
may oﬀer. In still other cases, the memory of traumatic events in home areas
precludes return; demographic realities have changed; shelter is unavailable
or lost; or scarce resources or competing claims to land or livelihood assets
make return untenable. Generally, across case studies of the criteria that
regulate return decisions, the most inﬂuential factors are security, shelter,
access to land and livelihood assets, restoration of basic services, and political
as well as kinship aﬃliation considerations.

Overall, the conﬂict has led to signiﬁcant losses in Syrian human capital in
addition to imposing unsurmountable pain and suﬀering on Syrian people.
Preliminary calculations by Hamilton and Nguyen (2017) show that the
combined eﬀects of casualties, forced dispersion, and reduced investments in
human capital formation could add up to a 30 percent permanent loss in the
country’s human capital stock (compared with the 2010 stock).16 To put this
ﬁgure in perspective, according to the Wealth of Nations data set at the World
Bank, a typical lower-middle-income country such as Syria would have about

16
      These calculations rely on the discounted present value of the lifetime earnings of the currently employed
     population cohort, assumed to include individuals ages 15–65 years. Earnings within a given age and gender
     cohort are in turn a function of years of schooling and years of work experience. In addition to wage employment,
     total human capital estimates also include the earnings of the self-employed. This approach ensures that the
     asset value of human capital is consistent with other asset values in the System of National Accounts.
     The preliminary estimates are conditional on future GDP growth, which is taken at a constant long-term
     growth rate of 2.5 percent, and reﬂects eﬃciency gains, after a brief period of post-conﬂict recovery starting
     from 2018. The eﬀective discount rate for earnings is therefore the diﬀerence between an assumed discount
     rate and the assumed GDP growth rate. The eﬀective discount rate used in the new World Bank estimates of
     human capital is 1.5%, which is consistent with a discount rate of 4 percent and real growth in per capita GDP
     of 2.5 percent per year.
     This methodology (also called the Joregensen-Fraumeni methodology) for valuing human capital includes not
     only the earnings of older workers (ages 25–65), but also the expected earnings of those ages 15–24, based
     on school enrollment rates by age and gender. The issue for the 15–24 cohort is that many people are still in
     school, which has two eﬀects on their lifetime earnings: (i) their lifetime earnings accumulation is delayed, but
     (ii) their earnings once employed will be higher as a result of their greater knowledge and skills. Gross
     enrollment rates are therefore an important input to human capital valuation, as are employment rates (by age
     and gender) and survival rates (also by age and gender). More details and data sources are provided in
     Hamilton and Nguyen (2017).
54                                                                                       The Wrath of Conflict




18 percent of its wealth in natural capital, 25 percent in produced capital, and
57 percent in human capital. Thus, human capital is the largest source of
wealth in all regions and countries, with the exception of the large petroleum
exporters, and signiﬁcant losses in human capital are also signiﬁcant losses in
overall wealth. Unsurprisingly, labor earnings constitute at least 50-60
percent of GDP in virtually all countries. In what follows, the report will
discuss the economic implications of losses in human capital as well as
physical capital in more detail.

Effects of the Conflict on Economic Activity
The destruction of physical capital, casualties, forced migration, and
breaking up of economic networks has had devastating consequences for
Syria’s economic activity. After growing by 3.4 percent in 2010, Syria’s GDP
was estimated by this report to have contracted by 61 percent between 2011
and 2015 and the economy was estimated to contract by an additional 2
percent in 2016 – a 63 percent decline compared to 2010 GDP.17 The oil GDP
declined by 93 percent during the same period, while the non-oil economy
contracted by 52 percent due to the severe destruction of infrastructure,
reduced access to fuel and electricity, low business conﬁdence, and disruption
in trade. Hydrocarbon production plunged from 383,000 bpd in 2010 to
10,000 barrels per day (bpd)18 in 2015 and 2016, due to ISIS control of a
considerable portion of the country’s oil production. The most severe
contraction of the economy took place in 2012 and 2013, when the economy
shrank by 29 and 32 percent, respectively, as economic activity plummeted
and ﬁghting intensiﬁed and spread across the country. In nominal terms, the
total GDP, which in 2010 stood at US$60 billion, was estimated to be at
US$20 billion and US$15 billion in 2015 and 2016, respectively.

Syria’s energy sector has deteriorated since March 2011 with oil and natural
gas production declining dramatically. Syria's energy sector has encountered
several challenges as a result of the conﬂict and subsequent sanctions
imposed by the United States and the European Union. The energy
infrastructure—including oil and natural gas pipelines and electricity
transmission networks—has been damaged, which has hindered the
exploration, development, production, and transport of the country's energy
resources. Prior to the conﬂict, Syria's oil and gas sector accounted for
approximately one-fourth of government revenue. Since the onset of the
conﬂict, crude oil production in government-controlled areas has fallen
sharply (97 percent decline), from 386,000 bpd in 2010 to 10,000 bpd19 in
2015 and 2016, according to the United Nations Economic and Social
Commission for Western Asia (UNESCWA) (ﬁgure 2.8). Total oil production,


17
   The World Bank reference year for real GDP is 2010.
18
   This refers to oil in areas under government control, but with the ﬁelds under rebel control, oil production is
   estimated at 40,000 bpd.
19
   ISIS controls 80 percent of the ﬁelds; the government controls 8 percent of the ﬁelds; and Kurdish forces
   dominate the remaining 12 percent (Almohamad and Dittmann 2016).
 THE TOLL OF WAR                                                                                55




 Figure 2.8: Economic Activity during the Years of the Conflict

 ECONOMIC GROWTH SINCE 2011
                 20


                  0


                 -20
Percentage




                 -40


                 -60


                 -80


                -100
                       2010     2011    2012     2013       2014        2015       2016


                              Overall GDP Growth
                              Non-Oil GDP Growth
                              Oil GDP Growth


 GOVERNMENT CONTROLLED PRODUCTION OF OIL


                500


                400    383
                                 340
Thousands bpd




                300


                200
                                        145

                100
                                                   58
                                                             28          10         10
                  0
                       2010     2011    2012     2013       2014        2015       2016



 Source: World Bank staﬀ estimates; United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia.
56                                                                                      The Wrath of Conflict




including from ﬁelds under opposition and ISIS control, is estimated to be up
to 40,000 bpd, but estimates vary widely (box 2.2). In May 2016, the European
Union extended its embargo on Syria’s oil exports to Europe until June 2017,
which accounted for about 95 percent of exports. Syria's oﬃcial crude oil
exports are assumed to have almost ceased, but evidence points toward
signiﬁcant illicit exports, especially from non-government-controlled areas.
The capacity of its two state-owned reﬁneries has fallen to half of pre-conﬂict
capacity (Energy Information Agency), exacerbated by the imposed sanctions.
According to the Energy Information Agency, the Islamic Republic of Iran
continues to supply Syria with approximately 60,000 bpd of crude oil, but this
level is still insuﬃcient to meet demand. Until recently, the conﬂict has had a
less severe impact on the natural gas sector than on oil, because some of the
main gas ﬁelds and processing facilities have remained under government
control. Syria’s gas production stabilized around four to ﬁve billion cubic
meters in 2013–16, down from a record 8.7 billion cubic meters in 2011.
However, there is evidence that gas infrastructure has suﬀered signiﬁcant
further damage since mid-2016. In the summer of 2016, ISIS captured and
destroyed Al-Shaer, one of the Syrian government’s last two remaining large
gas ﬁelds. In January 2017, the Al-Maher and Jihar gas ﬁeld and processing
plant were destroyed. The processing facility at Ebla, although currently idle,
was struck by ISIS rockets in February 2017. Now only one of eight major gas
processing plants remains in operation and in government control.

Agricultural production also registered signiﬁcant losses. The conﬂict has led
to widespread damage to irrigation systems and shortages of labor and inputs
such as seeds, fertilizers, and fuel. Syria had been a net producer of wheat in
the prior 20 years (excluding drought years) but production of this crop is
currently estimated to be at 1.5 million tons, approximately 55 percent lower
than the pre-conﬂict average of 3.4 million tons (2007–11) (FAO and WFP
2016). However, some crops, such as barley,20 have seen an increase in
production of 40 percent above the average of the past 10 years, to 0.9
million tons, following better rainfall. Syria’s livestock economy, which
accounted for about 40 percent of total agricultural production, was also
severely aﬀected by the conﬂict. According to the Food and Agriculture
Organization (FAO), currently there is 30 percent fewer cattle, 40 percent
fewer sheep and goats, and 60 percent less poultry (FAO and WFP 2016).
Overall, agriculture GDP contracted by 41 percent between 2011 and 2015,
and this followed a 10 percent decline in 2010.

Conﬂict-driven disruptions of irrigation systems and labor shortages have
played important roles in the loss of agricultural output. The FAO Food
Security Study reported that because of the damage to pumping stations
(both for surface and groundwater irrigation), irrigation structures, and
equipment, and the poor availability of electricity and fuel, many farmers have


20
     A rainfed and more resistant crop under adverse weather and input conditions and not dependent on irrigation
     and fertilizers like wheat is.
THE TOLL OF WAR                                                                                                                                          57




abandoned irrigation and turned to predominantly rainfed crops such as
barley, coriander, and other herbs. A pilot study conducted for this report in
four agricultural zones in Syria supports these observations (box 2.3). The
availability of farm labor during the 2015/16 season varied greatly across
governorates, based on security conditions and availability of alternative
employment. According to respondents to the NAPC survey, in Hasakeh, the
low availability of farm labor contributed to the collapse of cotton production,
which is now reduced to 4,000 hectares.


 Box 2.2: Oil Production by Non-State Groups

 In areas outside government control, non-state groups have continued to extract
 and process oil and gas. Estimates from November 2014 suggest that ISIS was
 producing, reﬁning, and selling as much as 50,000 barrels of crude oil per day.
 Another estimate from October 2015 puts the number at between 34,000 and
 40,000 barrels a day. The coalitions led by the United States and the Russian
 Federation against the Islamic State (ISIS) consider oil production a “war-sustaining
 activity,” and have therefore targeted extraction, reﬁning, and transport
 infrastructure across ISIS-held territory. By late September 2016, the United
 States–led coalition claimed to have struck 2,638 “oil infrastructure” targets,
 primarily in Syria, leaving much of the country’s extraction and processing capacity
 destroyed (though much had reportedly already been damaged by previous
 ﬁghting). See map B2.2.1 and table B2.2.1.


 Map B2.2.1: Oil Economy during Conflict


                                              TURKEY                                                           Isis control
                                                                                                               Isis support
                                                                                                               Rebel-held
                                                                        Sinjar                                 Syrian regime
                                                                                 Mosul    KURDISTAN
                                                                                          REGIONAL
                                                                                         GOVERNMENT            Kurds
                        Aleppo                                                                                 Rebel-held/Nusra*
                                              Raqqa                                                            *Jabhat al-Nusra, al-Qaeda’s Syrian aﬃliate



                                                       Deir Ezzor
                                                                                                               Oil ﬁelds
                                                                                                               Mobile reﬁnery

                                                                                                               Oil market
                                                                                                               Primary oil routes
                                                                    al-Qaim                                    Smuggling route
       LEBANON
                                      SYRIA

                 Damascus                                                IRAQ
                                                                                             Baghdad              IRAN


  ISRAEL




                             JORDAN



                                        SAUDI ARABIA                                                   100KM




 Source: Erika Solomon, Robin Kwong and Steven Bernard, at Financial Times, February 29, 2016.

 Notes: Military map changed substantially since the time of this analysis: ISIS lost ground
 including the al-Jabseh ﬁeld to the Syrian Democratic Forces.
58                                                                         The Wrath of Conflict




 Box 2.2 (cont.): Oil Production by Non-State Groups
 Table B2.2.1: Sample of ISIS Crude Oil Production


     Oilﬁeld        Est. production           Price
                   (barrels per day)        ($/barrel)
     al-Tanak       11,000-12,000              $40
     al-Omar         6,000-9,000               $45
     al-Tabqa        1,500-1,800               $20
     al-Kharata          1,000                 $30
     al-Shoula          650-800                $30
     Deiro            600-1,000                $30
     al-Taim            400-600                $40
     al-Rashid          200-300                $25

 Source: Erika Solomon, Robin Kwong and Steven Bernard, at Financial Times, February 29, 2016.


 By 2015, the Assad government retained control of only 8 percent of Syria’s oil
 resources (Ar Rasm, Bilas Sharifah, al-Sha’ir, Elba, and Jazal ﬁelds). The oil ﬁelds held
 by the Islamic State group in the summer of 2015 had a pre-conﬂict output of
 250,000 barrels per day (bpd)—or roughly 65 percent of the country’s overall
 capacity. Syria’s Kurdish-led factions also control oil ﬁelds, most notably the
 Rmailan ﬁeld in Hasakeh province. The ﬁeld, which at its height produced up to
 170,000 bpd, in late 2015 operated at about 15,000 bpd.

 Syria’s two state-owned reﬁneries in Baniyas and Homs are also only partly
 operational: by early 2015, the nominal capacity was just below 240,000 bpd or 75
 percent of the country’s pre-conﬂict demand. Syrian oﬃcials claimed that
 infrastructure damage has further decreased production capacity to about 50
 percent. Under conﬂict conditions, civilians and armed groups have also set up
 private makeshift oil reﬁning sites across the country. For a 2016 report entitled
 “Scorched Earth and Charred Lives,” the Dutch NGO PAX used satellite data to
 identify as many as 37 separate makeshift oil reﬁning sites across Syria, each with
 hundreds or even thousands of very rudimentary individual structures to process
 oil that reportedly has been primarily purchased by armed groups in the areas. The
 central government reportedly continues to purchase oil from such areas.




There has been considerable destruction of major industrial zones in Syria,
most notably in Aleppo. Many Syrian cities had clearly demarcated industrial
areas and, in some cases, industrial zones a short distance from the city. In
Aleppo, which was the manufacturing center of Syria and a hub for sectors
including pharmaceuticals, textiles and garments, chemicals, and
THE TOLL OF WAR                                                                        59




agroprocessing, many of the industrial zones were the scene of substantial
ﬁghting and have suﬀered major damage. As table 2.8 shows, the worst hit
zones in Aleppo have seen 70 percent or more of their buildings damaged,
according to recent satellite imagery. Furthermore, this imagery does not
capture lateral damage to the sides of buildings and looting.

Manufacturers were forced to close their businesses or move them
elsewhere. In 2013, the government published a directive to encourage
factories to move to safe cities and simpliﬁed the paperwork required to do
so. In 2014, they took a decision to establish two new industrial zones in
Latakia, with sizes of 350,000 and 225,000 square meters, respectively. In
interviews, private Syrian banks reported that lending for factory relocation
and setting up in safe cities like Latakia and Tartus is a signiﬁcant line of
business. However, other manufacturers have moved their production
elsewhere in the region, such as Turkey, Egypt, and Jordan. Egypt in particular
has attracted the garment and textile business from Aleppo. But not all
sectors have been equally able to move outside the country. Machines from
heavier industries, and even some machines in textile production, were simply
too cumbersome to move and had to be abandoned. The Syrian government
initially reacted to businesses moving outside the country by banning them
from selling their products back into Syria. However, the government is now
attempting to attract back businesses that relocated overseas.

Sanctions have also had a signiﬁcant impact on the manufacturing sector.
This impact has been most severe in sectors that export, require a substantial
share of imported inputs, or were closely linked to external partners who have
cut ties. For exporters, none of the interviewed private banks reported that
they were providing any foreign currency services or letters of credit, due to
the sanctions. State-owned banks are similarly aﬀected and in many cases
directly sanctioned for their links to the government. As a result, accessing
import and export ﬁnance is one of the biggest challenges facing
manufacturers, according to interviews with manufacturing conglomerates.
Many of these conglomerates suﬀered physical damage to facilities as well,
but today are more worried about the ongoing impact of sanctions. Trade
ﬁnancing is occurring largely through informal methods, but this undoubtedly
limits its accessibility.



 Box 2.3: Eﬀects of the Conﬂict on Syrian Agriculture: A Pilot Study

 A pilot study, conducted jointly by the World Bank and the European Space Agency
 EO4SD for this report, used Satellite Earth Observation to assess the impact of the
 conﬂict on agricultural production in Syria. The study mapped temporal and spatial
 changes in land cover and agricultural productivity, by using a vegetation index, which
 is a measure of the greenness of vegetation. Three areas and respective irrigation
 schemes in Syria, located near Dara’a, Aleppo, and Ar Raqqah, were compared with
 similar schemes in nearby zones in Turkey and Jordan. The status of these agricultural
 areas is assessed and compared between 2011 (pre-conﬂict) and 2016 at ﬁeld level
 (10x10 meter to 30x30 meter resolution). (See maps B2.3.1 and B2.3.2.)
60                                                                    The Wrath of Conflict




 Box 2.3 (cont.): Eﬀects of the Conﬂict on Syrian Agriculture: A Pilot Study
 Map B2.3.1: Study Areas Included in Map B2.3.2: Change in Vegetation
 the Demonstration                   Cover for February in March (Al Hassakeh)
                                     from Pre-Conflict in 2011 to Conflict in 2016




 Source: World Bank and European Space Agency staﬀ calculations.



 The main conclusion is that the conﬂict has aﬀected agricultural output through
 land utilization, cropping intensity, and crop yields. Cultivated land has decreased
 by about 50 percent in the Syrian Al Eis irrigation scheme; formerly wet (potentially
 irrigated) areas in the dry season diminished by 36 percent; and productivity has
 declined by 36 percent in winter and 47 percent in summer. In Ar Raqqah,
 productivity also decreased in spring and summer, by on average 15 percent. In Al
 Hassakeh, productivity decreased by 15 percent in summer but increased by 60
 percent in spring. The results include targeting criteria and an agricultural activity
 analysis, and can assist in planning for reestablishing agriculture input supply chains.

 Agricultural production capacity is inﬂuenced by three variables: land utilization
 (extent of cultivated areas), cropping intensity (number of crop cycles in a year), and
 crop yields (productivity). Earth observation can provide information to support all
 three variables. However, in an Earth observation context, the word productivity is
 a combined measure of all three eﬀects, derived by a vegetation index, here the
 Normalized Diﬀerence Vegetation Index. The extent of cultivated areas
 signiﬁcantly decreased in the Al Eis irrigation scheme (45,672 hectares) between
 2011 and 2016. Although pre-conﬂict there were 34,327 hectares under
 cultivation, less than half of the area was still in use in 2016 (12,308 hectares).

 A detailed classiﬁcation of the cultivated area in Al Eis shows that half of the El Ais
 area was fallow or abandoned in 2016, compared with the cultivated area extent in
 2011. The detailed classiﬁcation of the cultivated area in Al Eis shows that in 2016
 the remaining active cultivations were mainly winter crops (11.5 percent), followed
 by spring crops (10.9 percent). Summer crops, which typically need irrigation, are
 only found in 3.9 percent of the Al Eis area. Two cropping cycles are rarely found in
 2016. Earth observation showed that vegetation activity was not present or in
 general signiﬁcantly lower in the Syrian irrigated area compared with an intact
 irrigation scheme in Turkey in 2016. Furthermore, the crop cycle and in particular
 the start of the season was very similar to the surrounding natural, rainfed
 vegetation in the Syrian Al Eis irrigated area, indicating a breakdown of the
 irrigation infrastructure.
THE TOLL OF WAR                                                               61




Table 2.8: Damage by industrial area in nine cities


City                Industrial area   Damage (%)
Aleppo              Shaykh Najjar     81
Aleppo              Ramouseh          73
Aleppo              Ash-Shaqif        70
Aleppo              Billeramoun       67
Deir ez-Zor         Deir ez-Zor       54
Tadmur              Tadmur            43
Kobani              Kobani            39
Idlib               As-Sina’iyya      34
Aleppo              Jibreen           18
Dar’a               Dar’a             8
Raqqa               Raqqa             4
Douma               Douma             3
Hama                Hama 2            3
Hama                Hama 1            1

Source: World Bank staﬀ estimates.

On the expenditure side, the conﬂict has led to a collapse in investments
(ﬁgure 2.9). Public and private investment in Syria contracted greatly after the
start of the crisis, due to the heightened level of risk and uncertainty and the
severe damage to infrastructure, equipment, electricity, water systems, and
communications. There was a 24 percent cut in public investment in 2011,
and a contraction of over 31 percent in 2015 in real terms. Investors exited
Syria due to the insecurity and poor business environment, which led the
private investment’s share of GDP to decline from 12 percent in 2010 to 4
percent in 2015. Public investment’s share of GDP was also severely hindered
by declining revenues and shifting priorities toward military consumption and
public wages. Overall, the period from 2011 to 2015 witnessed a substantial
fall in public investment, from 9 percent of GDP in 2010 to only 1 percent of
GDP in 2015.

International trade, especially exports, also declined severely (ﬁgure 2.9).
Total exports fell from US$7.9 billion in 2011 to US$631 million in 2015, a
decline of 92 percent in just four years. Imports declined from US$17,348
million in 2011 to US$4,654 million in 2015—a 73 percent fall. The steeper
decline in exports than imports (and GDP) is potentially driven by three
factors: tradable sectors, for example, oil, could be more exposed to changes
in income than non-tradable sectors; sanctions on Syrian exports could be
eﬀectively blocking activity; and some export industries may have substituted
away from formal exports to production for domestic consumption, while
  62                                                                                      The Wrath of Conflict




  Figure 2.9: Investment and Trade Dynamics

  PRIVATE AND PUBLIC INVESTMENT
                 30%




                 20%
Percent of GDP




                                        14%
                           12%
                 10%           9%
                                               8%       8%
                                                                    7%
                                                                                    6%
                                                             4%                                      4%
                                                                         2%              2%
                                                                                                          1%
                  0%
                             2010          2011         2012         2013           2014             2015


                                    Private ﬁxed capital formation
                                    Public ﬁxed capital formation
                                    Total ﬁxed capital formation


  EXPORTS AND IMPORTS IN SYRIA BETWEEN 2011 AND 2015, USD MILLIONS

                    17,348




       7,946                           7,633
                                                                            6,468
                                                            5,945
                                                                                                4,654
                               2,147                1,469           1,093                631

                 2011               2012               2013            2014                   2015


                 Exports
                 Imports



  Source: World Bank staﬀ estimates.
THE TOLL OF WAR                                                              63




others may have engaged, directly or indirectly, in illicit trade. The mineral
sector’s exports suﬀered the most dramatic declines (from US$4.7 billion in
2011 to close to zero in 2015). On the import side, the decline in
manufactured goods imports (from US$11.5 billion in 2011 to US$2.8 billion
in 2015) explained two-thirds of the total reduction in imports.

Foreign exchange reserves are almost depleted. With conﬂict and
international trade sanctions, the current account deﬁcit was estimated to
reach 28 percent of GDP in 2016, up from 0.7 percent of GDP in 2010. This
was due mostly to the collapse of oil exports, loss of tourism revenues, and
sanctions. The government has been increasingly ﬁnancing its growing
external deﬁcit through withdrawals from the Central Bank reserves. It is
estimated that the amount of foreign reserves declined severely, from nearly
US$21 billion in 2010 to less than US$1 billion in 2015.

Public Finance

The conﬂict has led to an escalating budget deﬁcit, especially after 2012,
when state revenues began to plummet. Lower revenues and high military
spending sharply widened the ﬁscal deﬁcit to 9 percent of GDP in 2016, from
2 percent of GDP in 2010 (UNESCWA). However, underlying ﬁscal
developments were much more adverse than suggested by the changes in the
budget deﬁcit: total public revenue dropped from 23 percent of GDP in 2010
to less than 3 percent of GDP in 2015. This was mainly due to the losses in oil
and tax revenues, the collapse of international trade due to sanctions, a
growing informal economy, and weak administrative collection capacity. In
response to this shortfall, government spending was cut back, but these
measures were not enough to oﬀset the fall in revenues (ﬁgure 2.10).

The conﬂict has led to a shift from capital expenditure toward current
expenditure. Capital expenditures collapsed from about 9 percent of GDP in
2010 to an estimated 1 percent of GDP in 2015. Current expenditure, as a
percent of GDP, was much higher, at 18 percent in 2015, compared with 16
percent of GDP prior to the crisis, reﬂecting increased spending on public
sector wages, military, and imports of essential goods. Wages made up the
largest share of current expenditure, followed by subsidies and transfers,
goods and services, and interest payments.

Current expenditure on wages held steady and public debt increased to an
unsustainable level. Although on the decline in recent years, current
expenditures have continued to account for the largest share of the budget
despite the collapse in revenue over the course of the conﬂict. Wages made
up the largest share of current expenditure, followed by subsidies and
transfers, goods and services, and interest payments. As a result, public debt
has increased to unsustainable levels, driven by the collapse in revenue and
increase in expenditure, particularly for military purposes. Public debt is
estimated to have increased by 150 percent of GDP in 2015 (US$21 billion),
up from only 30 percent of GDP in 2010 (US$18 billion) (ﬁgure 2.10).
  64                                                                          The Wrath of Conflict




  Figure 2.10: Fiscal Deficit and Debt

  FISCAL BALANCES
                 60


                 40
Percent of GDP




                 20


                  0


                 -20


                 -40
                       2010      2011     2012      2013      2014        2015       2016


                              Total revenue
                              Total expenditure
                              Budget deﬁcit


  GROSS PUBLIC DEBT

                 160




                 120
Percent of GDP




                  80




                  40




                   0
                       2010        2011      2012          2013       2014          2015

  Source: United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia and International
  Monetary Fund estimates.
THE TOLL OF WAR                                                                65




Money and Banking

The nominal exchange rate of the Syrian pound sharply depreciated. Prior to
March 2011, the Syrian pound was stable and traded at LS 47 against the U.S.
dollar. With depressed export revenues and declining international reserves,
between 2010 and 2015, the oﬃcial exchange rate of the Syrian pound
depreciated by 459 percent and reached 260 (LS/US$). The Central Bank of
Syria (Syria Central Bureau of Statistics) took several measures, including
limits on import licenses, to curtail demand for foreign currency. Other
measures included forcing exporters to surrender their foreign currency
earnings in April 2015. However, the ability of the Syria Central Bureau of
Statistics to intervene eﬀectively has proven limited, considering the
continuous depletion of foreign currency reserves. The Syrian currency
continued its depreciation against the U.S. dollar during 2016, but at a much
sharper pace. Foreign currency shortage and ongoing devaluation led to
increasing dollarization in government-controlled and opposition areas.

The conﬂict also led to a steep increase in prices. The consumer price index
(CPI) in Syria has increased rapidly throughout the period of the crisis.
According to UNESCWA, the prices for products such as rice, subsidized
bread, and wheat ﬂour rose dramatically, by 723 percent, 418 percent, and
388 percent, respectively, between March 2011 and November 2015. In
October 2014, the government raised the subsidized price of diesel from 36
to 48 cents per liter. The price of heating oil increased from 73 to 85 cents per
liter. Higher costs for rent and utilities put additional pressure on purchasing
power. In 2016 only, CPI inﬂation was estimated to have reached to 58
percent, due to ongoing disruption of trade, large shortages in supply, and the
sharp depreciation of the Syrian pound (ﬁgure 2.11). However, the actual
inﬂation rate varies signiﬁcantly across the country, reﬂecting the
fragmentation of Syria’s economic space, with signiﬁcantly higher price hikes
in areas with more intense conﬂict. Although prices are less volatile in
government-controlled areas (Latakia, Tartous, and Damascus), they are
particularly rampant in areas with high security risks or besieged areas (such
as Deir-Ez-Zor and Ar Raqqa), where the trade disruptions and security risks
increased the value of goods associated with high transportation costs.

Syria’s ﬁnancial sector has been hit hard by a shrinking economy, tightening
international sanctions, lack of public and private investments, and reduced
business opportunities in a conﬂict environment. The banks have endured
physical destruction of branches, but all 20 banks are still operational. Private
sector banking and payments systems appear to be largely functional in the
key government-held areas. There, deposit and withdrawal services have
continued, with limited lending services. Automated teller machine (ATM) and
branch networks have deteriorated, but are still functional in
government-held areas, although card payment transactions are not available.
Communication failures periodically aﬀect inter-branch connectivity and ATM
services. Moreover, the security of staﬀ and branches has become a major
                        66                                                                         The Wrath of Conflict




                        Figure 2.11: Exchange Rates and the Consumer Price Index

                        OFFICIAL AND PARALLEL EXCHANGE RATES IN SYRIA
                         600


                         500


                         400
SYP/US$




                         300


                         200


                         100


                             0
                                   2010        2011         2012        2013         2014        2015         2016


                                          Oﬃcial exchange rate
                                          Parallel exchange rate


                        INFLATION AS MEASURED BY CONSUMER PRICE INDEX

                   100%



                        80%
Period average, y-o-y




                        60%



                        40%



                        20%



                          0%
                                   2010        2011         2012        2013         2014        2015         2016

                        Source: International Monetary Fund and United Nations Economic and Social Commission for
                        Western Asia estimates.
THE TOLL OF WAR                                                                                          67




concern for the banks. Branches have been subject to armed robberies, and the
ones in the conﬂict regions have had to close.21 As early as December 2013, it
was estimated that 30 percent of the 539 bank branches (243 private and 296
public bank branches) were destroyed or not operational (Badra 2015).

In nongovernment areas, access to and functioning of basic banking and
payments systems is much more limited. Private banks are unable to operate
where the central bank does not have authority. As such, it appears that no
private bank branches are open in rebel-held areas. However, several private
banks noted that in the northeastern city of Al-Qamishly, which is partly held
by Kurdish groups, branches of private Syrian banks remain operational,
thanks to some form of agreement between Kurdish groups and the
government. Outside of this, rebel, Kurdish, and ISIS-held areas have none of
the formal banking services they previously enjoyed. The economy in these
areas appears to be almost entirely cash based.

In this challenging environment, banks have had diﬃculty ﬁnding lending
opportunities within acceptable risk parameters. According to International
Monetary Fund data,22 lending to the private sector constituted around 45
percent of bank lending in 2010. Thus, the collapse of the private sector could
have substantial impact on bank income levels. World Bank23 data indicate
that the net interest margin of the banking system declined from 2.7 to 1.8
percent from 2011 to 2013, while the share of noninterest income in total
income rose from 44.5 to 84.1 percent. In the absence of credible banking
sector data, particularly from the predominant public sector banks, it is very
diﬃcult to assess accurately the impact of the conﬂict on the banking sector.

International sanctions have compounded the eﬀect of the conﬂict on the
banking and ﬁnancial sector. Between 2011 and 2015, international
sanctions cut oﬀ the Syrian Central Bank (SCB) and state banks (representing
75 percent of banking assets) from international debt markets and payment
and settlement systems. Bank for International Settlements data show that
the exposure of foreign banks to Syrian banks declined from around US$550
million to US$90 million between 2011 and 2015. Despite budgetary
problems and the need to attract foreign direct investments, Syria failed to
attract any private ﬁnancial ﬂows from abroad. The only oﬃcial ﬁnancial
assistance was provided by the Iranian government in the form of credit lines,
totaling US$1.9 billion in 2013, US$3 billion in 2014, and US$0.97 billion in
2015 (IMF 2016). Assuming that the Iranian credit was the only ﬁnancial aid
(with no assistance from the Russian Federation or China) the remaining
budgetary deﬁcit was probably funded by the SCB and commercial banks,
thereby negatively aﬀecting the banking system.



21
   In the absence of credible ﬁnancial soundness indicator data, the team is unable to provide a more robust
   assessment of the impact and damage to the ﬁnancial infrastructure of the banking sector.
22
   International Monetary Fund International Financial Statistics database.
23
   World Bank Global Financial Development Database.
68                                                                              The Wrath of Conflict




The nonbank ﬁnancial sector was hit hard, but enterprises largely continued
to operate. The Syrian stock market (DSE) is still operational, with a few
investors, and has had no de-listings from the exchange. As of 2015 Q4, DSE
had 23 listed companies with US$7 billion in total assets, almost all from the
banking and insurance sector. As of 2015, six brokerage ﬁrms of 13, and four
advising ﬁrms have discontinued their operations due to the downturn in
DSE’s performance and lack of proper income opportunities (Badra 2015).
The insurance sector suﬀered from increased claims. The conﬂict saw an
increase in claims, which worsened the ﬁnancial position of insurance
companies, despite the rejection of many claims on the basis of noncoverage.
The insurers have also had diﬃculty ﬁnding reinsurers, due to sanctions and
high country risk, while rising reinsurance costs were partly passed onto
clients. Moreover, lower incomes of the population and high costs of
insurance services hit the demand for insurance products. This is also visible in
the DSE data, which show that the assets of the listed insurance companies
are down from US$269 million in 2011 Q1 to US$95 million in 2015 Q4.

Despite the conﬂict and having to write oﬀ part of their loans, certain Micro
Finance Institutions (MFIs) are continuing operations: the Aga Khan
Foundation has continued microﬁnance operations in Syria, although scaled
down to rudimentary levels. It also collaborated with local organizations on
aid distribution, such as cash assistance through savings accounts. Ibdaa MFB
resumed activities in Syria and is working on opening new branches. The
United Nations Relief and Works Agency provided 30 percent of total
microﬁnancing in Syria in 2012 and granted 9,334 loans worth US$2.6 million
in 2015.24 By 2015, it had to write oﬀ 8,648 loans with an uncollected balance
of US$318,145.25

Human Development Outcomes
Economic deterioration hit employment. Since the onset of the conﬂict, jobs
were destroyed at an estimated rate of approximately 538,000 per year on
average26 between 2010 and 2015, adding 482,000 people to the
unemployment pool every year. The working age population has also
decreased by 2 percent annually, corresponding to an estimated decrease of
264,000 individuals net per year in that period. As a result, the labor force
decreased by 1 percent, about 56,000 individuals net per year, annually (ﬁgure
2.12). Overall, the unemployment rate increased from 8.6 percent in 2010 to
a disastrous 52.9 percent in 2015, a 44.3 percentage point change.

Idleness and informality have become the norm. More than three in four
Syrians of working age (77 percent, or nine million individuals) are not involved
in any economic value generation: 2.9 million unemployed and 6.1 million

24
   www.UNRWA.ORG.
25
   www.UNRWA.ORG.
26
   The diﬀerence between the number employed in 2015 and 2010 would determine the number of net jobs
   created (or destroyed in this case). This number is “net” as it includes jobs created and destroyed.
THE TOLL OF WAR                                                                69




inactive (ﬁgure 2.13). Unemployment among youth reached 78 percent in
2015 (UNESCWA 2016). The current inactivity in the working age population
will have long-term consequences, including rapidly depreciating skills and
human capital. In the short term, however, the consequences are dire:
individuals, especially young men, are increasingly joining the military or
getting involved in violence to survive (SCPR 2014). Those who are lucky
enough to ﬁnd a job turn to informal job opportunities (as a wage earner or
self-employed) or become involved in the “war economy” as a coping
mechanism in an eﬀort to earn an income for their families (World Vision
2016). These jobs are mostly labor intensive, unskilled, or low skilled and
poorly paid. Even those employed in relatively stable jobs or in the private
sector have seen their living conditions decline steeply due to the rise in the
prices of basic commodities and rapidly depreciating currency.

Demographic mobility helped to adjust the distribution of economic activity.
The conﬂict pushed people and economic activities away from conﬂict zones
into relatively more stable and safer ones. With millions of IDPs moving from
high-conﬂict intensity areas, like Deir Ezzor and Dara’a, to low-conﬂict
intensity areas, like Tartous and Lattakia, the former experienced labor
shortage and the latter labor surpluses. With saturation in the labor market
and the associated depression in wages (FAO and WFP 2015), the relatively
safe areas became attractive to businesses and investments. According to Dun
& Bradstreet (2016), citing data from 2015 from the Syrian Investment
Agency, the regions of Suwayda and Tartus emerged as the most dynamic
investment areas in 2015, as they attracted almost 70 percent of all new
investments for 2015. These two regions were not considered particularly
attractive before the onset of the conﬂict in 2010; they attracted only 11
percent of overall investments. By contrast, households in Aleppo and Dara
governorates have lost more jobs than any other parts of the country
(UNESCWA 2016). The emigration of people abroad, due to the security
situation, lack of job opportunities, and steep decline in the standard of living
have led to an important skills shortage in Syria.

Since the onset of the conﬂict, the government has scaled down its social
security programs to cope with mounting ﬁscal pressures. With declining
revenues, the government decided to reduce its expenditures, ﬁrst by
dramatically decreasing spending on subsidies. This led to a signiﬁcant
increase in the prices of basic food and fuel. In October 2013, manufacturers
started paying market prices for fuel oil and “mazout” or gasoil, eﬀectively
ending a decades-old policy of subsidies that followed the arrival to power of
the Baath party. Key staple products (rice and sugar), fuel oil, and “mazout” are
still subsidized for households, but prices have risen signiﬁcantly. Prices of
“mazout” increased about nine-fold and that of fuel oil increased 10-fold from
2011 to 2015. As for rice and sugar, prices increased by 2.3-fold in the same
period. In an eﬀort to reduce expenses for households, those key staple foods
are still subsidized under a coupon scheme; however, the loss of jobs,
prevalence of violence, and reduction in subsidies have led to poverty
descending rapidly on the Syrian people.
 70                                                                                                   The Wrath of Conflict




 Figure 2.12: Labor Market Indicators: Pre-Conflict versus Conflict
 CHANGE IN THE SIZE OF THE LABOR FORCE, EMPLOYED AND UNEMPLOYED

        1,500                                                               Conﬂict period        500

                                                                                                  400
        1,000
                                                                                                  300

             500                                                                                  200




                                                                                                          Thousands
Thousands




                                                                                                  100
                -
                                                                                                  -

            (500)                                                                                 (100)

                                                                                                  (200)
      (1000)
                                                                                                  (300)

    (1,500)                                                                                       (400)
                    2005

                           2006

                                  2007

                                         2008

                                                2009

                                                       2010

                                                              2011

                                                                     2012

                                                                            2013

                                                                                   2014

                                                                                          2015



                                  Change in the number of unemployed
                                  Change in the number of employed
                                  Change in the size of the labour force (right-axis)

 Source: World Bank staﬀ estimations.


 ANNUAL GROWTH AND PERCENTAGE POINT (PP) CHANGE IN KEY LABOR
 MARKET INDICATORS
                                                                                          44.3%
 Unemployment rate (pp change)
                                                                             0.5%
                                                                 -2.2%
 Total population (annual growth)
                                                                             2.7%
                                                                 -2.1%
 Working age population (annual growth)
                                                                             2.6%

                                                                                            49.2%
 Unemployed (annual growth)
                                                                              5.1%
                                                          -12.8%
 Employed (annual growth)
                                                                             2.0%


            Post-crisis (2010-2015)
            Pre-crisis (2005-2010)
 Source: World Bank staﬀ calculations based on data from the Syrian Center for Policy Research.
THE TOLL OF WAR                                                                         71




Figure 2.13: Structure of the Working-Age Population in Syria, 2015


                                       Working age population
                                         11.6million 62.9%

                           Inactive                        Active
                       6.1million 52.8%                5.5million 47.2%

                                             Employed                  Unemployed
                                          2.6million 47.1%           2.9million 52.9%

         Agriculture                          Industry            Building & Construction
       0.4million 16%                      0.02million 1%              0.4million 16%

      Trade & Tourism                     Transportation &            Other services
                                          Communications
       0.5million 19%                       0.2million 7%             1.1million 41%


Source: World Bank staﬀ estimations.




Estimates suggest that about six in 10 Syrians live in extreme poverty today.
Micro-data on per capita expenditure at the household level and the poverty
line were not available for this exercise. Nevertheless, a simple extrapolation
of the growth elasticity of extreme poverty (from 2004–07) suggests drastic
increases in extreme poverty in Syria (ﬁgure 2.14). Assuming that the
estimated growth elasticity remains constant at -2.911 throughout the crisis
period and that inequality does not increase (scenario 1), the poverty rate in
2016 is estimated to be 66.5 percent. When we allow the income elasticity to
fall as the poverty rate increases, it moderates the impact of falling income on
poverty; the estimated poverty rate under scenario 2 is 54.5 percent. Finally,
when we assume that elasticity is decreasing and the Gini index is increasing
at the rate of 1 percent per year (scenario 3), the predicted extreme poverty
rate in 2016 is 62.7 percent.

Aid distribution statistics support the assessment of a rapid increase in
poverty rates. The United Nations Oﬃce for the Coordination of
Humanitarian Aﬀairs estimates that about nine million people are in need of
food assistance in Syria today (UNOCHA 2016). About seven million people,
or one in three individuals, are food insecure, and an additional two million
people are at risk of falling into food insecurity. The entire population of
besieged locations, and over half of all IDPs, are considered food insecure.
According to OCHA, 74 percent of the sub-districts in Syria reported
members adopting, on average, more than ﬁve types of negative coping
mechanisms, to access food. Some of the negative coping mechanisms
reported were early marriage, begging, borrowing, child labor, and child
recruitment in the conﬂict. These negative coping mechanisms are
disproportionally aﬀecting women and children (UNOCHA 2016).
            72                                                             The Wrath of Conflict




            Figure 2.14: Simulated Poverty Rate With and Without the Conflict, 2007–16 (%)

70
                                                                                         66.51
                                                                                         62.72
60
                                                                                         54.54
50

40

30

20
     12.3
10                                                                                       8.88

 0
  2007      2008       2009       2010   2011   2012    2013     2014     2015       2016


                 Counterfactual          Scenario 1         Scenario 2            Scenario 3



            Food security is the biggest item in aid. Since the onset of the conﬂict in early
            2011, US$3 billion, representing 50 percent of earmarked oﬃcial aid ﬂows or
            32 percent of all oﬃcial aid ﬂows to Syria have been assigned to the food
            security sector (ﬁgure 2.15). Of all sectors, food security is the biggest
            recipient of aid, followed by the health and the “emergency shelter and
            nonfood items” sectors (US$774 million and US$591 million, respectively).
            The amount of oﬃcial aid labeled as going to food security might be
            underestimated, as aid ﬂows marked as multi-sector and for which a sector
            has not yet been speciﬁed include food security. Aid earmarked for the food
            security sector as a share of yearly aid ﬂows has been stable, at around 33
            percent on average between 2012 and 2016. Over 60 percent of the
            abovementioned food assistance is channeled through the World Food
            Program (WFP).

            Foreign aid to Syria grew at an annual growth rate of 131 percent between
            2011 and 2016, with the majority of the earmarked sources originating from
            the Government of the United States. Funds to Syria grew from US$39
            million in 2011 to US$2,584 million in 2016 (ﬁgure 2.16). Of those funds, 23
            percent originated from the Government of the United States, 21 percent of
            the Government of Germany, and 12 percent each from the European
            Commission and the Government of the United Kingdom, in 2016. Other
            donors included the Turkey Humanitarian Fund (accounting for 4 percent of
            total funds in 2016), Government of Kuwait (accounting for 5 percent in 2015
            and 2016), Government of the United Arab Emirates (accounting for 9 percent
THE TOLL OF WAR                                                                           73




 in 2014), Government of the Kingdom of Saudi Arabia (accounting for 33
 percent in 2013), as well as the Governments of Sweden and Switzerland
 (accounting for 10 percent each in 2011).


 Figure 2.15: Food and Non-Food Foreign Aid Flows in Syria

 TRENDS IN FOOD ASSISTANCE TO SYRIA, 2011-2016
              1000

               800
US$ million




               600

               400

               200

                 0
                        2011    2012    2013     2014      2015   2016

                               World food programme
                               Food security sector


 SECTORAL DISTRIBUTION OF OFFICIAL AID FLOWS, 2011-2016
 (SHARE OF EARMARKED OFFICIAL AID FLOWS)

                                 Mine action
                               Early recovery
                                  Protection
                                   Education
 Coordination and support services
                     Water sanitation hygiene
                                 Multi-sector
                 Emergency shelter and NFI
                                       Health
                                Food security

                                                0%   10%   20%    30%     40%   50%

                                                            US$ million

 Source: United Nations Oﬃce for the Coordination of Humanitarian Aﬀairs, FTS database.
 74                                                                          The Wrath of Conflict




 As of December 2016, 5.8 million individuals received in-kind food
 assistance. Most beneﬁciaries are in Aleppo, Rural Damascus, and Idlib, while
 areas such as Der-ez Zor and Ar Raqqa received minor assistance relative to
 their need (51,000 and 6,000 beneﬁciaries, respectively). Overall, 1.6 million
 beneﬁciaries were in hard-to-reach and besieged areas. The national average
 cost of a standard food basket is LS 32,332 (US$64) (December 2016), which
 is 487.5 percent higher compared with 2012. The basket is most expansive in
 the governorates of Rural Damascus, Homs, and Damascus, and most
 aﬀordable in As-Sweida, Dar’a, and Quneitra (map 2.11). WFP alone
 distributes more than four million food baskets per month. The food baskets
 distributed by WFP provide beneﬁciaries approximately 1,700 kilocalories per
 day and consist of the following commodities: wheat ﬂour, bulgur, rice, red
 split lentils, whole lentils, white beans, oil, salt, and sugar, while their
 ready-to-eat rations provide beneﬁciaries approximately 2,100 kilocalories
 per day and consist of the following commodities: canned fava beans, canned
 humus, canned vegetables, canned chicken, olive oil, biscuits, halawa, and
 juice (orange/apple/pineapple or grape, ﬁve bottles, 200 milliliters each). The
 majority of those commodities is imported from Turkey (pulses, wheat ﬂour,
 bulgur wheat, sugar, and oil); rice is imported from India or Vietnam. The only
 items bought locally are salt and ready-to-eat rations.


 Figure 2.16: Trends in Reported Funding, by Source, 20017–16 (US$, millions)

                3,000
Thousands bpd




                2,000



                1,000



                    -
                        2011      2012    2013    2014       2015       2016


                All other funding         Government of UK
                Government of USA         Government of Kuwait
                European Commission       Government of Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
                Turkey Humaitarian Fund   Government of Switzerland
                Government of UAE
                Government of Sweden
                Government of Germany

 Source: United Nations Oﬃce for the Coordination of Humanitarian Aﬀairs, FTS database.
THE TOLL OF WAR                                                              75




Map 2.11: Number of Beneficiaries, by Sub-District (December 2016)




Source: United Nations 2016.



A small cash-based transfer program targets pregnant and lactating women.
In 2014, WFP introduced cash-based monthly transfers for pregnant and
lactating women. The program now targets 20,000 women in the Homs and
Lattakia governorates. The voucher is considered complementary to the food
basket program, and aims at improving the dietary diversity and micronutrient
intake of mothers and mothers-to-be. The vouchers can be used to purchase
fresh fruits and vegetables, fresh dairy products, and fresh animal protein
(meat, chicken, eggs, and ﬁsh) from designated WFP contracted shops. The
reference for the value of the voucher is a basic fresh food basket. The prices
of these items are monitored monthly and the value of the vouchers is
adjusted approximately every three months.
                                3
A Syrian man sells fuel in the northern embattled Syrian city of Aleppo on February 9, 2016. Shop shelves are bare and prices have doubled in Syria's Aleppo
                              as the threat of a blockade looms after advancing regime forces cut oﬀ the city's second main supply route the previous week.
                                                                                                           Photo Credit: Karam Al-Masri/AFP/Getty Images.




                                                    DISENTANGLING THE ECONOMIC
 CHAPTER                                                 IMPACT OF THE CONFLICT


The economic impact of the conﬂict is manifested through multiple channels, and
each channel has its own bite. The analysis in this chapter shows that physical
destruction, by itself, explains only a limited share of the aggregate economic
impact. The bulk of conﬂict-driven economic losses is generated not by destruction
of productive factors, but by low utilization of these factors. Disruptions in
economic organization are about 20 times costlier than capital destruction alone
in the ﬁrst six years of the Syrian conﬂict, when measured by the cumulated losses
in gross domestic product. Reduced connectivity, higher transportation costs,
disruptions in supply chains and networks, increased rent seeking, and erosion of
social trust render production daunting in an active conﬂict environment. In
comparison, conﬂict-related casualties generate the most catastrophic eﬀects for
the subjective well-being of Syrians. In addition, they are also the primary drivers
of forced displacement, and the economic impacts generated by casualties are
much more persistent than other channels. Finally, the analysis shows that the
longer the conﬂict lasts, the slower the post-conﬂict recovery will be.
78                                       Disentangling the Economic Impact of the Conflict




C H A P T E R 3 : DISENTANGLING THE ECONOMIC
IMPACT OF THE CONFLICT
What is the economic impact of the conﬂict on the Syrian economy?
Answering this question turns out to be surprisingly diﬃcult. The previous
section showed that the conﬂict has been associated with changes in many
areas that can aﬀect the well-being of Syrian citizens. These include
casualties, forced displacement, physical destruction, limitations on the
mobility of goods and people, and a vast amount of foregone opportunities in
the normal course of economic and social life. These multidimensional eﬀects,
however, need to be converted into impact assessments before they can fully
inform policies like prioritization of mitigating actions and design of
reconstruction and reconciliation plans. The conversion to impact
assessments entails classifying the individual eﬀects into similar economic
categories, comparing them with reliable benchmarks (for example,
counterfactuals), and accounting for the overlapping parts to ensure an
accurate assessment. However, undertaking such an eﬀort is complicated by
several factors:

• Data are sparse and, when available, vary in quality across diﬀerent components.
  Active conﬂicts often lead to severe shortages of data. This study did not
  have the opportunity to collect ﬁrst-hand data by implementing surveys and
  interviews in Syria. Thus, only remote-sensing-based assessments and
  secondary sources of data were used.

• There is no perfect indicator capturing the full extent of the impact of the
 conﬂict. Aggregating various impacts is desirable to provide the “big picture”
 and avoid double counting, but requires a conversion of sorts, as diﬀerent
 impacts are measured in diﬀerent units. For example, the destruction of
 physical assets can be evaluated as rebuilding costs, but not the loss of
 human lives. The latter entails assigning a monetary value to human lives,
 which may be controversial, not to mention diﬃcult. Certain aggregate
 indicators, such as the impact on income (or GDP), could help with some of
 these issues in the short term; however, they do not reﬂect the true reality
 and welfare costs encountered by people in conﬂict, and may even present
 an anomalous picture. The U.S. GDP, for example, grew by 11 percent
 annually during World War II, a record that remains today.

• The absence of reliable counterfactuals could hamper the assessment of impact.
  In any given area of interest, assessing the impact of the conﬂict entails a
  good understanding of what would happen had there been no conﬂict. For
  “exogenous” events like natural disasters, these are relatively
  straightforward. The “business as usual” scenario could provide a relatively
  reliable counterfactual. In the case of a conﬂict, however, the conﬂict itself
  is an outcome of various factors, including income distribution, quality of
  institutions, and mobilization costs. Thus, it is not always clear what it means
  to have no conﬂict when underlying conditions dictate it. The regional
THE TOLL OF WAR                                                                   79




 economies that could provide a comparison point are aﬀected by the factors
 that triggered the conﬂict and the conﬂict itself. Therefore, it is diﬃcult to
 estimate what Syria would look like now in the absence of conﬂict.

• The conﬂict is an active conﬂict, and its eﬀects will continue to materialize long
  after it ends. The eﬀects of casualties, destruction of physical assets, and,
  perhaps most importantly, degradation of institutions will have long-lasting
  impacts on the well-being of the surviving Syrians. A large portion of these
  eﬀects has not yet been captured by current estimates of indexes like the
  poverty rate or income; thus, a forward-looking analysis is in fact a crucial
  aspect of impact assessment. In the absence of alternatives, second-best
  solutions are utilized. As described in the previous chapter, the data problem
  was tackled by a pragmatic approach that uses veriﬁed remote-sensing
  information and data from secondary sources.

First, without a reliable counterfactual, a statistical method was utilized to
generate imperfect counterfactuals for aggregate economic variables like
GDP. The GDP series that are calculated by statistical methods based on
pre-conﬂict data series are compared with the national accounts–based GDP
estimates, to produce an assessment of GDP impact since the beginning of
the conﬂict.

Second, an integrative framework that is based on a dynamic general
equilibrium model was introduced to deliver diﬀerent indicators of impact in
a consistent manner. This framework is used to run several inquiries that are
not directly observable from data. These include assessing the relative
importance of diﬀerence channels (physical destruction, casualties, and
economic disorganization) in the manifestation of the conﬂict’s impact. In
addition, the role played by demographic mobility is also discussed, by using
quantitative implications. Finally, the propagation of the conﬂict’s
post-conﬂict impact is analyzed, by using various conﬂict end-time scenarios.

Aggregate Impact
A ﬁrst step in assessing the impact of the conﬂict on Syrians’ well-being is to
generate an estimate for the aggregate impact. The eﬀects of the conﬂict in
diﬀerent ﬁelds may have overlapping components that have to be counted
only once, and not twice. For instance, the delivery of water often uses
electricity as an intermediate input; the impact assessments should add up the
changes in value added in these sectors, not total nominal values of outputs.
GDP calculations help to do this. But, like all indicators, GDP-based
calculations fail to capture some other dimensions, which will be discussed.

Impact on GDP

Overall, economic outcomes deteriorated signiﬁcantly during the conﬂict;
but that is not the whole story. The previous chapter summarized the
        80                                      Disentangling the Economic Impact of the Conflict




        estimates of economic performance in Syria since the beginning of the
        conﬂict. Simply comparing these estimates with those prior to the conﬂict,
        however, does not provide the “impact.” To estimate such impact, the actual
        economic outcomes need to be compared with where Syria would have been
        today had there been no conﬂict (ﬁgure 3.1). Unfortunately, it is impossible to
        know that with precision. With signiﬁcant changes in external conditions,
        including the drastic change in oil prices over the past few years and the
        outbreak of the Arab Spring, it is diﬃcult to accurately estimate how the
        Syrian economy would have evolved.

        This study employs various statistical approaches to estimate a
        counterfactual path for the Syrian GDP. In the absence of a reliable
        counterfactual, the options are limited. Simple benchmarking is not possible,
        because the set of comparable countries are inﬂuenced by the conﬂict itself,
        or they have not been fully exposed to the changes Syria would have
        experienced even in the absence of the conﬂict. This study employs synthetic
        control methods (SCM), which control for several factors (institutions, human
        capital, physical capital stock, population, and so forth) that cannot be
        controlled by simple benchmarking to produce counterfactual estimates for
        Syrian GDP (box 3.1). In addition, simple benchmarking and vector
        autoregression–based estimates are also computed for further checks.


        Figure 3.1: Conceptualization of Pre-Shock, Post-Shock, and Counterfactual
        Relationship

                                                         Counterfactual



                                                                                    Impact if
                                                                                 stock variable
Pre-shock

                                Impact if ﬂow variable




                                                          Post-shock
2010                                                           2016
THE TOLL OF WAR                                                                    81




The estimates under various techniques show similar outcomes: Syrian GDP
was forecast to continue growing without the conﬂict, albeit at a slower rate
than during the pre-conﬂict era. Figure 3.2 depicts two synthetically
constructed Syrian real GDP per capita estimates, which use diﬀerent weights
obtained from the two diﬀerent donor pools using SCM. First, it is important
to note that the in-sample estimates provided a good match with the actual
series before the conﬂict. SCM1 is preferred to SCM2, as the former better
reﬂects the impact of declining oil prices in growth in 2015 and 2016, as the
donor pool is restricted to countries with known similar structural features
(including oil exporters). Overall, however, both techniques estimate a GDP
per capita of around about $6,000 (in 2010 dollars) in 2016, compared with
about $5,700 in 2010.

Figure 3.2: Comparing the Counterfactual Real GDP per Capita by Different
Methodologies with Actual Estimates

US$                                           Syria                                         US$
8,000                                 (Real GDP per capita $)                               8,000

7,000                                                                                       7,000

6,000                                                                                       6,000

5,000                                                                                       5,000

4,000                                                                                       4,000

3,000                                                                                       3,000

2,000                                                                                       2,000

1,000                                                                                       1,000

   0                                                                     0
    1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014 2016


          Syria           Counterfactual              Counterfactual             Counterfactual
                          (SCM1)                      (SCM2)                     (VAR Model)


 Box 3.1: Counterfactual GDP Calculations

 The Synthetic Control Methods (SCM) was developed by Abadie and Gardeazabal
 (2003) and Abadie et al. (2010). SCM allows the creation of a control group without
 needing to ﬁnd one country or case study. The approach also avoids the
 arbitrariness of the selection of the control group, by relying on a combination of
 comparator countries that best approximate the characteristics of the country that
 is exposed to the shock. A combination of comparator countries is likely to produce
 a better control/comparison group for the country exposed to the shock than any
 one comparison unit alone.
82                                          Disentangling the Economic Impact of the Conflict




 Box 3.1 (cont.): Counterfactual GDP Calculations

 By checking the pre-shock diﬀerences between the outcome variable for Syria and
 the synthetic Syria, we are able to judge the quality of the control group. We can
 then create the counterfactual outcomes for Syria, by controlling for the eﬀect of
 the conﬂict through identiﬁcation of the comparator countries that best predict the
 historical development of Syria prior to the conﬂict, by using a set of predictors.
 This produces a set of weights for each country (most end up being 0, as they are
 not relevant) and these weights are used to construct a synthetic Syria series based
 on the actual outcomes for the comparator countries during the period of the
 conﬂict, to produce a counterfactual Syria.

 Finally, this approach allows us to conduct robustness checks by way of p-values, by
 conducting the same approach on every other country in the donor pool to produce
 a distribution of eﬀects, and seeing the signiﬁcance of Syria’s post-treatment
 diﬀerence compared with all other countries. This allows us to build a conﬁdence
 level for our inference that conﬁrms that the variation in the data is due to the
 impact of the treatment (conﬂict). In this exercise, this will be frivolous, as the
 impact of the conﬂict is so severe and pervasive that there will necessarily be a very
 large variation between the counterfactual outcomes and the actual outcomes.

 Speciﬁcation and Data
 Following the endogenous growth theory literature, the vector of predictors that
 was selected to explain economic growth included the stock of physical capital,
 stock of human capital, democracy proxy, trade openness, and population growth.
 This is a common speciﬁcation for cross-country growth simulations and was most
 recently utilized by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) in its SCM estimation of
 reform eﬀects (Adhikari et al. 2016).

 The data rely on a cross-country panel data set for the period between 1990 and
 2011. The outcome of interest is real gross domestic product per capita, but we
 also employ the technique for population growth. The majority of the data was
 sourced from the Penn World Tables until 2014, then data from the IMF World
 Economic Outlook data were used to extend the data until 2016. These variables
 capture, in a broad sense, the impact of institutions, demography, and
 macroeconomic conditions in addition to traditional growth accounting variables,
 such as the stock of physical and human capital.

 Before conducting the SCM to construct Syria’s macroeconomic counterfactual
 scenario, we had to ensure that none of the comparators that were selected
 violated the exogeneity criterion. Explicitly, we needed to avoid countries that were
 involved or signiﬁcantly aﬀected by the conﬂict. To take this a step further, there is
 also an argument to restrict the donor pool to countries that have structural
 similarities to Syria. For example, if the SCM is conducted and ﬁnds that Tuvalu, a
 small island country in the Paciﬁc Ocean with 10,000 people, shared a similar
 growth path to Syria historically, there may be suﬃcient grounds to imagine this
 was a spurious correlation. Accordingly, we conduct the SCM using two donor
 pools of countries. The ﬁrst donor pool is a restricted group based on the countries
 identiﬁed as comparator countries. The second donor pool is all countries in the
 world excluding those that were involved in or signiﬁcantly aﬀected by the conﬂict.
THE TOLL OF WAR                                                                        83




 Figure 3.3: Actual and Counterfactual GDPs and Cumulative GDP Losses


                                            Real GDP (US$ 2010)
               80                                                                                  250

               70
                                                                                                   200
               60
US$ billions




                                                                                                         US$ billions
               50                                                                                  150
               40
                                                                                                   100
               30

               20
                                                                                                   50
               10

               0                                                                                   0
               2006   2007   2008   2009   2010   2011   2012     2013   2014   2015        2016


                      Counterfactual          Real GDP               Cumulative diﬀerence
                      (SCM1)                  (US$ 2010)             (Real GDP US$ 2010) (RHS)

 Source: World Bank staﬀ estimates.

 What is the impact of the conﬂict on Syrian GDP? The impact is calculated by
 using the SCM1 counterfactual (which is broadly similar to that of SCM2) and
 the estimates for the actual GDP per capita of Syria presented in the previous
 chapter. Actual GDP fell US$51 billion (in 2010 prices) short of the
 counterfactual GDP in 2016. From 2011 to 2016, the accumulated impact on
 real GDP is estimated to be US$226 billion (in 2010 prices, Figure 3.3), nearly
 two times the GDP in 2010. This is mostly driven by the steep drop-oﬀ in
 actual GDP estimates, leading to a 63 percent reduction in the size of the GDP
 compared with 2010. Once the conﬂict ends and Syria begins reconstruction,
 based on previous experiences in post-conﬂict economies, actual GDP will
 quickly rebound and start closing the gap with the counterfactual.
 Nevertheless, given the intensity and protracted nature of the conﬂict, the
 losses will have permanent eﬀects on the well-being of many generations.

 Beyond GDP

 GDP is an imperfect measure of well-being even in peaceful times, and more
 so during conﬂict. By denoting the value of aggregate ﬁnal goods and services
 produced in a year, including the production of military assets that are
 “consumed” by the public, GDP, by itself, does not fully capture the complex
 eﬀects of the conﬂict on Syrians’ well-being. For instance, an important aspect
 of the conﬂict’s impact is on the life expectancy of Syrians, which is estimated
 to have fallen from 74.4 years in 2010 to 69.5 years in 2016 (World Health
 Organization), both measured at birth. This ﬁve-year drop in life expectancy
   84                                                        Disentangling the Economic Impact of the Conflict




   has set Syria back about three decades (the last time the Syrian life
   expectancy at birth was recorded at 69.5 years was in 1988). Even when the
   welfare of an average Syrian citizen is simply measured by her income and
   longevity only, it is obvious that focusing only on income changes over several
   years is insuﬃcient (ﬁgure 3.4). Yet, because income and life expectancy are
   measured in diﬀerent units (dollars and life-years, respectively), measuring the
   deterioration in welfare requires some sort of a conversion between the two.


   Figure 3.4: Indifference Map for Income and Life Expectancy in Syria

                          80




                          75                                 2010




                          70           2016
Life expectancy (years)




                          65




                          60




                          55




                          50
                               500   1000   1500   2000   2500   3000    3500     4000     4500     5000     5500
                                                          Income (US$)

   Source: Onder, Ponthiere, and Pestieau (2017).


   A simple calculation shows that the loss due to reduced life expectancy could
   be as high as 45 percent of pre-conﬂict income. Onder, Ponthiere, and
   Pestieau (2017) use an “equivalent income approach” to quantify the
   domestic welfare loss associated with decreasing life expectancy in a simple
   way. This involves comparing the lifetime welfares of an average Syrian citizen
   (welfare is deﬁned as based on income and longevity) before the conﬂict and
   at the sixth year of the conﬂict. Since longevity and income are lower in the
   sixth year of the conﬂict than before it, welfare is also lower, unambiguously
THE TOLL OF WAR                                                                                                         85




(ﬁgure 3.4). The next step is to decompose the welfare eﬀects determined by
income loss and longevity loss. To do this, the income in the sixth year of the
conﬂict is increased hypothetically until it reaches a level (equivalent income)
where the person reaches her pre-conﬂict welfare, while holding the short
longevity ﬁxed. The results show that this hypothetical income level could
exceed the actual pre-conﬂict income by 45 percent. With actual income
decreasing by about half because of the conﬂict in this simple exercise, the
welfare loss because of decreasing longevity is signiﬁcant.27

The next section extends this analysis by introducing an extended set of
impact indicators. To provide a more comprehensive assessment of impact,
which takes into consideration the medium and long-term eﬀects of the
conﬂict, the analysis next turns to combining the damage and loss
assessments developed so far and producing indicators of impact that capture
diﬀerent dimensions in a consistent manner.

Integrative Framework
This section of the report focuses on the prominent underlying factors that
shaped the impact of the conﬂict on Syrians. To assess the unmeasured
dimensions of the impact of the conﬂict, this section will employ a simulation
model (Artuc and Onder 2017). Figure 3.5 illustrates the main operating
principles of the simulation model; box 3.2 provides a summary of the model’s
characteristics, and the appendix to this report contains the formal deﬁnitions.

The ﬁrst objective is to assess the relative importance of each channel
through which the conﬂict might have manifested its impact. The analysis
focuses on the following three major conﬂict-related mechanisms to explain
the overall economic impact. Table 3.1 shows the baseline and alternative
speciﬁcations of shocks and other factors, followed by the analytical approach.

• Capital destruction. This encompasses the damage to all economically
 relevant physical capital, including infrastructure, machinery, and buildings.
 The extent of destruction is determined by using the physical damage
 assessments in the housing sector across governorates.

• Casualties. This focuses on directly conﬂict-related casualties, which rely on
  the midpoint of the casualty estimates provided in the previous chapter.
  Aside from the obvious distress and welfare impacts on families, the
  economic impact of casualties includes reduction in productive labor and
  forcible displacement of Syrians.

27
      The roles played by income and longevity are relatively robust to alternative parametrizations of the Constant
     Relative Risk Aversion period utility function used in this exercise. However, the role of longevity varies between
     alternative measurement methods when losses in social welfare are calculated. An ex ante approach measures
     social welfare by taking a uniform life expectancy at birth for all Syrians; thus, reduction in life expectancy aﬀects
     the lifetime welfare of all individuals in the same manner. An ex post approach, however, takes into account the
     variation in actual life spans among individuals. The ex post approach penalizes early mortalities, especially when
     the social welfare function reﬂects aversion to inequality, and thus, the estimated welfare impact of the conﬂict
     is higher in this case.
86                                       Disentangling the Economic Impact of the Conflict




• Economic disorganization. This comprises all factors that lead to reduced
  productivity or idleness in factors of production, including, but not limited
  to, losses in network access and connectivity (which may reduce access to
  input and marketing opportunities), reduced participation in economic
  activity arising from security concerns, and any other intangible capital that
  may have been destroyed. Methodologically, this component provides a
  residual category in calibrations: given capital destruction and casualties,
  the level of economic disorganization was chosen to target observable
  outcomes (changes in GDP and interregional mobility).

Next, the analysis focuses on the role of mobility in shaping the impact of the
conﬂict on Syrians’ well-being. The demographic analysis in the previous
section showed that one of the most striking consequences of the conﬂict has
been the large-scale demographic displacement of Syrians. On the one hand,
the exodus of people from conﬂict-prone regions may improve welfare by
reducing casualties. On the other hand, demographic mobility could further
reduce economic activity, as displaced people do not immediately integrate
into the labor markets at destination. To assess the relative importance of
these eﬀects, the analysis will compare the baseline results with alternative
scenarios where moving out of the country or all mobility (internal and
external) is restricted.

The impact of the conﬂict will propagate past the immediate end of the
conﬂict, whenever it happens, as shown by the use of diﬀerent conﬂict
end-date scenarios. The recovery in investment and capital stock may take
place relatively rapidly, but the recovery of human capital and economic
organization will take years, if not decades. The persistence of these eﬀects is
particularly signiﬁcant when conﬂict is protracted. The longer is the conﬂict,
the deeper are the eﬀects. Thus, to put the baseline impact estimates into
perspective, the analysis will consider alternative end-dates to the conﬂict.
The baseline scenario assumed that the conﬂict ends within the current year
(2017). The next scenario will extend this date to 2020. The ﬁnal scenario will
assume that the conﬂict does not end in the near future, and this will provide
a worst-case benchmark. The analysis assumes that, when the conﬂict
continues, the additional years of conﬂict have the same damage ratio and
geographical composition as previous years. Although this assumption is not
perfect, it is less arbitrary than other potential assumptions for the future path
the conﬂict may take.

In all cases, various indicators are used to compare the eﬀects of the
underlying factors. The analysis compares diﬀerent scenarios on the basis of
their outcomes in various indicators, including ﬂow variables in annual terms
like GDP and wages. In addition, these eﬀects are accumulated over various
periods (for example, from the beginning to the end of the conﬂict as well as
benchmark years after the end of the conﬂict). To put these numbers in
perspective, we compare them with the corresponding annual pre-conﬂict
values. Finally, the present values of future wages are also reported to provide
a more continuous observation of the eﬀects on material well-being.
THE TOLL OF WAR                                                                                         87




Figure 3.5: Simulation Diagram


BEFORE CONFLICT



                                                                      OTHER REGIONS




           CAPITAL                         NETWORKS                               LABOR
 Depreciates at a normal rate,    Link active capital and active    In each period, decides to move
  replenished by investment      workers at a normal rate (allows   to another region/sector or not
                                   equilibrium unemployment)          in a “smart” way (by taking all
                                                                           future outcomes into
                                                                              consideration)

AFTER CONFLICT



                                                                      OTHER REGIONS




            CAPITAL                        NETWORKS                              LABOR
   Depreciates at a high rate      Link active capital and active   Given higher probability of death
      (calibrated by using            workers at a lower rate       and low livelihood opportunities,
    remote-sensing damage         (calibrated by targeting actual       emigrates at a faster rate
assessments), replenishment by     GDP and migration patterns)
    investment slows down
88                                            Disentangling the Economic Impact of the Conflict




 Box 3.2: Simulation Model

 The simulation model builds on the model in Alix-Garcia, Artuc, and Onder (2017)
 and extends it in various aspects, including the characterization of a conﬂict
 environment and a built-in matching mechanism. The model comprises 14 regions
 (governorates) in Syria and a stylized outside region to account for outmigration.
 Agents, who are identical otherwise, choose a region in which to live and work
 every period. Moving to a diﬀerent region entails a one-time cost, which has a ﬁxed
 and a random component.

 Agents
 An agent can be employed (active) or unemployed (inactive). Active agents are paid
 wages that are determined by market conditions, while inactive workers get a
 (small) ﬁxed income, for example, a transfer. When a worker moves to a new region,
 she is initially inactive. She searches for a job and is matched to a vacancy in the
 region with some probability, which increases when the size of the pool of
 searchers (new arrivals, new separations, and unmatched workers from previous
 periods) is small. The number of matches is determined by a Cobb-Douglas
 matching technology. For simplicity, the separation probability is assumed to be
 equal to the capital depreciation rate. The matched worker-employer pair
 constitutes a factor of production, that is, a job. This factor produces an output
 together with the capital factor via a Cobb-Douglas production function, and it
 receives its marginal product. The employer and employees share this marginal
 product equally.

 The welfare of agents is characterized by a Constant Relative Risk Aversion (CRRA)
 utility function with various degrees of risk aversion. An important implication of
 this is that utility is assumed to be zero in the case of a death, which in principle may
 be disputed. A diﬀerent assumption, for example, a negative utility in the case of
 death, would have quantitative eﬀects on the computations of welfare (Onder,
 Ponthiere, and Pestieau (2017) employs a range of negative utilities from death in
 calculating equivalent incomes). The probability of death is speciﬁc to regions, and
 determined by the intensity of the conﬂict. For simplicity, we assume that the
 agents who migrate outside Syria (refugees) receive a ﬁxed, exogenously
 determined utility in every period with certainty.

 Capital
 The potential supply of capital is deﬁned over a ﬁxed continuum in each region, for
 example, land. Similar to workers, there are two types of capital: active and inactive.
 In each period, some of the active capital depreciates and becomes inactive. With
 the conﬂict, this depreciation rate increases and varies across diﬀerent regions.
 After becoming inactive, capital can be activated by investment, which requires an
 investment cost with ﬁxed and random components. If the investment cost is larger
 than the value diﬀerence of active and inactive capital, the capital stays inactive. If
 not, the capital becomes active after paying the cost. This decision is repeated for
 every unit of inactive capital every period.

 Capital receives a rent equal to the marginal product. The value of capital is
 calculated using the expected rents, probability of depreciation, and distribution of
 investment shocks. (It is similar to the case of the problem for workers, but simpler.)
THE TOLL OF WAR                                                                      89




 Box 3.2 (cont.): Simulation Model
 Shocks
 Shocks are stochastic, for example, they are unpredicted by agents. With economic
 disorganization shock, productivity decreases and the separation probability
 increases. Capital shock increases the capital depreciation rate signiﬁcantly, which
 is also reﬂected in investment decisions, as the depreciation rate changes the net
 returns to investment as well. A casualty shock not only leads to deaths in the
 current period, but also increases the probability of death in future periods; thus,
 when there is a casualty shock at some location, people perceive this as a security
 threat in the coming periods.

 Calibration
 The model’s parameters are calibrated with widely used standard approaches from
 the economics literature (risk aversion parameter in CRRA utility 0.9, annual capital
 depreciation in non-conﬂict years of 2.5 percent, and so forth). The shocks are
 calibrated to match the physical damages, cross-governorate and cross-border
 migration, and gross domestic product outcomes by the end of the six-year conﬂict,
 as summarized in the previous section. We did not aim to match the year-by-year
 changes within that six-year period.



This framework does not capture many other eﬀects. The simulations that
are presented here do not capture several important outcomes, including
environmental, cultural, political, and security-related eﬀects that are posed
by the conﬂict. These left-out eﬀects are nevertheless crucial determinants of
Syrians’ well-being. In addition, the results are presented in comparison with
pre-conﬂict levels, leaving aside the discussion on counterfactuals.

Table 3.1: Structure of the Simulation-Based Analysis


                                Baseline   Channels of impact      Mobility scenarios End scenarios
SHOCKS                            (1)       (2) (3) (4)            (5) (6) (7)          (8)   (9)
Capital destruction
Casualty
Economic disorganization


MOBILITY
Income-based mobility                                                      YES
Welfare-based mobility            YES       YES YES YES            YES YES                YES YES
Internal mobility allowed         YES       YES YES YES            NO YES YES             YES YES
External mobility allowed         YES       YES YES YES            NO NO YES              YES YES


END OF CONFLICT
Conﬂict end year                 2017      2017 2017 2017         2017 2017 2017          2021 n/a
90                                                           Disentangling the Economic Impact of the Conflict




Channels of Impact

The economic impact of the conﬂict is manifested through multiple channels.
The simulation results show that the negative eﬀects of the conﬂict are not
only generated by destruction of capital and human lives, but also by
behavioral responses, like reduction in investment in the baseline scenario.
With a combined shock, investments drop to about 80 percent lower than
their pre-conﬂict levels and remain there throughout the duration of the
conﬂict (table 3.1). This reduction is primarily driven by low expected returns
to investment: a decrease in overall productivity, a high destruction rate of
physical capital, and a decrease in available labor (as more than 3.5 million
Syrians leave the country in gross terms over the course of the conﬂict) bring
down the payoﬀ to investing. As a result, by the end of the conﬂict (which is
the end of the sixth year in the baseline), GDP remains at 65 percent lower
than its pre-conﬂict level. To put this in perspective, this reduction means a full
erosion of the economic achievements of the decade preceding the conﬂict.

Capital destruction, by itself, would have a relatively subdued eﬀect. To
assess the implications of physical capital destruction only, the simulations
turn to scenario 2 (capital destruction only), as speciﬁed in Table 3.1. This
includes using the rate of destruction observed in physical damage
assessments as of February 2017 to calibrate the capital destruction shock.
The results show that if the conﬂict only destroyed capital (at the same rate it
has done so far), without other eﬀects, its impacts on income and welfare
would be relatively limited. To see why, note that when only capital is
destroyed, investments decrease by about 22 percent from the initial level
relatively quickly and remain there throughout the years of the conﬂict. In
comparison, they decrease by 80 percent when all shocks (capital destruction,
casualties, and economic disorganization) are introduced in the baseline
scenario.28 In the absence of other eﬀects on labor and productivity, an
increase in capital depreciation/destruction does not reduce proﬁtability as
much. This mechanism highlights a remarkable diﬀerence between natural
disasters and conﬂicts. When a natural disaster destroys built capital in a
well-functioning market economy with strong institutions, the recovery of
capital stock is rapid, and impacts are not persistent. Conﬂicts are diﬀerent:
casualties, demographic movements, and lower returns to investment
compound the damage to physical capital. As a result, the eﬀective losses due
to physical capital damages are more pronounced, and they can linger into the
future at a much higher rate than in natural disasters.



28
     To see why investments can decrease in the case of the capital-destruction-only scenario, there are two distinct
     mechanisms that aﬀect the incentives to invest in our model. First, given a ﬁxed continuum of capital in diﬀerent
     cities (for example, land), which prevents an excessive agglomeration after a shock, there is an upper bound to
     investment, which becomes more binding as demographic mobility concentrates population in conﬂict-free
     areas. Second, in a given location, the investment decision is aﬀected by two factors: the return to capital in a
     given period and the probability of further physical damages in future periods. Thus, even when capital
     destruction increases the marginal productivity of capital, and thus return to investment in a given period, a
     sustained attrition in physical capital may still deter investments.
THE TOLL OF WAR                                                               91




Stability and a conducive business environment are crucial for investments to
play a major role during recovery. The result above shows that destruction of
capital hurts most when it is combined with factors restricting the expected
returns to investment. These include human capital loss, demographic
dispersion, institutional degradation, and escalation in rent-seeking behavior.
All these are prominent in the current conﬂict. In the absence of such
complications, investment could jump back to pre-conﬂict levels quickly, and
help the economy recover rapidly along with recovery and reconstruction
eﬀorts. Simulations show that investments would be back to their pre-conﬂict
level four years after the end of the conﬂict in a capital-destruction-only
scenario. Historical experience in countries like post-war Germany and Japan,
where conﬂict did not recur, also support this view. For instance, Davis and
Weinstein (2002) show that the Japanese cities that were bombed during
World War II reached their pre-conﬂict relative sizes vis-à-vis other cities in
about 20 years after the end of the war. In comparison, post-conﬂict recovery
is much slower in countries with a high risk of resurgence in violence. Mueller,
Piomentese, and Tapsoba (2017) show that this is because, in peaceful years,
post-conﬂict countries with a high likelihood of conﬂict recurrence grow no
faster than countries with no conﬂict history and substantially slower during
the resurgence of violence.

Casualties are the primary drivers of outmigration. When the conﬂict brings
about casualties only (scenario 3 in table 3.1), the impact on GDP is found to
be comparable to that of capital destruction. In both cases, the current GDP
eﬀects remain less than 5 percent, compared with the pre-conﬂict levels
during the years of conﬂict. Behind this similarity, however, lies a major
diﬀerence between the two. Conﬂict-related casualties lead to a massive
exodus of Syrians, whereas capital destruction does not. Simulations show
that about 2.5 million out-migrants of 3.5 million in the baseline can be
attributed to casualty-related factors alone. This reduces GDP, but not at a
drastic level, because the decrease in investment remains relatively modest in
this case. Investment decreases by about 22 percent in the
capital-destruction-only scenario and only about 14 percent in the
casualty-only scenario.

The impact of casualties is much more persistent than that of the other
shocks. The accumulated losses in GDP reach 93 percent of the annual
pre-conﬂict GDP by the 20th year after the beginning of the conﬂict (table 3.2
and ﬁgure 3.6). Only a sixth of this eﬀect takes place during the years of the
conﬂict. In comparison, the accumulated loss is 26 percent of GDP in the
capital destruction scenario. About two-thirds of this eﬀect is manifested
during the conﬂict.
               92                                                 Disentangling the Economic Impact of the Conflict




               Table 3.2: Combined and Isolated Impacts of Shocks
               (Outmigration in millions; other variables in comparison to their pre-conflict
               values in percentage terms)


                                             Conﬂict                                        Post-conﬂict
               1st Year 2nd Year 3rd Year 4th Year 5th Year 6th Year             10th Year 15th Year 20th Year
BASELINE (COMBINED SHOCKS)
Investment   -83.18  -81.77         -80.61      -79.58    -78.66      -77.80       -13.77     -7.31      -6.50
Outmigration    0.81       0.70       0.63      0.58       0.53        0.49         0.00       0.00       0.00
Wages          -54.99     -54.81    -54.70      -54.64    -54.60      -54.57       -23.53     10.31       8.55
GDP            -58.34     -60.60    -62.20      -63.42    -64.38      -65.15       -42.38     -13.16     -11.12

CAPITAL DESTRUCTION ONLY
Investment     -23.07     -22.85    -22.73      -22.65    -22.60      -22.57        0.01      -0.03      -0.04
Outmigration    0.00       0.00       0.00      0.00       0.00        0.00         0.00       0.00       0.00
Wages           -1.54     -2.31      -2.70      -2.92      -3.04       -3.10       -0.13       0.02       0.04
GDP             -1.62     -2.44      -2.89      -3.16      -3.34       -3.46       -0.59      -0.31      -0.23

CASUALTY ONLY
Investment     -13.25     -13.41    -13.71      -14.04    -14.38      -14.71       -5.76      -5.57      -5.18
Outmigration    0.71       0.51       0.40      0.34       0.29        0.26         0.00       0.00       0.00
Wages           0.84       1.66       2.41      3.08       3.69        4.26         6.55       6.57       6.11
GDP             -1.88     -2.33      -2.64      -3.00      -3.42       -3.89       -5.13      -5.82      -5.87

DISORGANIZATION ONLY
Investment     -75.46     -75.04    -74.70      -74.41    -74.15      -73.91       -9.09      -2.62      -2.21
Outmigration    0.13       0.14       0.15      0.15       0.16        0.16         0.00       0.00       0.00
Wages          -54.52     -53.89    -53.34      -52.86    -52.42      -52.02       -27.22      4.09       2.97
GDP            -55.97     -57.08    -57.95      -58.66    -59.26      -59.76       -37.05     -6.63      -4.98


               Note: Outmigration is reported in millions and in gross terms.

               wages increase. Focusing exclusively on a single indicator, for example,
               current wages, could imply that conﬂict is good for Syrians. However, this is
               obviously misleading, because it does not take into consideration the
               well-being of the deceased. Although the survivors may experience an
               increase in GDP, the Syrian population incurs signiﬁcant welfare losses in
               aggregate. As the eﬀects of the conﬂict extend well beyond casualties, the
               casualty-only scenario is purely illustrative of the impact that the casualty
               channel has on key economic variables.

               The bulk of the impact of the conﬂict is associated with disruptions in
               economic organization. Using capital damage and the casualty number
               estimates from the damage assessments, our simulations show that the bulk
               of the conﬂict’s economic impact must be associated not with the net
               decrease in productive factors of production, but with how the remaining
               productive factors are put to use. The conﬂict not only destroys productive
  THE TOLL OF WAR                                                                                                                      93




     Figure 3.6: Dynamics of Impact under Various Shock Scenarios


       CUMULATIVE CHANGE IN GDP
                                              End of conﬂict        End of conﬂict        End of conﬂict        End of conﬂict
                                                                      +3 years              +5 years              +10 years
                                      0
                                   -100
Percent of initial GDP




                                   -200
                                   -300
                                   -400
                                   -500
                                   -600
                                   -700
                                   -800

       CUMULATIVE CHANGE IN WAGES
                                              End of conﬂict        End of conﬂict        End of conﬂict        End of conﬂict
                                                                      +3 years              +5 years              +10 years
                                    200
                                    100
Percent of initial wage




                                      0
                                   -100
                                   -200
                                   -300
                                   -400
                                   -500
                                   -600


                                   Capital destruction         Casualty      Economic disorganization             Combined shock

        PRESENT VALUE OF FUTURE WAGES
                                    15

                                    10
Deviation from initial value %5)




                                      5

                                      0

                                     -5

                                    -10

                                    -15

                                    -20

                                    -25
                                          0                     5                    10                    15                    20
                                                                                 Years
                                          Capital destruction               Casualty               Economic disorganization           Combined shock
94                                                          Disentangling the Economic Impact of the Conflict




factors, it also increases rent seeking and cronyism, prevents the connectivity
of people, reduces their incentive to pursue productive activities, and breaks
economic networks and supply chains. Simulations show that these factors,
which are captured by changes in total productivity and matching mechanisms
built into the model, by themselves would lead to reduction of GDP by more
than half over the course of the conﬂict. In cumulative terms, losses in GDP
are equivalent to six times the annual pre-conﬂict GDP after 20 years.

In practice, there are many mechanisms that drive the disruptions in
economic organization. The simulation model in this report captures the
eﬀect on economic organization under two aggregate categories: a
diminished propensity of matching between active capital and labor and a
lower total factor productivity. In practice, there are many factors that feed
into these categories, including, but not limited to, higher trade costs,
disruptions in supply chains and other economic networks, and intensiﬁed
rent seeking. Unfortunately, many of these are not quantiﬁable with the
current level of access to information in Syria. The previous chapter showed
estimates for increased distance of travel among major cities, which can proxy
for higher trade costs; but that is only a small component of the problem.
Recently, the Syria Center for Policy Research, documented a signiﬁcant
decrease in Syrian social capital, deﬁned over three broad categories: social
networks and community participation, trust, and shared values and attitudes
(SCPR 2017). The study’s social capital index, which relies on a
community-based survey encompassing all governorates, registered a 30
percent decrease from the beginning of the conﬂict until mid-2014 when the
survey was conducted.29 This decline is largely explained by a sharp fall in the
community conﬁdence and networks components. Geographically speaking,
the composite index registered the highest decreases in Raqqa (80 percent),
Hasake (52 percent), and Idleb (47 percent). Such institutional degradation
must have had signiﬁcant eﬀects on the economy’s capability of putting
productive factors into use; however, characterizing the exact channels of
transmission and identifying the optimal oﬀsetting mechanisms are beyond
the scope of this report and will require more targeted studies.

Post-conﬂict planning should extend attention beyond physical destruction.
What would it take to ensure a rapid and sustainable economic recovery in the
post-conﬂict Syria? Our simulations and anecdotal evidence suggest that even
reinstating the lost capital, by itself, would not be suﬃcient to bring the
economy back to its pre-conﬂict level if institutional and organizational
challenges are not tackled simultaneously. Regardless of the source of
ﬁnancing, boosting public investments without a comprehensive approach


29
     The “Population Status Survey” was conducted with key informants in 698 residential areas across Syria. The
     social capital index is a simple average of three normalized components: social relations and networks (measured
     by participation in decision making, volunteering, problem solving cooperation, and women's participation);
     community trust (measured by trust between individuals and the sense of security); and common values,
     attitudes, or understandings (measured by the degree of consensus among the members of the community on a
     shared vision of the region, and the status of women in society).
THE TOLL OF WAR                                                             95




would trigger further rent seeking and cronyism, which were important
enabling factors in the conﬂict’s onset, as described in chapter 1. Thus,
recovery and reconstruction are by no means an engineering issue; our results
show that the issue is primarily an economic and social one, where the
incentives of Syrian citizens are at the core.

Role of Mobility

Mobility has important consequences for economic outcomes. But is it good
or bad for Syria? In a textbook economic framework with no externalities, the
ﬂexibility to move across regions or jobs always improves the eﬃciency of the
economy. However, does this conclusion hold in the case of a catastrophic
event like the conﬂict where about half of the country’s population is forced
to move? In this section, we will try to shed light on the role played by
displacement in shaping the impact of the conﬂict on the Syrian economy.

Why have Syrians migrated?

The exodus of millions of Syrians triggered a debate about the motivation
behind this movement. The conﬂict has led to a massive outflow of Syrians
from their homeland. In December 2016, the total number of registered Syrian
refugees was nearing ﬁve million (UNHCR). It is important to identify the push
and pull factors behind such movement in a careful and detailed manner.
Nevertheless, the analysis developed for this study can shed some light on the
relative importance of security and economic factors in explaining the
mobility of Syrians.

Security considerations dominate economic concerns in explaining
demographic mobility. Our simulations do not support the view that refugees
are mostly economic migrants. To shed light on the motivations to move, the
analysis considers a case where individuals are risk-neutral as opposed to
being risk-averse, which was assumed in the baseline (a widely accepted
moderate degree of risk aversion, σ=0.9, was chosen from the economics
literature). Overall, risk-neutral and risk-averse agents migrate by comparing
expected wages in diﬀerent locations; however, risk-averse agents “overreact”
and move away disproportionately when the probability of conﬂict-related
deaths increases. The results are shown in table 3.3. Holding everything else
constant (including the shocks), when agents are risk-neutral, gross outflows
are signiﬁcantly smaller than that in the baseline (about 10,000 refugees a
year during the conﬂict as opposed to more than half a million under the
baseline), and this happens although GDP and wages fall in a comparable
manner in these scenarios. This ﬁnding shows that a high emphasis on the
escalated probability of death that comes with the conﬂict is the primary
driver of mobility.
               96                                            Disentangling the Economic Impact of the Conflict




               Table 3.3: Economic Outcomes under Risk Neutrality
               (Migration in millions; other variables in comparison to their pre-conflict values in
               percentage terms)


                                          Conﬂict                                      Post-conﬂict
               1st Year 2nd Year 3rd Year 4th Year 5th Year 6th Year         10th Year 15th Year 20th Year
Investment     -84.72    -83.99   -83.30     -82.65   -82.02     -81.44        -8.47      -1.64     -0.91
Outmigration    0.01      0.01     0.01      0.01     0.01         0.01        0.00       0.00       0.00
Wages          -55.01    -54.62   -54.33     -54.11   -53.94     -53.82       -25.89      4.49       2.25
GDP            -59.37    -62.77   -65.38     -67.42   -69.04     -70.32       -47.11     -13.09     -7.79
PV of Wages    -23.77    -25.40   -26.53     -27.24   -27.60     -27.66       -16.99      -7.21     -3.84



               What would happen without mobility?

               The most direct implication of mobility restrictions would be a greater
               casualty rate. The cumulative conﬂict-related casualty in Syria was estimated
               at about 1.5 to 2 percent of the 2010 population as of December 2016. This
               ratio could easily climb rapidly if Syrians could not migrate. Migration
               restrictions involve accessibility barriers (like the diﬃculties of crossing the
               Mediterranean Sea) and policy barriers (like a destination country sealing oﬀ
               its borders against refugee arrivals). To account for the consequences of these,
               this analysis considers two additional scenarios. First, we assume that only
               outmigration is restricted; thus, no Syrians can leave the country, but they can
               become IDPs. Second, we restrict all mobility across the country; thus, nobody
               can become an IDP or a refugee.

               From an economic point of view, a restricted migration regime would
               increase the Syrian GDP but decrease per person income. Figure 3.7 shows
               the outcomes of the alternative scenarios. Both migration restriction
               scenarios show a relatively smaller GDP loss compared with the baseline. For
               instance, the GDP loss by the 20th year is about 670 percent of the annual
               pre-conﬂict GDP when all migration is restricted, and about 760 percent
               when mobility is free. In contrast, the average aggregate real wage losses
               amount to 535 percent of the average annual pre-conﬂict wage in the former,
               and only 433 percent in the baseline. This contrast is intuitive in this simple
               framework. Migration restrictions keep the labor force larger despite the
               additional casualties. This also increases labor per unit of capital, reducing
               marginal productivity and wages. As a result, each worker receives a smaller
               wage, but in aggregate, production increases because there are more workers.
               In a more complex, less stylized framework where, for example, trapped labor
               might be demotivated or actively resist supporting economic activity (for
               example, through strikes or major productivity slowdowns), it is not clear that
               we could not observe both a fall in GDP and in wages.
   THE TOLL OF WAR                                                                                                                   97




     Figure 3.7: Dynamics of Impact under Different Migration Restriction Scenarios
     (Baseline: Free Movement)


     CUMULATIVE CHANGE IN GDP
                                              End of conﬂict       End of conﬂict        End of conﬂict        End of conﬂict
                                                                     +3 years              +5 years              +10 years
                                   -300
Percent of initial GDP




                                   -400

                                   -500

                                   -600

                                   -700

                                   -800



     CUMULATIVE CHANGE IN WAGES
                                              End of conﬂict       End of conﬂict        End of conﬂict        End of conﬂict
                                                                     +3 years              +5 years              +10 years
                                   -300

                                   -350
Percent of initial GDP




                                   -400

                                   -450

                                   -500

                                   -550

                                   -600

                                   All migration restricted        Outmigration restricted        Baseline

     PRESENT VALUE OF FUTURE WAGES
                                      5

                                      0
Deviation from initial value (%)




                                     -5

                                    -10

                                    -15

                                    -20

                                    -25

                                    -30
                                          0                    5                    10                    15                    20
                                                                                 Years
                                          All migration              Outmigration restricted        Baseline
98                                      Disentangling the Economic Impact of the Conflict




What If…? The Lingering Impact of a Protracted Conflict

How will the conﬂict’s impact on the Syrian economy evolve if the conﬂict
does not stop in 2017? The baseline simulations assumed that the conﬂict
ends in 2017. Alternative conﬂict-end scenarios are considered to provide a
benchmark for the possible evolution of the conﬂict’s impact on the Syrian
economy. Thus, two alternative scenarios are shown: the conﬂict ends in its
10th year (2021) and the conﬂict does not end in the near future. In both
cases, shocks and parameters are the same as in the baseline speciﬁcation.

With protracted conﬂict, economic outcomes continue to deteriorate. In the
baseline, where conﬂict ends by the end of the sixth year, GDP recovers by
about 20 percentage points (as a share of pre-conﬂict GDP) by the 10th year
(table 3.4). In comparison, it continues to deteriorate in the alternative
conﬂict-end scenarios. In both alternative scenarios, GDP reaches a level that
is about 67 percent less than the pre-conﬂict level by the 10th year. In the
case of perpetual conﬂict, it reaches about 69 percent less than pre-conﬂict
GDP by the 20th year. These scenarios show that as the conﬂict persists, its
impact on current variables increases over time, but at a decreasing rate.
several factors drive this slowdown. As conﬂict-related damage takes place in
certain geographic areas and the additional years of the conﬂict are assumed
to have the same pattern, the economic base aﬀected by the conﬂict shrinks
over time. Migration drains the labor force in conﬂict-aﬀected regions and the
capital stock reaches a stable level with new damage and investment ratios.
Therefore, the economy converges to a new equilibrium, and adjustment
slows, compared with the initial years when the adjustment is rapid.

The longer the conﬂict persists, the slower the recovery would be once the
conﬂict ends. Simulations show that despite the moderation in the rate at
which the conﬂict aﬀects economic outcomes, its eﬀects become more
persistent. When the conﬂict ends in its sixth year, GDP recoups about 41
percent of the remaining gap with its pre-conﬂict level within the next four
years. In comparison, it recoups only 28 percent of the gap in four years if it
ends in its 10th year. The total loss in GDP reaches 760 percent of the annual
pre-conﬂict GDP by the 20th year in the baseline (ﬁgure 3.8). With a perpetual
conﬂict, this loss stands at 1,320 percent. When the conﬂict ends in the 10th
year, the present value of future wages recovers back to pre-conﬂict levels by
the 20th year. In the case of a perpetual conﬂict, it never recovers. Simulations
also show that outmigration doubles between the sixth year of the conﬂict
and the 20th year. Thus, the supply of migrants will not cease as long as there
is conﬂict.
THE TOLL OF WAR                                                                         99




Table 3.4: Economic Outcomes under Various Conflict End-Date Scenarios
(Migration in millions; other variables in comparison to their pre-conflict values in
percentage terms)


                                           Conﬂict
               1st Year 2nd Year 3rd Year 4th Year 5th Year 6th Year     10th Year 15th Year 20th Year
BASELINE (CONFLICT ENDS IN 6TH YEAR)
Investment   -83.18   -81.77   -80.61         -79.58   -78.66   -77.80    -13.77    -7.31      -6.50
Outmigration     0.81     0.70      0.63      0.58     0.53     0.49       0.00         0.00   0.00
Wages           -54.99   -54.81    -54.70     -54.64   -54.60   -54.57    -23.53    10.31      8.55
GDP             -58.34   -60.60    -62.20     -63.42   -64.38   -65.15    -42.38    -13.16     -11.12

CONFLICT ENDS IN 10TH YEAR
Investment   -83.18   -81.77       -80.61     -79.58   -78.66   -77.80    -74.84    -14.83     -7.80
Outmigration     0.81     0.70      0.63      0.58     0.53     0.49       0.00         0.00   0.00
Wages           -54.99   -54.81    -54.70     -54.64   -54.60   -54.57    -54.49    -17.22     11.38
GDP             -58.34   -60.60    -62.20     -63.42   -64.38   -65.15    -67.10    -40.00     -14.37

PERPETUAL CONFLICT
Investment  -83.18       -81.77    -80.61     -79.58   -78.66   -77.80    -74.84    -71.82     -69.36
Outmigration     0.81     0.70      0.63      0.58     0.53     0.49       0.37         0.26   0.19
Wages           -54.99   -54.81    -54.70     -54.64   -54.60   -54.57    -54.49    -54.39     -54.31
GDP             -58.34   -60.60    -62.20     -63.42   -64.38   -65.15    -67.10    -68.23     -68.75
     100                                                                         Disentangling the Economic Impact of the Conflict




     Figure 3.8: Dynamics of Impact under Various Conflict End-Date Scenarios


     CUMULATIVE CHANGE IN GDP
                                                 7th year          10th year            15th year         20th year
                                    -300

                                    -500
Percent of initial GDP




                                    -700

                                    -900

                                   -1100

                                   -1300

                                   -1500



     CUMULATIVE CHANGE IN WAGES
                                                 7th year          10th year            15th year         20th year
                             -300
                             -400
Percent of initial GDP




                             -500
                             -600
                             -700
                             -800
                             -900
                            -1000
                            -1100
                            -1200

                                    Perpetual conﬂict       Conﬂict ends in 10th year       Baseline (conﬂict ends in 7th year)

     PRESENT VALUE OF FUTURE WAGES
                                     10

                                       0
Deviation from initial value (%)




                                    -10

                                    -20

                                    -30

                                    -40

                                    -50

                                    -60
                                           0                   5                10                  15                  20
                                                                              Years
                                           Perpetual conﬂict            Conﬂict ends in 10th year        Baseline (conﬂict ends in 7th year)
A Syrian refugee family, from Aleppo, staying under a shelter during a rainy day on March 8, 2014, at Uskudar in Istanbul.
                                                                             Photo Credit: Bulent Kilic/AFP/Getty Images.




                                              CONCLUDING REMARKS
102                                                            Concluding Remarks




CONCLUDING REMARKS
As this report was being prepared, the conﬂict was still active. By the     end
of March 2017, conﬂict was still active in large number of fronts,          and
despite much eﬀorts brokered by many parties, including those of            the
international community, a stabilization and resolution path out of         the
conﬂict remained elusive.

The economic and social impacts of the conﬂict will continue to unfold, albeit
with diﬀerent magnitude and composition. The brief account outlined in this
report stressed the combination of several risk factors that contributed to the
onset, duration, and intensity of the conﬂict. These included a mass popular
mobilization spurred by the spread of the Arab Spring to Syria in 2011, a larger
regional context in which armed rebellion was made feasible and was kept
going by the support of various powers, and the increasingly sectarian
character of the conﬂict, which made credible commitments to a reasonable
resolution impossible. Whereas the ﬁrst two factors may be deemed passé as
of now, the last factor is not. More importantly, the economic and social
impacts of the conﬂict may in turn determine the future path of the conﬂict.

The importance of economic factors in shaping the outcomes on the ground
has increased. An important question that arises from the analysis thus far is
the following: in what direction could the economic impact of the conﬂict
aﬀect peace and stability? It is obviously very diﬃcult to answer this question.
However, it is unambiguous that the conﬂict has increased regional
inequalities, war economy, and rent seeking, and further depressed civil
liberties and polarized the Syrian society. Although these factors played only
an enabling role for the onset of the current conﬂict, with much worsened
outcomes now, they could play a more prominent role in further complicating
a reasonable stabilization.

The economic and social impacts of the conﬂict also amount to immense
practical challenges. Syria will eventually have to overcome a multitude of
urgent economic and social challenges to promote peace and stabilization.
The conﬂict has cast a wide swath of the population into poverty, and
reoriented several million toward livelihood sectors that will not be
sustainable in a post-war economy. A whole generation of children has
received inadequate education. This, coupled with a signiﬁcant brain-drain,
has caused a dramatic decline in Syria’s human capital. The immense spectrum
of needs arising from the conﬂict will require a strident response. Planning,
coordination, and implementation arrangements will need to reﬂect the dual
challenge of providing immediate peace dividends and humanitarian support
to those in need, while also strengthening the national systems and capacities
that are necessary to eliminate poverty, promote development objectives, and
help to implement a new vision for Syria.
           104                                                                       Appendix




           A P P E N D I X A . METHODOLOGY AND ASSESSMENTS

           Methodology of Physical Damage Assessments
           Physical damage assessments were conducted in two stages:

           a) City-level assessments. These provided an assessment of physical damage for
              the 10 cities (Aleppo, Dayr az-Zawr, Raqqa, Dar’a, Idlib, Douma, Kobane,
              Tadmur (Palmyra), Homs, and Hama) as of January 2017.

           b) Governorate-level assessments. These provided modiﬁed extrapolations of
              city-level assessments to estimate physical damage for the country’s eight
              most conﬂict-aﬀected governorates (Aleppo, Homs, Hama, Dayr az-Zawr,
              Raqqa, Dar’a, Idlib, and Rif Dimash).

           In both stages, the following sectors were included in the analysis: housing;
           water and sanitation (public network), energy (public network), health (public
           facilities), education (private and public facilities), and transportation (primary
           road network).

           City-Level Assessments

           The baseline for all six sectors was created and reﬁned for Aleppo, Dar’a,
           Homs, Hama, and Idlib cities during previously conducted Damage and Needs
           Assessments (DNAs). A baseline of facilities was created for the ﬁve cities not
           previously covered in DNA eﬀorts (Dayr az-Zawr, Douma, Kobani, Raqqa, and
           Tadmur). Table A.1 provides the number of facilities assessed per sector by city.

           Table A.1: Number of Facilities Assessed per Sector, by City

City      WASH       Power      Housing      Health     Education     TOTAL         Road
                                                                    FACILITIES     length

Aleppo    198         333        88,384        121          475        89,511    3,123,681
Dar’a      26          10        9,443          25          137         9,641     224,672
Dayr       23          40        5,712          42          120         5,937     479,199
az-Zawr
Douma      11          17        5,578          12          49          5,667  128,462
Hama       99         396        22,977         47          217        23,736  610,216
Homs       26         274        42,017         90          287        42,694 1,113,961
Idlib      30          70        5,896          15          56          6,067  181,346
Kobani     24           3        5,673           3          18          5,721  166,665
Raqqa      13          37        7,810          25          43          7,928  688,997
Tadmur      7          10        1,364           4          24          1,409  271,047
TOTAL     457        1,190      194,854        384         1,426      198,311 6,988,246
THE TOLL OF WAR                                                            105




Baseline identiﬁcation and remote-based veriﬁcation of the damage and
functionality of facilities was conducted through examination of (1)
commercial half-meter resolution imagery, (2) social media data, and (3)
publicly available sources of information, including Syrian government reports
and nongovernmental organization documents. Employing a multi-pronged
approach allowed for cross-validation of data and cycles of reﬁnement. In
addition, remote sensing data, such as Visible Infrared Imaging Radiometer
Suite day/night band light detection imagery, was consulted as part of the
analytic output testing process for the power sector. The physical status of
each facility was classiﬁed as follows:

• Destroyed, if damage exceeds 40 percent of the structure
• Partially damaged, if damage is less than 40 percent of the structure
• No damage, if damage is at 0 percent.

The operational status of each facility is also provided—functioning or not
functioning—as source reporting is available.

Governorate-Level Assessments

As the methodology developed for the city-level analysis relies on detailed
observations and labor-intensive analysis, repeating the same methodology
for the entire Syrian landscape was prohibited by timing and
resource-constraints. Thus, the governorate-level assessment employed
extrapolation of all six sectors to provide damage results for the eight
governorates in which the 10 surveyed cities are located. Baseline statistics
came from the following sources:

• Housing and water, sanitation, and hygiene (WASH): access to the public
  WASH network by residential units, from the Syrian Government 2004
  Housing Census).

• Power: data on major power plants from Syrian General Institute for
  Electricity Generation reports.

• Education: data on primary and secondary schools from the Syrian Center
  for Statistics 2010 Survey of the Syrian Education System.

• Health: data on private hospitals, public hospitals, medical centers, and
  specialized medical centers from the Syrian Center for Statistics 2010
  Survey on Syrian Medical Facilities.

• Transportation: data on main roads, highways, and primary roads from
  OpenStreetMap.

The extrapolation process required statistics to be compiled at the district
level (the administrative unit immediately below governorate); however, the
            106                                                                      Appendix




             education and schools data available from the Syrian Center for Statistics are
             only provided at the governorate level.

             Conﬂict dynamics analysis at the city and district levels facilitated
             extrapolation of city-level damage results to the governorate level.
             Speciﬁcally, this entailed creating a conﬂict-induced damage inference matrix;
             applying the matrix to cities to calculate composite sector damage estimates
             for high-, medium-, and low-conﬂict environments; applying the matrix to
             districts to ﬁrst assign expected high, medium, and low conﬂict-induced
             damage levels, and next transfer corresponding city-level composite damage
             percentages to baseline ﬁgures for the district; and ﬁnally, aggregating these
             district-level estimates to the governorate level.

             The conﬂict-induced damage inference matrix was developed to estimate
             high, medium, and low damage that take into account three major types of
             conﬂict tactics as well as their intensity. In addition, it factors in observed
             resilience in the country by including reconstruction (undertaken by a variety
             of local actors) as an indicator type (table A.2).


            Table A.2: Conflict-Induced Damage Inference Matrix


   Indicator Type         High Prevalence     Moderate Prevalence        Low Prevalence

Low intensity conﬂict     Widespread (3)           Targeted (2)         Close to none (1)
      Airstrikes          Widespread (3)           Targeted (2)         Close to none (1)
   Heavy Artillery        Widespread (3)           Targeted (2)         Close to none (1)
(Tanks, Mortars, etc.)
   Reconstruction          Extensive (-3)         Moderate (-2)        Limited or none (-1)

             Any city or district with less than 2 points was assigned a low damage
             estimate; 3 to 5, a medium damage estimate; and 6 or above, a high damage
             estimate. The damage inference matrix was applied to the 10 cities in the
             study, yielding the following damage category groupings:

             • High damage: Aleppo, Dayr az-Zawr, Douma, Idlib, and Tadmur
             • Medium damage: Dar’a, Kobani, Raqqa, and Homs
             • Low damage: Hama.

             Finally, the city composite estimates were used to calculate district- and
             governorate-level damage. Of 42 districts located in the eight governorates, 29
             districts were classiﬁed as high damage, eight districts as medium damage, and
             ﬁve districts as low damage. These composite percentages of damage were
             applied to the baseline ﬁgures for each district, at the high, medium, or low
             level as appropriate. This generated ﬁgures for housing, health, and education.
             The composite percentages for housing were also applied to the transportation
             sector (using total road length for the major road categories of highway, trunk,
             and primary roads as the baseline), as well as to the WASH sector (using total
             number of households accessing the public network as the baseline).
THE TOLL OF WAR                                                                                         107




A P P E N D I X B . SECTORAL SITUATION REPORTS
Table B.1: Situation Report: Water and Sanitation Infrastructure

City     Source                 Water Availability         Damages                                      Coping Mechanisms

Aleppo   150 Public and         As of 15 February 2017,    Pumping stations and piping network        Residents are
         300 Private Wells      no residents in Aleppo     heavily damaged, especially in eastern and dependent on wells
                                have accessed water via    southern neighborhoods                     and trucks
                                the public network since
                                14 January

Dara’a   Wells and Water        Public water network is    Damage to two pumping stations and           Wells and trucks, in
         Trucks                 not fully functional; in   connecting pipelines                         absence of public
                                opposition-held Dar’a                                                   networks; trucks face
                                al-Balad, no information                                                diﬃculty in entering
                                available on water                                                      opposition held
                                availability                                                            al-Balad

Dayr    Partially               Access to public network Largest water treatment station and most       Wells, Euphrates river
az-Zawr functioning public      is limited; al-Joura and pumping stations are damaged                   and water tank
        network                 al-Qusour
                                neighborhoods receive
                                water once every week
                                for a few hours, on
                                average

Douma    Wells and hand         Public water network is    Pipeline likely to be heavily damaged   Small scale wells and
         pumps                  cut oﬀ.                    because of frequent and heavy bombings, hand-pumps, few
                                                           some pumping stations damaged.          trucks

Hama     Public Network         90-100% coverage           Public network remains undamaged and         0-9% use truck or
                                through public network     functioning, but the main line outside the   alternative sources.
                                                           city is damaged

Homs     N/A                    N/A                        Partial damage                               Availability of 60
                                                                                                        wells acts as a
                                                                                                        back-up

Idlib    Public Network         No consistent water        Piping network damages, lack of              Trucks and wells
                                supply from public         electricity
                                network; Rotating
                                schedule, with each
                                neighborhood receiving
                                water every 12 days

Kobani   Partially              Some neighborhoods are Pumping stations and tanks are not               Trucks and wells
         functioning public     disconnected from public accessible, due to ISIS takeover and are
         network; city relies   network; supply limited  likely partially damaged
         on 15 wells to         in time and pressure in
         supply piped           connected
         network                neighborhoods

Raqqa    Public Network         Decreased/limited          Electricity and fuel shortages, stolen       N/A
                                supply                     equipment; water outages for long
                                                           periods due to air strikes, likely future
                                                           damages to pipeline through frequent
                                                           airstrikes

Tadmur   N/A                    No access to public        Extensive damage to piping network since
                                network                    the start of conﬂict and wells likely    N/A
                                                           remains partially damaged; likely more
                                                           damages due to latest ISIS takeover
                  108                                                                                                   Appendix




                  Table B.2: Situation Report: Power Infrastructure

City        Public Grid (hours of electricity hours per day) Commercial and Private Generators Comments

West        0-2 hours (January 2017). The                42%. Commercial and private            West Aleppo’s private
Aleppo      transmission line connecting Aleppo city     generators have become an              generators are regulated
            to the grid in Hama has been cut. Most       important source of electricity. 108   through the city’s public
            public infrastructure in Aleppo              private generators surveyed            electricity administration and
            governorate has been destroyed or            provided on average 8–10 hours of      are legally obliged to provide a
            disconnected.                                electricity per day.                   minimum of 10 hours of
                                                                                                electricity per day.

East        0 hours. The eastern districts of the city   No data available.                     Before the recapture by
Aleppo      have been largely destroyed and cut oﬀ                                              government forces, residents
            from public services.                                                               relied on a combination of
                                                                                                public and private generators, as
                                                                                                well as improvised solutions,
                                                                                                such as solar energy.

Damascus 4-12 hours. Reports suggest an average          No data available.                     Data for Damascus vary heavily
         of 12 hours of electricity a day, with                                                 by neighborhoods, especially
         peripheral neighborhoods faring worse:                                                 between central districts and
         Qudsaya 6 hours, downtown Mezzeh 4                                                     outlying suburbs.
         hours, Sahnaya and Barza 2 hours and
         Artouz 0 hours.


Douma       0 hours.- Douma has been cut from the        8% on average from private and         Private and commercial
            public grid.                                 commercial generators.                 generators reportedly rely on
                                                                                                the now disused public
                                                                                                electricity infrastructure.

Hama        1-9 hours. Most neighborhoods in Hama Commercial electricity generators             N/A
            receive between 5 and 9 hours of          are available and in use.
            electricity from the public grid per day.

Masyaf      4 hours.                                     No data available.                     N/A

Salamiyeh 2 hours.                                       No data available.                     N/A

Tadmur      0 hours. Following the recapture of the    Generators operate to support        The city experienced few power
(Palmyra)   city by ISIS in December 2016, electricity water wells and core infrastructure. outages prior to its initial
            has been cut.                                                                   capture by ISIS in May 2015.

Latakia     1-4 hours. Reports in January 2017 of     No data available.                        N/A
            total blackouts for entire areas (Dator
            and Ramlat Shmali), and 20 to 22 (Dahiet
            al-Assad, al-Tabiyat, Saliba) hours of
            rationing for most other neighborhoods.
            The situation is reportedly worse in the
            countryside. Syria Direct averages
            outages at 1 hour of electricity per day.

Tartus      6 hours. Oﬃcials from Tartus claim 1.5       No data available.                     N/A
            hours of electricity alternating with 4.5
            hours of rationing (December 2016).

Idlib       Up to 1.2 hours for most neighborhoods, Roughly 75% of Idlib residents own          Idlib’s public electricity system
            except ad-Dabit (4 hours) and           or subscribe to 29 private electricity      relies on 11 public generators
            Market/City Center (2 hours).           generators (range 55% in                    administered by the
                                                    al-Arbaeen to 95% in As-Souq and            opposition’s Public Services
                                                    Hadiqat al-Basel). Operators are            Administration. The city has
                                                    allowed to provide up to 4.5 hours          been cut oﬀ from the central
                                                    per day (July 2016), 18.75%.                state electricity grid.


Raqqa       8 hours. The city receives on average 8      No data available.                     N/A
            hours of electricity primarily from
            Al-Furat Hydroelectric Dam.

Kobani      24 hours. Local sources report that by       No data available.                     N/A
            January 2017, residents received 24
            hours of electricity from the public grid.
THE TOLL OF WAR                                                                                            109




Table B.3: Situation Report: Health Care Facilities

City      Health Status                                                 Alternative Arrangements/Other Eﬀorts

Aleppo    • 58% of facilities in Aleppo have been destroyed or      • Eastern Aleppo is heavily reliant on temporary health
            damaged.                                                  points and mobile clinics
          • 84% of facilities in Eastern Aleppo were reported to be • IDP camps in outskirts only have access to mobile
            non-functioning.                                          clinics.

Dara’a    • 65% of facilities are partially damaged                     • In Dara’a Al-Mahata, government attempts to re-staﬀ
          • Both government-controlled Dar’a al-Mahatta and               hospitals and provide new equipment.
            opposition-controlled Dar’a al-Balad experience             • In Dara’a Al-Balad, support is received from medical
            shortages of staﬀ.                                            NGOs.
          • Hospitals in both areas are under threat.                   • Some medicines and equipment were also smuggled
                                                                          from government-controlled areas.

Dayr    • 88% of facilities have been destroyed or damaged              • Patients in need from opposition-controlled areas
az-Zawr • six facilities are currently functioning                        were transported to Turkey or regional hospitals.
        • shortage of medicines and medical supply                      • Syrian government has reportedly air dropped a ton of
                                                                          medical aid into western Dayr az-Zawr
                                                                        • International NGOs have been providing medical
                                                                          supplies to the city via airdrop since the start of the
                                                                          siege in 2014

Douma • All facilities partially damaged and only two facilities        N/A
        functioning in the city

Hama      N/A                                                           N/A

Homs      N/A                                                           N/A

Idlib     • Facilities operate with limited capacity; of 15 identiﬁed   • There are evidences of opening of new facilities and
            facilities, 9 remain partially damaged, 3 are destroyed,      also staﬀ hiring announcements
            and 3 are intact.

Kobani    • Two out three hospitals are functioning, one is             • The two functioning hospitals were rebuild/repaired
            experiencing shortages in medical supplies and                and re-opened.
            equipment

Raqqa     • Before crisis, private clinics provided most of Raqqa’s     • International aid organizations began providing health
            health care services; there was only one large public         services, but they were forced to stop following the
            medical facility in the city                                  takeover of the city by ISIS.

Tadmur • Under ISIS, nearly daily attacks damaged/destroyed all N/A
         medical facilities
                  110                                                                                                 Appendix




                  Table B.4: Situation Report: Education Facilities

City      Education Status                                          Alternative Arrangements/Other Eﬀorts

Aleppo   • 53% of schools are damaged; 10% completely               • UNESCO and UNICEF have supported the
           destroyed                                                  construction and rehabilitation of 23 schools between
         • Nearly all schools in Eastern Aleppo are destroyed         December 2016 and January 2017

Dara’a   • 15% of facilities are destroyed and 37% are partially    N/A
           damaged.

Dayr    • 62% of the facilities show signs of damange               • Government has re-opened some schools but in ISIS
az-Zawr                                                               controlled areas, due to security threats, teachers and
                                                                      students stay out of schools.

Douma • 90 percent of all education facilities are partially        N/A
        damaged
      • Schools remain vulnerable: about 10% are used as
        bomb shelters

Hama     N/A                                                        N/A

Homs     N/A                                                        N/A

Idlib    • 68% of Idlib’s schools have sustained partial damage     • According to a February 2017 statement, 73 percent
                                                                      of Save the Children-supported schools in Idlib and
                                                                      Aleppo have suﬀered severe airstrike damage.

Kobani   • 12 schools show no signs of damage, 2 have been          • Local rehabilitation eﬀorts have been ongoing in the
           destroyed, and 4 have been partially damaged.              educational sector since April 2015.
                                                                    • 15 schools were rehabilitated, and accommodate
                                                                      50,000 students as of January 2017.

Raqqa    • Of the 43 schools identiﬁed, 16% have been               • In addition to al-Furat University, the Islamic State is
           destroyed, and 63% registered as partially damaged         operating as many as 24 schools.

Tadmur • 83% of schools are partially damaged                       N/A
       • As of January 2017, no schools or educational facilities
         are reported operational within the city
THE TOLL OF WAR                                   111




A P P E N D I X C . TECHNICAL SPECIFICATIONS OF
THE SIMULATION MODEL

A. Key Features of the Model
112                           Appendix




B. Introduction of Notation
THE TOLL OF WAR   113
114            Appendix




B. The Model
THE TOLL OF WAR   115
116   Appendix
THE TOLL OF WAR         117




D. Solution Algorithm




E. Scenarios
118   Appendix
THE TOLL OF WAR                                                            119




REFERENCES

Abadie, A. and Gardeazabal, J., 2003. The economic costs of conﬂict: A case
  study of the Basque Country. The American Economic Review, 93(1),
  pp.113-132.

Abadie, Alberto & Diamond, Alexis & Hainmueller, Jens, 2010. “Synthetic
  Control Methods for Comparative Case Studies: Estimating the Eﬀect of
  California’s Tobacco Control Program,” Journal of the American Statistical
  Association, American Statistical Association, vol. 105(490), pages
  493-505.

Acemoglu, D. and Robinson, J.A., 2013. Why nations fail: The origins of power,
  prosperity, and poverty. Crown Business.

Adhikari, B. and Alm, J., 2016. Evaluating the economic eﬀects of ﬂat tax
  reforms using synthetic control methods. Southern Economic Journal,
  83(2), pp.437-463.

Akbar, T., Aoun, J, Arshad, R., and Tamma, W. 2017. Urban Space, Housing and
  Municipal Services, mimeo, the World Bank.

Alix-Garcia, J., E. Artuc, and H. Onder. 2017. The Economics of Hosting
   Refugees: A Host Community Perspective from Turkana. World Bank:
   Washington, DC.

Almohamad, Hussein, and Andreas Dittmann. 2016. “Oil in Syria between
  Terrorism and Dictatorship.” Social Sciences 5 (2).

Artuc, E. and Onder, H. 2017. Disentangling the Economic Impact of the
  Conﬂict, mimeo, The World Bank.

Badra, Joude. 2015. “The Syrian Financial Sector.” 2013–2014 Syrian
  Economic Reconstruction Project, Carnegie Middle East Center.

Baker, A., 2014. Why al-Qaeda Kicked Out Its Deadly Syria Franchise. Time
  Magazine.

Barnes, J. 2009. “Managing the Waters of Bath Country: The Politics of Water
  Scarcity in Syria.” Geopolitics 14 (3).

Baroutt, M.J., 2011. The past decade in Syria: the dialectic of stagnation and
  reform (Part 1 of 5). Research Paper Arab Center for Research and Policy
  Studies, Doha Institute.

Batatu, H., 1999. Syria’s Peasantry. The Descendants of its Lesser Rural
  Notables, and their Politics, Princeton: Princeton UP.
120                                                                 References




Cole, J. 2010. Syria Land use Map at Informed Comment,
  https://www.juancole.com/2010/12/map-syria-land-use.html, accessed at
  July 4, 2017.

Davis, D. R., and D. E. Weinstein. 2002. “Bones, Bombs, and Break Points: The
  Geography of Economic Activity.” American Economic Review 92 (5):
  1269–89.

Douwes, D. 2000. The Ottomans in Syria: A History of Justice and Oppression.
  London: I.B. Tauris.

Dun & Bradstreet. 2016. “Syria Country Insight Report.”Dun & Bradstreet,
  Short Hills, NJ.

FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization) and WFP (World Food Programme).
  2015. “Crop and Food Security Assessment Mission. WFP, Rome.

FAO (Food and Agriculture Organization) and WFP (World Food Programme).
  2016. “Crop and Food Security Assessment Mission to the Syrian Arab
  Republic.” FAO and WFP, Rome.

Fearon, James D. 2017. “Notes on the Causes of the Civil War in Syria, Its
  Continuation, and Implications for International Reconstruction Eﬀorts.”
  Background paper for the Syria Economic and Social Impact Assessment.
  World Bank, Washington, DC.

Fearon, James D., and David Laitin. 2003. “Ethnicity, Insurgency, and Civil
  War.” American Political Science Review 97: 75–90.

Gallup, J.L., Sachs, J.D. and Mellinger, A.D., 1999. Geography and economic
  development. International regional science review, 22(2), pp.179-232.

Ghanem, H. (ed.). 2016. The Arab Spring Five Years Later. Washington, DC:
  Brookings Institution Press.

Gleick, Peter. 2014. “Water, Drought, Climate Change and Conﬂict in Syria.”
  Weather, Climate and Society 6 (3): 331–40.

Hamilton, K. and Nguyen, T. 2017. Estimating Syrian Human Capital Loss Over
  the Civil War Years, mimeo, The World Bank.

Hinnebusch, R.A., 1995. The political economy of economic liberalization in
  Syria. International Journal of Middle East Studies, 27(3), pp.305-320.

Hourani, A. 1946. Syria and Lebanon: A Political Essay. London: Oxford
  University Press.
THE TOLL OF WAR                                                             121




HRW (Human Rights Watch). 1996. “Syria: The Silenced Kurds.” Human Rights
  Watch 8 (4) (E).

Ianchovichina, E., L. Mottaghi, and S. Devarajan. 2015. “Inequality, Uprisings,
   and Conﬂict in the Arab World.” Middle East and North Africa Economic
   Monitor, October. World Bank, Washington, DC.

IMF (International Monetary Fund). 2016. “Syria’s Conﬂict Economy.” IMF
  Working Paper WP/16/123. IMF, Washington, DC.

International Crisis Group. 2009. “Reshuﬄing the Cards? (I): Syria’s Evolving
   Strategy.” International Crisis Group, Washington, DC.

IOM (International Organization for Migration). 2017. National Population
  Monitoring (NPM): Access to Services: Obstacles and Dynamics. Geneva: IOM.

Issawi, C. 1988. The Fertile Crescent; 1800-1914: A Documentary Economic
   History. New York: Oxford University Press.

———. 1995. The Middle East Economy: Decline and Recovery. Princeton:
  Markus Wiener Publishers.

Kelley, C.P., Mohtadi, S., Cane, M.A., Seager, R. and Kushnir, Y., 2015,
  December. Climate Change In The Fertile Crescent And Implications Of The
  Recent Drought In Syria. In AGU Fall Meeting Abstracts.

Khalaf, S. 1987. Lebanon’s Predicament. New York: Columbia University Press.

Khoury, P. S. 1987. Syria and the French Mandate. London: I. B. Tauris.

Mueller, H., L. Piomentese, and A. Tapsoba. 2017. “Recovery from Conﬂict:
  Lessons of Success.” Policy Research Working Paper 7970, World Bank,
  Washington, DC.

Nunn, N. and Puga, D., 2012. Ruggedness: The blessing of bad geography in
  Africa. Review of Economics and Statistics, 94(1), pp.20-36.

Onder, H., G. Ponthiere, and P. Pestieau. 2017. “The Domestic Welfare Loss of
  Syrian Civil War: An Equivalent Income Approach.” Mimeo, World Bank,
  Washington, DC.


Owen, Roger. 1981. The Middle East in the World Economy, 1800-1914.
  Methuen: London.

PHR (Physicians for Human Rights). 2015. “Doctors in the Crosshairs: Four
  Years of Attacks on Health Care in Syria.” March 2015.
  https://s3.amazonaws.com/PHR_Reports/doctors-in-the-crosshairs.pdf.
120                                                                    References




REACH Initiative. 2015. “Migration Trends and Patterns of Syrian Asylum
  Seekers Travelling to the European Union.” Assessment Report. REACH,
  Geneva.

Sahner, Christian C. 2014. Among the Ruins: Syria Past and Present. London:
  Hurst & Co.

Save the Children. 2017. Invisible Wounds: The Impact of Six Years of War on the
  Mental Health of Syria’s Children. London: Save the Children.

SCPR (Syrian Center for Policy Research). 2013. “Socioeconomic Roots and
  Impact of the Syrian Crisis.” SCPR, Damascus.

SCPR (Syrian Center for Policy Research). 2014. “Alienation and Violence:
  Impact of Syria Crisis Report.”

———. 2017. “Social Degradation in Syria: The Impact of Conﬂict on Social
  Capital.” SCPR, Friedrich Ebert Stiftung, Beirut.

Sparrow, A., 2014. Syria’s polio epidemic: the suppressed truth. The New York
  Review of Books.

Syria Public Health Network. 2016. “Syria’s Health: An Overview of Current
  Knowledge and Policy Priorities.” https://syriahealthnetwork.ﬁles.wordpre
  -ss.com/2016/02/syria-health-policy-brief_london-conf_ﬁnal-3rdfebruary
  2016.pdf.

Syrian American Medical Society. 2017. “The Failure of UN Security Council
  Resolution 2286 in Preventing Attacks on Healthcare in Syria.” Syrian
  American Medical Society, Washington, DC.

UNOCHA (United Nations Oﬃce for the Coordination of Humanitarian
  Aﬀairs). 2016. 2017 Humanitarian Needs Overview: Syrian Arab Republic.
  New York: UNOCHA.

UNDP (United Nations Development Programme). 2005. Poverty in Syria:
  1996-2004: Diagnosis and Pro-Poor Policy Considerations.

UNDP (United Nations Development Programme). 2011. Poverty and
  Inequality in Syria (1997–2007)

UNDP (United Nations Development Programme). 2014. Human Development
  Report. New York: UNDP.

UNESCWA (United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Western
  Asia). 2016. Syria at War. UNESCWA and University of St. Andrews
  Publication. UNESCWA, Beirut.
THE TOLL OF WAR                                                        121




United Nations. 2016 “Whole of Syria: Who Does What Where per
  Governorate.” United Nations Oﬃce for the Coordination of Humanitarian
  Aﬀairs, Syrian Arab Republic.

Vanly, I.C. 1992. “The Kurds in Syria and Lebanon.” In The Kurds: A
  Contemporary Overview, edited by Philip G. Kreyenbroek and Stefan Sperl.
  Routledge.

Wada Y., L. P. H van Beck, and M. F. P. Bierkens. 2012. “Non-Sustainable
 Groundwater Sustaining Irrigation: A Global Assessment.” Water Resources
 Research 48 (6).

World Vision. 2016. The Cost of Conﬂict for Children. Amman, Jordan: World
 Vision.
Photography of wall painting in Aleppo by Khalil Hajjar/Middle East Eye (see the original article at:
http://www.middleeasteye.net/in-depth/features/pictures-aleppo-artists-paint-pictures-revolution-war-city-walls-2075898635).




This report studies the economic and social impact of the armed conﬂict in Syria.
Bringing together conﬂict-driven loss of lives, forced displacement, physical damages in
capital, and overall economic collapse, it takes stock of the consequences brought
about by one of the most brutal conﬂicts of our time.

The analysis extends our understanding of the Syrian conﬂict by focusing on the distinct
roles played by physical destruction, casualties, and disruptions in economic
organization in driving the economic and social impact of the conﬂict. Although visual
eﬀects, such as physical destruction, are more often noticed, the “invisible” eﬀects, such
as disruptions in economic networks, increased rent seeking, and the erosion of social
trust, play a greater role in explaining the collapse in economic activity. The persistence
of economic eﬀects also diﬀers across various channels. The economic impact of
conﬂict-related casualties is much more persistent than that of other channels.

As this report was written, the Syrian conﬂict was ongoing in its sixth year. The report
suggests that the longer the conﬂict lasts, the slower and more diﬃcult the post-conﬂict
recovery will be.
