A Deep Dive Case Study

     April 7, 2017
                              TABLE OF CONTENTS


Acknowledgements                                                              2

   I.     Executive Summary                                                   3

   II.    Background                                                          4

   III.   Purpose and Evaluation Questions                                    6

   IV.    Methodology                                                         7

   V.     Limitations                                                         8

   VI.    Findings                                                            8

   VII.   Conclusions                                                         18

   VIII. Recommendations                                                      20

Appendix A: Challenge Fund Logic Model                                        21

Appendix B: NIWA Semi-Structured Interview Schedule                           23

Appendix C: Partner Country Meteorological/Climate Service Semi-Structured Interview
Schedule                                                                       24

Appendix D: Partner Country National Disaster Management Office Semi-Structured
Interview Schedule                                                           25

Appendix E: Partner Country Tourism Ministry Semi-Structured Interview Schedule
                                                                             26
                                  ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS

The efforts of many kind people went into making this evaluation – participatory in nature – a
reality. I am deeply grateful to all levels of government officials in Solomon Islands, Samoa and
Fiji who made the time in their busy schedules to meet with me and share their views of the
DRVT in their countries. Your openness to, and participation in, this evaluative effort is greatly
appreciated and your insights are priceless. And to the Challenge Fund project team at NIWA, a
heart-felt thank you for your dedication, warmth, hospitality, time and generous assistance in
coordinating key informant interviews in four countries. The participation of all of these
stakeholders in this case study evaluation was truly vital to unearthing the findings contained
herein.

In an era of ever-shrinking humanitarian and development funds, it is rare that funding
organizations dedicate resources to the critical functions of monitoring, evaluation and learning
(MEL). I am grateful to both DFID and GFDRR for seeing the value in project MEL and for
choosing me to assume this role. My sincere appreciation goes out to GFDRR Innovation Lab
staff for their unending confidence and support in this complex endeavor. I truly hope that all
stakeholders will find something useful that will in fact be used in this evaluation report.

Of course the views expressed in this document do not reflect the official views of any
organization. They are those of the evaluator only. All errors contained herein are mine alone.




This publication was produced at the request of the Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and
Recovery’s (GFDRR’s) Innovation Lab as a deliverable under the DFID-funded Science for
Humanitarian Emergencies and Resilience (SHEAR) project. It was prepared by Tracy C.
Thoman, Ph.D., Independent Consultant and Challenge Fund MEL Specialist.


                                                                                                    1
                                  EXECUTIVE SUMMARY

This performance evaluation using Case Study design and qualitative methods focused on the
National Institute of Water and Atmospheric Research’s (NIWA) Challenge Fund (CF) Drought
Risk Visualization Toolkit (DRVT) project in Solomon Islands, Samoa and Fiji. It addressed the
following four theory-based evaluation questions:

   1. To what extent is NIWA achieving CF logic model results at the outcome and purpose
      levels in Solomon Islands, Samoa and Fiji? (Please note that these results refer to access
      and use of the toolkit.)

   2. Which of the output-level results are most critical to decision-maker access to and
      utilization of the DRVT? (Please note that CF output-level results are: 1. Developing
      tool in response to local demand; 2. Improving capacity among the community to develop
      the new tool; 3. Considering gender in project implementation; 4. Improving capacity of
      local beneficiaries in applying the new tool; and 5. Leveraging resources.)

   3. To what extent are the results reported in response to question 1 sustainable?

   4. What are the unintended consequences – positive and/or negative – of project
      implementation?

Findings showed that NIWA is achieving both access to and use of its DRVT in partner
countries. One partner country was recovering from the largest tropical cyclone on record to
make landfall in that country during Phase I project implementation and did not show access and
use to the extent of the other two; however, that is expected to change during Phase II. The most
critical factor in access to and use of the DRVT is the unique partnership between NIWA and
partner country officials. All involved express respect and gratitude to fellow partnership
members and are keenly interested in achieving results in-country.

Project results look very likely to be sustained after Phase II ends, mostly because of the
commitment both sides show to these partnerships. A NIWA project staff member summed it up
beautifully by saying, “We always do much more than the donor organization requires, but it
helps our partners tremendously and we enjoy doing it.” For their part, country officials voice
their strong and positive working relationships with NIWA. These relationships result in a
project where very few stones are left unturned and every possible avenue is explored, leading to
the best possible outcomes, which have great potential to remain long after funding ends.

Two positive unintended outcomes discovered in this study are an increased confidence by
ministry officials using DRVT products and the potential for strengthened intra-governmental
cooperation. Recommendations include continuation of close monitoring, evaluation and
learning (MEL) of all CF projects; instituting ‘sustainability awards’ for limited successful CF
projects; research on partner country budgets with respect to drought policy implementation;
modification of the CF logic model; and making an external version of this evaluation report
openly-available.



                                                                                                   2
                                             BACKGROUND

The Challenge Fund
The Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery’s (GFDRR) Innovation Lab partnered
with the UK Department for International Development’s (DFID) Science for Humanitarian
Emergencies and Resilience (SHEAR) project to deliver an innovative toolkit of new open data
and tools to support preparedness and resilience through a competitive Challenge Fund (CF).
Launched in 2015, this Challenge Fund provides seed funding to projects that address the
challenge in bridging the gap between technology and on-the-ground user needs in the field of
disaster risk identification. The Fund seeks to catalyze the development of data, products and
approaches to support disaster risk management decision making and build resilience, including
through better information, but also strengthening key steps in moving from information to
insight and behavior change.

More specifically, the Challenge Fund theory of change is:
  • If new data/tools/approaches to support disaster risk management decision making are
      developed in response to local demand; and
  • If there is improved capacity among the community to develop the new tool; and
  • If gender is considered in risk identification, outreach and capacity development plans;
      and
  • If there is improved capacity of local beneficiaries to apply the new tool; and
  • If resources are leveraged from other sources; assuming
  • The Challenge Fund delivers high-quality, demand-led data/tools/approaches; then
  • New high quality and relevant data/tools/approaches will be accessed by decision makers.
  • If new high quality and relevant data/tools/approaches are accessed by decision makers,
      assuming
  • Challenge Fund projects make products available to the right people who have the
      capacity and demand to use them, then
  • The data/tools/approaches will be utilized by decision makers.
  • Such use of these risk information products will contribute toward greater and more
      effective investment in disaster resilience, preparedness, response and recovery in target
      countries.1

To date there have been two phases of CF funding. A competitive call process resulted in 15
successful projects being selected for Phase I CF funding; seven projects were awarded $50,000
or less and eight received approximately $100,000. Implementation of Phase I commenced in
October 2015. Throughout the following year, consistent monitoring, evaluation and learning
(MEL) efforts were conducted to learn as much as possible about what was working, what was
not working and why.2 For example, CF staff maintained regular email communication with
project leads; reviewed and scored inception reports; conducted at least two in-depth calls with

1
  This theory of change is depicted by the CF logic model (found in Annex A) and based upon the DFID-created
SHEAR lograme.
2
  Requirements for compiling evidence of what works and communicating it through regular MEL reporting are
stated as milestones in the SHEAR logframe. Case study evaluations are but one example of such required
evidential reporting during CF implementation. An MEL Specialist was hired to conduct MEL reporting for the CF.

                                                                                                              3
each project to discuss progress and results achieved to date relative to SHEAR logframe
indicators; reviewed project progress reports; and reviewed final project monitoring self-
assessments.

These MEL efforts showed that CF projects exceeded every milestone established for the
initiative to date. Below, please see CF results, compared to pre-set ambitious targets, from all
15 Phase I projects effective January 31, 2017.

SHEAR Logframe Indicator                                             Target           CF Actual
# of projects that are co-designed with local beneficiaries          6                14
# of decision makers accessing tool                                  20               23
# of tools available on open platform                                5                15
# downloads of tools                                                 50               2,025
# of partnerships established                                        5                45
# of new tools developed                                             10               15
# of partnerships developed with local partners                      5                39
# of projects that consider gender                                   10               13
# beneficiaries trained                                              10               662
Amount of leverage                                                   $612,500         $2,147,500

While the overall goals of Phase I projects were the development of innovative tools and
illustration of their success, the focus in Phase II is ensuring uptake and use of the tools. In order
to select those projects which could best achieve the goals of uptake and use for a Phase II of CF
funding, three sources of information were scored by the CF project management team: 1.
project inception reports and follow up phone discussions; 2. In-depth discussions with project
leads at the mid-point of Phase I implementation; and 3. Phase II proposals and follow-up
discussions. Seven out of the 15 Phase I CF projects showed sufficient success and potential for
uptake to be selected for Phase II funding to scale up or replicate results.

Although careful and consistent monitoring allows us to learn from project implementation, it
does not provide insight for us to fully understand why we see the results reported and discussed
by project leads. This is the purpose of evaluation. DFID’s SHEAR project logframe requires
in-depth case study evaluations of successful CF projects over the course of implementation. As
Phase II was beginning implementation, GFDRR and DFID decided to conduct one of these in-
depth case study evaluations. The National Institute of Water and Atmospheric Research’s
(NIWA) “Drought Risk Visualization Toolkit (DRVT) for Pacific Island Countries” was selected
for this case study due its exceptional contribution to Phase I CF logic model results.

NIWA
NIWA’s Phase II CF proposal was among the seven selected for scale up and replication. Its
Phase I project focused on the development of the DRVT, an open-source, real time,
probabilistic drought risk visualization toolkit for Pacific Island Meteorological Services.3 The
DRVT provides specific drought information time series, maps, and advisories to help national
drought services more effectively trigger response in the three Phase I partner countries –

3
    The following information regarding NIWA was taken from NIWA CF reporting, and modified only slightly here.

                                                                                                              4
Solomon Islands, Samoa and Fiji. The toolkit consists of a package of new, open-source scripted
product generators, installed on an existing in-country database server (CliDE – Climate Data for
the Environment, developed by the Australian Bureau of Meteorology) and integrated with the
open source climate services platform, CliDEsc.

CliDEsc, developed by NIWA, is a web-based tool that allows end users to request data and
products to be generated from the CLIDE data management system. It provides a user-friendly
menu to download selected data tables, and to display the results in both text and graphical form.
At the completion of Phase 1, all three countries received software upgrades to enhance the
product generator suite of CliDEsc. New product generators (the ‘Drought Risk Visualization
Tools’) that were provided with the upgrade are now operational on a daily basis, analyzing data
in near real time and providing country-specific maps and time series of the processed data and
dissemination products for a range of advisories and reports for end-user application. In
addition, climate services staff in each country were given training to manage and use the DRVT
product generators as part of their routine work.

In all three partner countries, while general climate information is disseminated widely and is not
restricted publically, drought early warnings are mostly treated more formally and are processed
through designated authorities, typically the National Disaster Management Offices (NDMOs).
This ensures that drought advisories and warnings are accompanied by the appropriate
implementation of response measures. During Phase I implementation, the capacity of climate
services staff was developed to support and work through these designated authorities, and where
possible to collect feedback from vulnerable communities on the information that is reaching
them – such as its timeliness, usefulness, and interpretability.


                       PURPOSE AND EVALUATION QUESTIONS

Evaluation Purpose
This is a theory-based evaluation, largely focused on the CF logic model and whether and how it
holds in the case of NIWA’s project. It in no way audits the performance of NIWA. Rather, it
seeks to determine the extent to which the CF theory of change was evident during Phase I of
NIWA’s DRVT project. The overall purpose is to produce this case study as a piece of evidence
regarding whether or not the CF theory of change is robust during CF implementation for a
successful project, and to learn from its findings, possibly leading to modification of the logic
model and theory of change it depicts. Another, albeit related to the previous, purpose of this
evaluation is to determine to what extent the NIWA project is contributing to SHEAR logframe
results. In short, similar to most evaluations, the intention is to learn what is working, what is
not working, and why.

This evaluation report has many intended users. Although it is a deliverable under the SHEAR
project, stakeholders in addition to DFID have expressed interest in using the results of this
study. GFDRR is keenly interested in incorporating relevant points of learning into its steadfast
work on getting the right risk information into the hands of the right people at the right time to
decrease risk and increase resilience to hazards around the world. NIWA will also use the
findings, conclusions and recommendations of this evaluation to further target its work in these


                                                                                                     5
and other partner countries with the ultimate goal of use of its innovative tool – the DRVT – by
all levels of beneficiaries. And government officials in Solomon Islands, Samoa and Fiji will
hopefully benefit from the recommendations coming out of this report, by meeting their evolving
needs in this hazard area, ultimately leading to use of the DRVT and increased resilience to
drought events – especially at the community level.

Evaluation Questions

Given that this is a theory-based endeavor, the evaluation questions relate to aspects of the CF
logic model, as below.

   1. To what extent is NIWA achieving CF logic model results at the outcome and purpose
      levels in Solomon Islands, Samoa and Fiji? (Please note that these results refer to access
      and use of the toolkit respectively.)

   2. Which of the output-level results are most critical to decision-maker access to and
      utilization of the DRVT? (Please note that CF output-level results are: 1. Developing
      tool in response to local demand; 2. Improving capacity among the community to develop
      the new tool; 3. Considering gender in project implementation; 4. Improving capacity of
      local beneficiaries in applying the new tool; and 5. Leveraging resources.)

   3. To what extent are the results reported in response to question 1 sustainable?

   4. What are the unintended consequences – positive and/or negative – of project
      implementation?


                                       METHODOLOGY

In order to gain a deep understanding surrounding the reported results from NIWA’s Phase I
project in these countries, and to address the four evaluation questions above, a case study
evaluation design using qualitative methods was chosen by DFID and GFDRR. As previously
stated, the NIWA project was a strong contributor to overall CF results during Phase I. Case
studies are an appropriate choice of evaluation design for those interventions which are
considered to be ‘outliers’ – either very successful projects or those that did not perform well
against stated objectives, for example. NIWA was chosen because it exhibits the former – a very
successful CF project. The case study design helps to gain an understanding of how different
elements fit together and were able to produce the results reported. The untested CF theory of
change can be compared with the evidence discovered. In this way, the CF logic model and
theory of change it represents can be revised to reflect the reality of implementation. The results
of this case study evaluation could then help interventions of a similar nature when they are in
the design stage.

There are different types of case studies. This evaluation most closely resembles what is called
the “Program Effects” case study; according to the U.S. Government Accountability Office,
“This examines the causal links between the program and observed effects and usually involves


                                                                                                   6
multisite, multimethod evaluations.” This evaluation design allows the evaluator to ask
questions which attempt to get at how much of the results we observe are attributable to the CF
project.

The methods used in this evaluation were document review, key informant interviews (KIIs) and
analysis of data gathered. Many documents regarding NIWA’s work in the three partner
countries were reviewed to provide context for this study; in addition, partner country
meteorological service websites were explored to gain a better understanding of the extent to
which NIWA’s CF work is being utilized by its first-line partner office in-country. In order to
get at the ‘why’ of these result outliers and address the four overarching evaluation questions, the
evaluator traveled to four country locations to conduct key informant interviews (KIIs) where the
stakeholders work and live. KIIs were conducted from February 13 to February 24, 2017 with
NIWA CF project staff in its offices in Wellington, New Zealand; and government officials in
Meteorological Services, Climate Services, National Disaster Management Offices and one
Tourism Ministry in Solomon Islands, Samoa and Fiji. All interviews for this evaluation were
semi-structured with mostly open-ended questions regarding output- and outcome-level results.
(Please see attached interview schedules in appendices B, C, D and E.)

This was a collaborative and participatory evaluation in the sense that open discussions were
held with NIWA CF project implementing staff before, during and after site visits. The input
provided was enormously useful not only for providing context, but also for suggesting people to
interview and issues to discuss. Open communication and two-way feedback occurred
throughout this evaluation. In addition, discussions with partner country government officials
also continued after the site visits and were two-way communications, during which officials’
views and concerns were incorporated into the study and addressed to the extent possible. In this
way the evaluation can be seen as more participatory than a more traditional case study where
the evaluator reviews documents, asks questions and analyzes data, without opening up lines of
communication about the design of the evaluation, its findings and results as they are being
developed. Stakeholder feedback was incorporated throughout this evaluative process.


                                          LIMITATIONS

Case study performance evaluations have inherent limitations. While they allow for an in-depth
look at a certain intervention, they do not allow the evaluator to look at anything other than that
particular intervention. Related to this lack of breadth limitation is the threat to external validity
such an evaluation design presents. It is difficult to generalize the findings from one case study
to a broader population. However, neither the evaluator nor the funders claim to do this. In fact,
DFID and GFDRR plan to conduct two additional CF case study evaluations before early 2018.
These three CF case study evaluations will then be analyzed together (i.e., a meta-evaluation) to
find common themes and lessons learned for similar endeavors moving forward. In addition, the
strategic selection of case study projects – atypical projects at the extremes – helps address some
of the perceived limitations of this design.




                                                                                                     7
                                           FINDINGS

The results below are taken from information provided by KIIs with 18 project stakeholders,
several NIWA DRVT project documents, partner country meteorological service websites, and
analysis of this information. KIIs were held with NIWA DRVT project staff in Wellington;
Meteorological Service, Climate Service, NDMO and Tourism Ministry officials in Solomon
Islands; Meteorological Service, Climate Service and NDMO officials in Samoa; and
Meteorological Service, Climate Service and NDMO officials in Fiji. NIWA’s Phase II CF
Inception Report was received by GFDRR as this evaluation report was being finalized and is
also incorporated into this study where relevant.

In addition, some of the findings below were communicated to NIWA CF project staff as they
were discovered, which then lead to modifications of NIWA’s planned Phase II intervention in
some cases. This further illustrates the participatory nature of the evaluation. The findings are
presented below per evaluation question.

   1. To what extent is NIWA achieving CF logic model results at the outcome and
      purpose levels in Solomon Islands, Samoa and Fiji? (Please note that these results
      refer to access and use of the toolkit.)

The last reported droughts in the three DRVT project partner countries were in late-2015 and
early-2016. Therefore, it is not possible to comment upon use of the DRVT to directly prepare
for, respond to or recover from drought during Phase I. However, access to and use of the
DRVT for other purposes can be reviewed. For example, information provided by interviews
with NIWA staff, as well as its CF project reporting, argues that the development of national
drought response plans is currently being influenced by the DRVT.

Given that NIWA’s CF project is being implemented at the same time that these drought
response plans are being developed, its influence can be seen on three levels. NIWA’s work
with meteorological services has: 1. increased awareness of DRVT products among policy-
makers so they can now include these among requirements of meteorological services; 2. enabled
them to fulfill what is requested by the drought policies; and 3. assisted the committees that will
use DRVT information to understand what it means and how best to utilize it.

NIWA REPORTING
NIWA’s final Phase I report states that use of the DRVT is managed within National
Meteorological Services and that use will likely increase as understanding of the potential of the
toolkit grows. Its report also states that daily use is made of the DRVT tools in Samoa, with
regular postings to the Samoa Meteorology Division web pages. This was easily verified by a
quick look at this website: http://www.samet.gov.ws/index.php/clews-products/drought-warning.
In addition, with respect to use of the toolkit, NIWA reports that the Samoa Tourist Authority
works with the Samoa Meteorology Division to compile monthly reports of drought risk, and
additional reports during periods of dry weather, for distribution to all tourism operators in
Samoa.

All three Meteorological Services compile monthly climate summaries and seasonal outlooks


                                                                                                    8
which are distributed by email and web services each month. Outputs from the DRVT are used
to replace manual data processing in the compilation of these reports. The automated output of
drought information to mobile devices is updated daily in Samoa and Solomon Islands; currently
this service is relayed via a NIWA web link, pending finalization of web service sites in each
country respectively.

The following presents more specific findings regarding access to and use of the DRVT, by
partner country.

SOLOMON ISLANDS
Government officials in various agencies in Solomon Islands have access to DVRT products. It
is clear that the Solomon Islands Meteorological Service (SIMS) accesses these products
regularly and makes them available to other interested government agencies, not least of which is
the NDMO. The NDMO, for example, then utilizes some of the DRVT products in its reporting
to higher-level government officials on the National Disaster Council (NDC) and in the Ministry
of the Environment, Climate Change, Disaster Management and Meteorology (Ministry of
Environment). When meeting with NDMO staff, the evaluator was shown actual DRVT
products from SIMS regular reporting that were recently used to brief the NDC and the Minister
of the Environment. One NDMO staff member summed up use of DRVT products by his office
by stating, “NIWA products which came from SIMS are very helpful for us. They help us with
planning and developing our own products to inform decision making at different levels of
government.”
                                                                         DRVT is helpful to
Recognizing that a drought has not occurred during the lifespan of       Solomon Islands NDMO
NIWA’s CF project in-country, one NDMO staff member pointed              so it is able to “request
to the role of the Meteorological Service in the ‘whole-of-              the government to release
government’ approach to humanitarian assistance. DRVT and other resources so we can
climate-related tools are helpful to them, because they can use them     address the humanitarian
“to request the government to release resources so we can address        imperative on the
the humanitarian imperative on the ground.” This is a direct             ground.”
illustration of the goal of the CF, “Greater and more effective
investment4 in disaster resilience, preparedness, response and recovery.” The NDMO also uses
DRVT information to inform its four disaster offices in provincial emergency operations centers
to increase awareness of the potential drought threat, and plan for possible response.

These clear illustrations of DRVT access, use and investment in Solomon Islands, however, only
tell part of the story. Other government bodies have access to, and make use of, DRVT
information as well. The head of SIMS explained that his office tailors the information from the
DRVT prior to disseminating it. “We are so happy about this tool actually, because we have a
database system to retrieve data.” He offered the example of the Seasonal Climate Outlook, a
monthly product SIMS sends to all if its stakeholders.

SIMS staff accesses the DRVT daily as they use it to monitor danger and respond to requests
from the Fire Service, for example. The Climate Change Division – part of the Ministry of

4
    Investments at the goal level include partner country budget allocations.

                                                                                               9
Environment – also relies on climate data from SIMS. The Acting Director of this division
mentioned that his office both uses some of the drought products it receives from SIMS, and also
uses the underlying data from CliDEsc to conduct its own analyses. Expressing his appreciation
for this service and referring to it as a ‘win-win’ situation, he said, “I’m so proud of SIMS
because within all ministries in the government, the most reliable data comes from them. It’s
stored properly and in electronic form so you can do your analysis straight away.” He further
explained that if this data were not available “it would leave a big gap especially when trying to
conduct a vulnerability and adaptation assessment of a remote location. The assessment would
not be complete without SIMS data because we need to load the rainfall in a particular site as
accurately as possible.”

In Solomon Islands, the development of the drought policy is coordinated by the Ministry of
Agriculture and Livestock. According to the head of SIMS, this policy – expected to be
completed by the end of 2017 – “is intended to encompass all things involved in responding to
drought, and to strengthen coordination among relevant government agencies.” SIMS
collaborates with the NDMO in formulation of this policy; and the DRVT plays a key role in
defining what information SIMS can provide for this effort. One high-level government official
mentioned that he hopes coordination among different government bodies will strengthen, and
that policies such as the drought policy are one means to achieve this goal.

SAMOA
In Samoa the National Drought Response Plan is being developed by the NDMO. In its CF
project work, NIWA held several meetings with the Samoan NDMO to assist the Samoa
Meteorology Division of the Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment to customize the
DRVT product suite to meet NDMO requirements. Speaking to this tailored assistance, the head
of the NDMO said, “It’s useful to me, because we have to develop a drought plan; without that
detail, it would be difficult for us to write a plan based on unreliable information.” She views
the DRVT as being reliable, especially in indicating thresholds as triggers for warning systems
and activation of response. As further support for the potential for increased use of the DRVT in
Samoa, she added, “We could not develop triggers for our warning and response systems without
the DRVT because we needed analysis of past events. NIWA has done the leg work for us.” As
in Solomon Islands, the DRVT is informing decisions with budgetary implications in Samoa.

The Meteorology Division of the Samoan Ministry of Natural              According to the
Resources and Environment has DRVT products directly available on       Samoa Meteorology
its website: http://www.samet.gov.ws/index.php/clews-                   Division, DRVT
products/drought-warning. The Climate Services Manager said, “All       “allows for the right
stakeholder agencies have access to this information. We have had       information to be in
workshops with them on how to use it.” Additional examples of access    the hands of the right
to and use of DRVT products in Samoa can be seen in the mobile          people at the right
application that is currently in operation. The Samoa Weather App and   time.”
Climate Service tap-in menu for DRVT products was updated; and a link was added to its mobile
web interface, which has been translated into Samoan. As but one example, the Tourism
Authority is a reportedly big user of this climate mobile application.




                                                                                               10
Now that this information is readily available and relatively easy to access, staff in the
Meteorological Division are working to raise awareness at the community level. They have
creative ideas on how to go about his, including “piggybacking on other agencies’ trips that
consult with communities to show that we have this mobile application in place.” They are also
considering using television programs to show people how to use the mobile app, which may
prove effective now that approximately 90% of Samoa is now has television coverage. And, not
missing an opportunity to get their message out, they deliver awareness programs when
conducting consultations at the community level though NDMO community outreach programs.

Staff at the Samoan Meteorology Division summed up its views of DRVT use by explaining
what would happen in the event a Minister is called by a media outlet to answer a question on
climate change concerning drought. They want to have information available to respond to the
Minister quickly – and not in a matter of days as before, which caused frustration and was no
longer useful – and DRVT allows them to do this. For example, “when the National Disaster
Advisory Committee requests information, they expect answers within a day so that they can use
DRVT real-time information to plan a response.” They summarized, “It allows for the right
information to be in the hands of the right people at the right time.”

The Meteorology Division also plans to incorporate the DRVT into its work on traditional
knowledge in Samoa. They compare traditional knowledge to scientific information, and have
observers in 40 villages, which serves as their link to the community. “Every year we have
workshops for these villages; and that is our window to apply the DRVT and show its
significance to them. Things are changing because of climate change. However, some
traditional knowledge indicators do not work anymore. We need a scientific basis for this
traditional knowledge.” And they see the DRVT as an effective means to fill this gap.

FIJI
Access to and use of DRVT products is less visible in Fiji at this point in CF implementation.
There are very good reasons for this, not least of which is the February 2016 cyclone which
struck Fiji. Tropical Cyclone Winston is the largest tropical cyclone on record to hit Fiji.
According to NIWA reporting, “NIWA and Fiji Met Service (FMS) met jointly with the Fiji
NDMO in November 2016 – at that time they were concentrating on Tropical Cyclone recovery,
and have since been involved in managing flood relief as well. So although drought
preparedness and mitigation remain urgent, the NDMO does not have the resources to develop
response plans on multiple fronts at the same time. FMS will continue to inform the NDMO on
an ongoing basis during drought events, and will introduce the DRVT tools to assist with this as
they gain confidence and understanding on how they can be applied.”




                                                                                              11
At the conclusion of Phase I, the Fiji Meteorological Service was          According to the Fiji
utilizing DRVT products internally only, and on a case-by-case basis.      Acting Manager of
For example, according the Acting Manager of Climate Services, “we         Climate Services, “if we
used DRVT information in response to a request for information from        were faced with a drought
the Department of town and country planning.” Although they use            situation today, we would
information from CliDEsc on their website and in publications, they        use DRVT products due
do not yet use DRVT products because, according to the Acting              to the real-time nature of
Manager of Climate Services, “we have not had sufficient time to test      the data.”
it.” Please see www.met.gov.fj. However, he added, “if we were
faced with a drought situation today, we would use DRVT products
due to the real-time nature of the data.”

Similar to Samoa, the NDMO in Fiji is the lead writer of drought response plan. The head of the
NDMO said that his office has a good relationship with Climate Services and relies on data from
them. Regarding drought, they use the data provided to inform communities if a drought is
likely. This helps farmers to determine the best crops to plant during a drought. He said, “We
are developing a drought management plan and out of that we will develop a drought response
plan… We need this drought plan so that we can more proactive over the long-term rather than
merely reactive.”

Increasing the potential for uptake and use of DRVT products, NIWA is indeed assisting with the
drought response plan process in Fiji, including “involvement in the National Disaster
Management Office’s committee that is developing the country’s Drought Response Plan,”
according to its Phase I final report. In addition, the report states, “The Fiji Drought Response
Plan aims to ‘inform drought preparedness, response, mitigation and adaptation measures
through a government lead multi-sectoral approach to reduce and prevent the adverse effects of
drought on the populations of Fiji’. To support this work, the project has included in the Fiji
DRVT software package a national drought risk map based on the daily fire risk calculated at
each automatic weather station on Fiji’s national climate network. As more climate stations
come on-line, they will automatically be included in the generation of this product.” In this way,
the DRVT has the potential to strengthen government coordination in Fiji as well.

   2. Which of the output-level results are most critical to decision-maker access to and
      utilization of the DRVT? (Please note that CF output-level results are: 1. Developing
      tool in response to local demand; 2. Improving capacity among the community to develop
      the new tool; 3. Considering gender in project implementation; 4. Improving capacity of
      local beneficiaries in applying the new tool; and 5. Leveraging resources.)

All five outputs in the CF logic model are on display in the NIWA DRVT project in the Pacific
Island nations of Solomon Islands, Samoa and Fiji, with some outputs playing a more prominent
role than others. With respect to #3 above, gender is important, but it was not as prevalent in
Phase I as it will likely be in Phase II where outreach at the community level will take on a larger
role. Training of partners in-country is also evident in all three countries. And NIWA has
successfully leveraged well over $650,000 in Phase I alone. However, numbers 1 and 2 emerged



                                                                                                 12
as the most critical to achieving access to and use of the DRVT. (Please see the table below,
taken from the CF Logic Model in Appendix A, for CF outputs and associated indicators.)

           Output: Improved capacity of the               (a) Number of partnerships
           community to deliver demand-led,               developed with local partners across
           co-produced products                           disciplines that support the
                                                          development of demand-led
                                                          products; (b) Number of projects
                                                          developed with beneficiaries5
           Output: Role of gender6                        Number of project plans
           considered in project design and               considering gender in risk
           delivery                                       identification, outreach and capacity
                                                          development plans
           Output: Improved capacity of                   Number of targeted beneficiaries
           target beneficiary users to apply              that receive training during the
           data, products and tools in practice           project
           Output: Leverage7 from other                   British pound leverage from other
           sources in CF and related activities           sources
           leading toward same overall goal

Access to and utilization of DRVT products would not have been possible without the true
partnerships that are on clear display in these countries between Meteorological Services
officials and NIWA project staff. The CF logic model contains the following output-level result,
which is measured by both partnerships and developing projects with beneficiaries: ‘Improved
capacity of the community to deliver demand-led, co-produced products’. The binding element
here is partnerships.

Namely, relationships emerged as the key to NIWA’s success in Phase I – the most critical
element of access and eventual uptake of the DRVT. The NIWA project lead explained, “We
want to support our colleagues in this work in the countries. The more we can build and learn
together, the more effective and sustainable the work will become. It’s a ‘buddy system’ where
we sit down and work with them to learn how they do things, and have a dialogue.”

This strategy has paid off, as evidenced by many unsolicited comments of partner country
officials, as well as official agreements. For example, NIWA and the three meteorological
services signed partnership agreements. During all interviews conducted for this study, key
informants voluntarily mentioned the fact that they have good relationships with NIWA project

5
  Beneficiary refers to a person or group that derives advantage from something. It is clear that NIWA staff and
partner country officials and citizens can all be seen as beneficiaries of the DRVT project. For the purposes of the
CF logic model, however, the term refers to those government officials within partner countries that take part in this
project. – typically mid-level government decision-makers.
6
  Gender at the output level is meant to include consideration of the role of, or the relationship between, men and
women at any stage of the intervention. In Phase II, it is meant to consider the answer to the question, “How are
men and women, boys and girls affected differently by the hazard?”
7
  Leverage at the output level of the logic model is meant to include cash and in-kind contributions from public or
private sectors for activities that assist in achieving CF results, whether directly requested by the project or not.

                                                                                                                   13
staff. This is the one theme that emerged from the data collected for this evaluation the most
often and repeatedly. Heads of offices and divisions said the following about NIWA:
        “NIWA is well known here and viewed very favorably.”
        “We are very close, like sisters.”
        “We work very closely with them. They have helped us in a number of projects, and the
        relationship is very good.”

NIWA does not approach its work in partner countries in any other way than cooperative. It
nurtures relationships so that it can work together on products/services that have the best
opportunity for uptake. As part of these true partnerships, it looks at how the partner country
Meteorological Services currently operate and what their needs are before identifying areas of
potential cooperation – together with partners. These open lines of communication and inquiry
are an important factor in the success of the DRVT project. In its own words from its Phase II
Inception Report, “NIWA is in regular contact with key staff in National Meteorological
Services where the DRVT is installed, and has collated feedback on the use of the
tools…Requests for additional capability raised in the feedback so far will be addressed in Phase
II.” Maintaining flexibility is clearly key to these successful partnerships.

All members of these partnerships point to a high degree of comfort with the other party in the
partnership. Termed “a process of engagement” by the NIWA project lead, the close and
comfortable nature of these partnerships allows for informal communications which have proven
so vital to the project’s success. “Unless I had conversations with him, he would have not asked,
nor would I have known what he needed; and he would have not known to ask.” Thus, the
partnerships allow the project to be driven by user demand; the two are inextricably linked, as
depicted in the CF logic model. And this user demand is informed and critical to achieving
higher-level outcomes such as access and use.

As but one of many examples, the head of the Solomon Islands Meteorological Services brought
up the idea to use NGOs as a productive means to disseminate information on DRVT products to
communities. He said, “We are in process of signing an MOU with Solomon Islands’ Red Cross
to train its staff to raise awareness on weather-related information at the community level.” Not
one to miss out on an opportunity emanating from this partnership, NIWA responded by making
community outreach via Solomon Islands’ Red Cross part of its Phase II plan to raise awareness
of DRVT products at the community level.

Consideration of gender is another element of the CF logic model. NIWA has indeed worked to
integrate gender into its CF project where and when possible. For example, project staff met
with the Ministry of Women, Community and Social Development in Samoa in an effort to
empower women in their project. According to Meteorological Services staff, “Women are
viewed as the glue that keeps communities together in Samoa; they are the organizers of
community events. This is why we are working with NIWA and the Ministry of Women as we
plan our awareness raising in communities.”

In the Solomon Islands, NIWA staff report that the government is keenly interested in improving
the status of women, and NIWA is working to reach women when DRVT products are
disseminated to communities. One government official there put it this way, “Women and


                                                                                               14
children are more vulnerable to drought. For instance, when a stream dries up, women walk a
long distance to fetch water for the family; and when the food runs out, women have to care for
household; they are adversely affected.”

NIWA’s Inception Report agrees, stating, “As it is evident that drought has a more significant
effect on women and children, the project aims to close the gender gap by facilitating distribution
of the DRVT products to vulnerable communities.” Although some of the groundwork for this
has been laid in Phase I, work on gender issues will be more prominent in Phase II, when
outreach to communities takes place. The reason for this, according to NIWA project staff, is
that “these countries are community centric. The most effective way to empower women is to
disseminate information to the communities; once the information reaches the community,
women will take action.” NIWA plans to work with its partners and the Red Cross in all three
countries to reach communities and women. In this way, gender is most relevant in this project
during the ‘last mile’ of intervention implementation.

Capacity of beneficiaries to apply the DRVT is another output in the CF logic model and
measured by training. NIWA’s partnerships in the three countries allow for a fluid training
process throughout the course of project implementation. In other words, training can be seen in
both informal and formal settings. The NIWA project lead explained it this way, “Our training
is more conversational and phenomenological. It’s akin to learning by doing and moving
together toward the goals that they have.”

Echoing this experiential view toward training, a high-placed Samoan official referred to “a
mentoring system with NIWA over the years. This project is just one in a long line other positive
working relationships with them.” And NIWA agrees, summarizing its approach with this, “It’s
a matter of understanding how they currently do things before being able to perhaps show a
different way that may be more beneficial to them.” In terms of holding workshops, NIWA has
learned that holding them at the end of their time in a country is “too late because partners ask
questions during workshops and we have time to build capacity if it is done earlier in the visit.”

NIWA has also employed some creative ways to build capacity, by linking workshops to a very
real issue which partners needed to work through. For example, while in Samoa, NIWA staff
facilitated a meeting between two ministries to discuss how information would be shared
between them. Tools were revised to ensure they were appropriate for each ministry, and after a
2-day workshop, both ministries signed an MOU on how data would be shared between them.

NIWA has successfully leveraged over $650,000 in Phase I alone; it plans to leverage even more
during Phase II. The ability to leverage such large amounts of funding is due in part to the close
partnerships NIWA maintains in partner countries. Together with partner country officials,
NIWA is able to identify areas where funding could assist with DRVT access, use and
investment, as well as identify sources of such leveraged funding. NIWA contributes in-kind
assistance to this project, and some funding comes from other donors and partner country
budgets. Very little of this useful leverage comes from private sources.




                                                                                                15
    3. To what extent are the results reported in response to question 1 sustainable8?

The key factor to NIWA’s success in the CF project is the same element that will help make
these results long-lasting. Namely, and in the words of the NIWA CF project lead, “NIWA isn’t
going anywhere.” All indications are that partner country officials feel the same way about the
close partnerships they share with NIWA. It is precisely these collaborative and mutually-
reinforcing relationships that will be key to the sustainability of results achieved in this CF
project.

These collaborative partnerships allow a deep understanding by all involved on both the needs of
those who could use DRVT products to achieve their goals as well as the potential of the toolkit
itself to fulfill those needs. For example, one NDMO Director described DRVT products that he
uses to brief higher-level government officials; he also said that his office uses DRVT
information together with its own maps and has found NIWA’s work to be very useful in his
daily work. Use of tools both directly and slightly modified speak well to the potential for
sustainability.

Reflective of NIWA’s unique approach to training, the project lead stated, “We really enjoy our
work with staff and want to enable them. We take a lot of satisfaction in the development of the
people we work with; we see people growing as a result.” There is also some training of trainers
evident in partner countries, which speaks well not only the strength of the capacity built during
NIWA visits and workshops, but also the sustainability of these outcomes. When more people
are trained in how to interpret and ultimately use DRVT products, the potential for access and
use becomes greater, leading to sustainability.

As discussed in evaluation question 1 above, DRVT products act as an influence on partner
country drought policies. If DRVT products are included in national policies on drought, their
use is extremely likely to be continued and sustained after the project comes to an end.
However, Ministries of Finance also have to budget sufficient funds for the policy to be
implemented. This has yet to be done in the three partner countries.

And again, the close partnerships allow for increased sustainability as illustrated by some partner
country officials verbalizing their request for DRVT products to be more user friendly. One such
official said, “Some of the products are quite technical. Even if we have them in our briefing
note or situation report, unless there is a narrative that clearly explains what is meant by the
graph or data, decision makers find it difficult to understand it.” Similar to many examples
discovered during this evaluation, NIWA quickly responded to this partner need (voiced earlier
than during this evaluation) and intends to make its products more understandable to policy
makers and beneficiaries during Phase II. Namely, it is contributing funds of its own to refine
the user experience so the end user can generate products on its own. Phase II will make
products easier to interpret, in direct response to partner concerns.



8
  For the purposes of this evaluation, sustainability refers to the continuation of project outcomes after the project
ends. This would be evident, for example, by access to and use of DRVT products by decision-makers and
beneficiary communities after Phase II ends.

                                                                                                                         16
Sustainability is also enhanced when the final beneficiaries – the most vulnerable people in
partner countries – understand and are able to make use of DRVT products. This ‘last mile’
issue, although not the focus of Phase I, will be emphasized by NIWA and partner country
officials alike during Phase II. In addition to making products easier to digest, efforts will be
increased to train people to reach communities and raise awareness of DRVT products. These
efforts may also integrate traditional knowledge regarding drought, linking to indicators with
which people are familiar. The idea to ‘piggyback’ on other NGO community outreach work
will also increase the potential for sustainable project results.

   4. What are the unintended consequences – positive and/or negative – of project
      implementation?

This project was well planned and implemented to date. Expected CF logic model results are
clearly seen in the data collected for this evaluation. One interesting and positive unintended
consequence occurred in the Solomon Islands. Specifically, an increased level of confidence
resulted from having access to DRVT products. A high-level official in the Tourism Ministry
explained, “It gives us an advantage and confidence while talking to cruise ships.” They have
confidence in the data and products of DRVT and therefore have confidence in talking with
cruise ship operators regarding the best time to visit or preparedness for their safety. He added,
“It would give visitors, tourism wholesalers, and cruise ships the confidence that Solomon
Islands has a mechanism in place to address disasters.”

Another possible future positive unintended consequence, evident in both Solomon Islands and
Fiji, concerns the drought policy. As previously mentioned, the DRVT informs country-level
drought policies by – among other things – defining what information is possible. Many
government bodies are involved in the drafting and implementation of drought policies.
However, they are not in all cases well-versed in working together on common goals or issues.
Information is seen as the glue that binds government agencies in working together on ‘whole-
of-government’ issues. The drought policy, influenced by the DRVT, would necessitate
communication mechanisms among different governmental ministries; they would need to work
together on the common issue of drought. In this way, the DRVT has (to a limited degree to
date) and will have the positive unintended consequence of strengthening government
coordination. It can be seen as a catalyst to the process of government coordination. Time will
tell to what extent it will have this effect in partner countries.

Although not an unintended consequence of the intervention itself, government officials in all
partner countries expressed an interest in learning from the results of this evaluation. They
hoped to learn from what other countries were doing in this project, for example. In addition, as
often occurs in participatory evaluative efforts, key informants noted that the process of being
asked questions as part of this evaluation helped them to think of new things and ways to
approach next steps.




                                                                                                    17
                                        CONCLUSIONS

NIWA’s work in these three countries has shown impressive positive results in Phase I, even at
the highest levels of the CF logic model – in the areas of access, use and investment. In fact, this
evaluation uncovered use of DRVT products that were not yet reported by NIWA itself. The
DRVT is informing drought response plans in all three current partner countries. These plans
will illustrate a future use as well as investment, as they are developed and resourced, which will
serve as a powerful element of DRVT sustainability. Interestingly, they were reported to serve a
means to catalyze intra-governmental cooperation.

Current access to and use of DRVT products is also visible in the areas of reporting to higher-
level government decision makers in partner countries, access of DRVT products by other
government agencies, creation of own products from DRVT – and to a limited extent – product
modification for community outreach. Future indications of use and investment will be seen in
expanded awareness and utilization at the community level, and could also be seen in
governmental budgeting for drought response activities.

A relatively small amount of funding has shown very large results. This project is clearly
punching above its weight and represents a very successful investment for DFID; it looks likely
to continue to produce results long after Phase II ends.

In answer to the question, “What has worked?” this evaluation found that partnerships are the
fulcrum around which the project operates. It are these true and mutually-beneficial partnerships
that enable sustainable capacity building, gender integration, and even leverage to occur – all
leading to access to and use of DRVT products to increase resilience on the ground. This
evaluation shed light on the unique style of partnership evident between NIWA and government
officials in the three project countries of Solomon Islands, Samoa and Fiji. Whether one looks at
the relationship as ‘buddies’ or members of one’s family, the partnerships in this CF project are
real and long-lasting.

What was also clear throughout the findings of this evaluation is the close connection between
what NIWA intends to do in Phase II and what partner country officials are requesting. The
strength of the partnerships between NIWA and government officials is extremely high. “Why”
have these partnerships served this role and been so critical to achieving long-term project
results? Because all parties concerned are interested in their success; partnership members
maintain flexibility, are responsive and intellectually curious. They come up with creative
approaches to achieving goals, and they work on issues together. They feel more accountable to
each other than to any funding organization.

There are creative ways to leverage the work of other organizations in the three partner countries
with respect to reaching beneficiaries at the community level. For example, NIWA plans to
work with Red Cross Red Crescent societies in the countries, using their networks to
communicate DRVT products to hard-to-reach communities. In addition, in coordination with
national meteorological services, NIWA plans to partner with other national stakeholders that
have close ties with community groups such as community observers and the Coastal
Infrastructure Management Plan in Samoa, and women’s groups in all three countries.


                                                                                                 18
The last mile of CF interventions can be the most critical to ongoing sustainability of these
efforts.

The current CF logic model, drawn from the SHEAR logframe provided by DFID, is strongly
supported by the evidence found in this evaluation in the case of NIWA’s DRVT project. This
project provided clarity to the different layers of beneficiaries in CF projects. The first layer is
the typically mid-level government officials with whom projects have the main initial contact.
The second layer is the higher-level government decision makers who will receive information
from the DRVT in an easily-understandable manner. And the third type of beneficiary is the
ultimate user of DRVT products, or the person who is most susceptible to hazards. The focus of
Phase I of the CF was primarily on the first-level beneficiary, typically the mid-level government
official. During Phase II, all three types of beneficiaries will be involved in ultimate use DRVT
products. This evaluation also argues that an assumption should be added to the CF logic model
from the output to the outcome level that states “assuming no disasters occur during project
implementation”.


                                    RECOMMENDATIONS

   1. Continue close MEL of all CF projects, including in-depth case studies to provide
      valuable lessons and insight into the theory of change and logic model, which inform
      future projects.

   2. Consider approval of small awards to the two or three most successful Phase II CF
      projects to provide further support to the lasting nature of this important work to improve
      resilience. These could be called “sustainability awards” and would be used exclusively
      to work on the ‘last mile’ of these interventions, increasing the possibility that the effects
      of these projects would be long-lasting. Gender dimensions would be the center of such
      interventions.

   3. An interesting area of potential future MEL activity would include review of partner
      country government budget data for drought response plans, where available. KIIs, over
      phone or in person, could be conducted to gain a sense of whether this CF project served
      as an influence on budget decisions. And if so, how?

   4. Consider modification of the CF logic model by adding an assumption from the output to
      outcome level that states, “assuming no disaster occurs during project implementation.”

   5. Make an external version of this evaluation report public so that others can learn from its
      findings. One key takeaway for projects in similar areas is the power of true partnerships
      in such efforts. This case study illustrates a project where communication is fluid and
      flows in both directions. In other words, it presents a clear departure from more
      traditional methods of conducting a needs analysis and then delivering assistance in
      response to that analysis. This paradigm shift represents a process of relationship
      building that includes constant needs analyses, fluid communication, flexibility and
      respect. And the results are much more than expected.


                                                                                                  19
                         ANNEX A: CHALLENGE FUND (CF) LOGIC MODEL


Results                         Indicators                       Milestones at end of   Milestones at end of
                                                                 Phase I                Phase II
Goal: Greater and               Number of policies,              N/A                    At least 6 local policies,
more effective                  plans or investments                                    plans or investments
investment9 in disaster         informed by CF-funded                                   informed by CF-funded
resilience,                     risk information                                        risk information
preparedness, response          data/tools/approaches;                                  data/tools/approaches
and recovery
Purpose:                        Number of documented             N/A                    10 documented instances
Data/tools/approaches           instances of high-level                                 of high-level decision
utilized by decision            decision makers using                                   makers using CF-funded
makers                          CF-funded risk                                          risk information
                                information                                             data/tools/approaches
                                data/tools/approaches
Outcome: New high               (a) Number of decision    (a) 20 decision-              (a) 30 decision-makers
quality and relevant            makers accessing CF-      makers regularly              regularly accessing CF-
data/tools/approaches           funded                    accessing CF-funded           funded
accessed by decision            data/tools/approaches;    data/tools/approaches         data/tools/approaches;
makers                          (b) # of tools available  (b) 5 tools are openly        (b) 6 tools are openly
                                on open platform; (c) #   available to the              available to the broader
                                downloads of              broader user                  user community on an
                                data/tools/approaches     community on an               appropriate platform; (c)
                                                          appropriate platform;         70 recorded downloads
                                                          (c) 50 recorded               of data/tools/approaches
                                                          downloads of
                                                          data/tools/approaches
Output: New toolkit             Number of new             Phase I CF yields at          In total, at least ten new
of demand-led, open             datasets/tools/approaches least 10 new datasets         datasets and tools
data, tools and                 developed                 and tools. Phase II           developed, 50% in DFID
approaches for                                            CF proposals                  priority countries
resilience,                                               evaluated and funded
preparedness, response
and recovery
Output: Improved                (a) Number of                    (a) 5 new              (a) 5 new partnerships
capacity of the                 partnerships developed           partnerships           developed with local
community to deliver            with local partners              developed with local   partners. (b) 15
demand-led, co-                 across disciplines that          partners. (b) 10       beneficiaries involved
produced products               support the development          beneficiaries          co-development of tools
                                of demand-led products;          involved co-
                                (b) Number of projects           development of tools


  9
      Investments at the goal level include partner country budget allocations.

                                                                                                             20
                              developed with
                              beneficiaries10
Output: Role of               Number of project plans           10 Phase I CF                All Phase II projects
gender11 considered in        considering gender in             projects considered          considered the role of
project design and            risk identification,              gender in project            gender in
delivery                      outreach and capacity             implementation               implementation
                              development plans
Output: Improved              Number of targeted                10 beneficiaries             A cumulative total of 20
capacity of target            beneficiaries that receive        trained during Phase         beneficiaries trained
beneficiary users to          training during the               I                            over the life of project
apply data, products          project
and tools in practice
New evidence on what          Evidence on what works            15 Phase I                   1 case study evaluation
works in developing           communicated through              monitoring self-             of a successful Phase I
demand-led data, tools        progress, final and               assessments                  CF project and 2 case
and products to support       evaluation reports                completed. Regular           study evaluations of
resilience and                                                  MEL reporting                Phase II projects using
demonstrating the                                               completed.                   rigorous evaluation
value of risk data and                                                                       methods completed.
tools for decision                                                                           Phase I learning
making                                                                                       document submitted.
                                                                                             Final report
                                                                                             communicating
                                                                                             examples of value of
                                                                                             information for decision
                                                                                             making
Output: Leverage12            British pound leverage            £500,000 cash and            £1million cash and in-
from other sources in         from other sources                in-kind contributions        kind contributions
CF and related
activities leading
toward same overall
goal




  10
     Beneficiary refers to a person or group that derives advantage from something. It is clear that NIWA staff and
  partner country officials and citizens can all be seen as beneficiaries of the DRVT project. For the purposes of the
  CF logic model, however, the term refers to those government officials within partner countries that take part in this
  project. – typically mid-level government decision-makers.
  11
    Gender at the output level is meant to include consideration of the role of, or the relationship between, men and
  women at any stage of the intervention. In Phase II, it is meant to consider the answer to the question, “How are
  men and women, boys and girls affected differently by the hazard?”

  12
     Leverage at the output level of the logic model is meant to include cash and in-kind contributions from public or
  private sectors for activities that assist in achieving CF results, whether directly requested by the project or not.

                                                                                                                     21
     APPENDIX B: NIWA SEMI-STRUCTURED INTERVIEW SCHEDULE


1. What do you do to ensure that your innovation is used in partner countries?

2. How do you view gender in your project?

3. How sustainable do you think this work is?

4. What is the most important element of the CF theory of change in eventual uptake of the
   DRVT, in your view? [Show CF theory of change if necessary.]

5. What is the nature of your work with partner country NDMOs?

6. Do you think your work is informing policies in any of the partner countries? If yes, can
   you explain how?

7. Is there additional information you would like to provide?

8. Do you have any questions for me?




                                                                                          22
APPENDIX C: PARTNER COUNTRY METEOROLOGICAL/CLIMATE SERVICE
             SEMI-STRUCTURED INTERVIEW SCHEDULE


1. Can you please tell me a bit about your office and its responsibilities?

2. Does your country have a drought management or drought response plan?

3. What does your service do in case of dryness or drought?

4. What do you think of NIWA’s work with you on the DRVT?

5. [If applicable] Do you distribute DRVT products directly from the toolkit or do you
   work with them first?

6. How do you look at gender in your work?

7. Do you use other products than the drought monitor?

8. Does the DRVT influence the drought policy?

9. Do you use the DRVT to make your own products?

10. [If applicable] How often do you use the DRVT?

11. How often do you or your staff access the DRVT?

12. Do you have any questions for me?




                                                                                         23
APPENDIX D: PARTNER COUNTRY NATIONAL DISASTER MANAGEMENT
        OFFICE SEMI-STRUCTURED INTERVIEW SCHEDULE


1. Can you please tell me a bit about your office and its responsibilities?

2. What is your relationship with Meteorological and Climate Services in your country?

3. Have you used any drought information from Met services?

4. Are you familiar with the DRVT?

5. If yes to question #4, what do you think of DRVT products?

6. Do you have a drought management or drought response plan?

7. What does your office do in case of dryness or drought?




                                                                                         24
APPENDIX E: PARTNER COUNTRY TOURISM MINISTRY SEMI-STRUCTURED
                     INTERVIEW SCHEDULE


 1. Can you please tell me a bit about your ministry?

 2. What is your role in the Tourism Ministry?

 3. What is your relationship with Meteorological and Climate Services in your country?

 4. Have you used any drought information from Met services?

 5. What is your relationship with the NDMO?

 6. Does your country have a drought management or drought response plan?

 7. What does your ministry do in case of dryness or drought?

 8. Does your ministry work with Meteorological and Climate Services or NDMO?

 9. What is meant by the ‘whole-of-government’ approach to issues in Solomon Islands?

 10. Do you have any questions for me?




                                                                                          25
