Health &
noncommunicable
diseases
PACIFIC POSSIBLE BACKGROUND PAPER NO.5.
Pacific Island countries face unique development challenges.
They are far away from major markets, often with small
populations spread across many islands and vast distances,
and are at the forefront of climate change and its impacts.
Because of this, much research has focused on the challenges
and constraints faced by Pacific Island countries, and finding
ways to respond to these.

This paper is one part of the Pacific Possible series, which
takes a positive focus, looking at genuinely transformative
opportunities that exist for Pacific Island countries over the
next 25 years and identifies the region’s biggest challenges
that require urgent action.

Realizing these opportunities will often require collaboration
not only between Pacific Island Governments, but also with
neighbouring countries on the Pacific Rim. The findings
presented in Pacific Possible will provide governments
and policy-makers with specific insights into what each
area could mean for the economy, for employment, for
government income and spending.

To learn more, visit www.worldbank.org/PacificPossible,
or join the conversation online with the hashtag
#PacificPossible.
© 2016 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank
1818 H Street, NW
Washington, DC 20433
Telephone: +1 202-473-1000
Internet: www.worldbank.org


This work is a product of the staff of The World Bank with external contributions. The
findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in the
work do not necessarily reflect the views of The World Bank, its Board of Executive
Directors, or the governments they represent.

The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The
boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information
shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the part of The World Bank
concerning the legal status of any territory or the
endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.

Rights and Permissions
The material in this work is subject to copyright. Because The World Bank encourages
dissemination of its knowledge, this work may be reproduced,
in whole or in part, for noncommercial purposes as long as full attribution to this work is
given.

Queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to the Office
of the Publisher, The World Bank, 1818 H Street,
NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA; fax: 202-522-2422; e-mail: pubrights@worldbank.org.
Health and Noncommunicable Diseases

Bending the Noncommunicable Diseases Cost Curve in the
Pacific




 Xiaohui Hou, Ian Anderson, Ethan-John Burton-Mckenzie
Acknowledgement


The background paper Pacific Possible: Health was produced and written by a task team consisting of
Xiaohui Hou (Task Team Leader), Ian Anderson and Ethan-John Burton-Mckenzie. This report was
launched at the Pacific Non-Communicable Diseases Summit in Tonga in June 2016. The report is one
part of a broader ‘Pacific Possible’ research agenda, which explores transformative opportunities that
exist for Pacific Island countries over the next 25 years and identifies the biggest challenges that require
urgent action.

The paper benefited from comments from Sameh El-Saharty, Enis Baris, Aaka Pande, WHO West Pacific
Office, SPC, Australian Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade and New Zealand Ministry of Foreign
Affairs and Trade. Susan Ivatts, Maude Ruest Archambault, Eileen Sullivan, Emiko Masaki, Sutayut
Osornprasop, Brenna Moore, Katie Barker, Quenelda Clegg, and Tasha Sinai, provided technical and
administrative support. Toomas Palu (Practice Manager of East Asia and Pacific Region, Health, Nutrition
and Population Global Practice) provided technical comments and supervision on the report. The team
also thanks Robert Utz, Venkatesh Sundararaman, Kim Edwards, and Anthony Obeyesekere for providing
valuable macro-economic advice and analysis.

The team would also like to thank Franz Drees-Gross (former Country Director for Timor-Leste, Papua New
Guinea & Pacific Islands, East Asia and Pacific Region), Michel Kerf (Country Director for Timor-Leste,
Papua New Guinea & Pacific Islands, East Asia and Pacific Regio) and Mona Sur (Portfolio and Operations
Manager, EACNF) for their overall guidance and support.




                                                     1
Context: Health as a Development Issue

Health has direct and indirect effects on economic growth. Good health has intrinsic value, but
also interacts in various ways with the pace and pattern of social and economic development
(Horton & Lo, 2013; Sen, 1999; Spence & Lewis, 2009; WHO, 2001; World Bank, 1993). At the
macroeconomic level, good health increases worker productivity and reduces absenteeism;
increases educational learning and the returns from investing in education; and reduces or
postpones the use of medical resources freeing up financial space for other purposes (D. Bloom &
Williamson, 1998; McCarthy, Wolf, & Wu, 1999; Ranis, Stewart, & Ramirez, 2000). At the
household level, good health – and good health systems – helps individuals maximize their human
potential; avoid financial distress and impoverishment; and break the inter-generational cycle of
maternal ill health, stunting and impaired productivity of children, and consequential poverty
(Barker, 1990; Bhutta, 2013; Black et al., 2008). The world has seen rapid and sustained
improvements in many health outcomes. For example, global life expectancy for both sexes
increased from around 65 years in 1990 to 71 years in 2013. However, many challenges remain.
Currently, noncommunicable diseases (NCDs) – especially cardiovascular diseases, cancer,
diabetes and chronic respiratory disease (WRPO, 2012)(WRPO, 2012) kill around 38 million
people each year. Almost three-quarters of NCD deaths occur in low- and middle-income countries
(WHO, 2014a).

The NCD Challenges in the Pacific

Pacific Island countries (PICs) face a particular challenge with respect to noncommunicable
diseases (NCDs). The latest Global Burden of Disease 2013 study, covering 188 countries,
showed the rising importance of NCDs as a cause of global death and disability (GBD 2013
Mortality and Causes of Death Collaborators, 2013). NCDs are now the leading cause of death in
most countries in the Pacific, ranging from an estimated 60 percent of deaths in Solomon Islands
to 77 percent of deaths in Fiji (figure 1) (WHO, 2014a). NCDs are also an important driver of
premature (< age 70 years) deaths in most of the Pacific, with rates measurably higher than lower-
middle-income global averages. Over half (54 percent) of all male deaths and nearly half (48
percent) of all female deaths were premature in Nauru (WHO, 2011b).

              Figure 1 Estimated Percentage of Total Deaths Caused by NCDs




                                                2
    90%
                           77%                      73%                                        73%
    80%                                69%                                  70%                          70%
               67%
    70%                                                                              60%
    60%
    50%                                                         44%
    40%
    30%
    20%
    10%
     0%
               FSM          Fiji      Kiribati    Marshall      PNG         Samoa   Solomon    Tuvalu   Vanuatu
                                                  Islands                            Islands
Source:WHO.


Diabetes is particularly prevalent in the Pacific. As shown in table 1, the Pacific contains seven
of the top ten diabetes-prevalent countries in the world.

Table 1 Prevalence Rates of Diabetes: Top Ten Countries in the World

          Ranking Country                                          Prevalence of diabetes, as
                                                                   percentage of 20-79 year olds,
                                                                   in 2015 (age adjusted)
                   1    Tokelau                                                                  30
                   2    Nauru                                                                  24.1
                   3    Mauritius                                                              22.3
                   4    Cook Islands                                                           21.5
                   5    Marshall Islands                                                       21.3
                   6    Palau                                                                  20.9
                   7    Saudia Arabia                                                            20
                   7    Kuwait                                                                   20
                   7    Qatar                                                                    20
                  10    New Caledonia                                                          19.6
Source: IDF Diabetes Atlas 7th Edition (International Diabetes Federation, 2015).


The percent of people affected by NCDs will rise substantially in the Pacific in the coming
decades. This projected increase is driven by at least two forces. The first is the interaction between
two major demographic trends, as illustrated in figure 2. PICs have high rates of population growth,
which adds to public health needs but prevents a potential “demographic dividend” that could
stimulate economic growth. Most Pacific countries have relatively high total fertility rates and
low contraceptive prevalence rates that are more akin to the global average for least developed
countries. In figure 2, the absolute population growth is largely driven by Papua New Guinea, but
the trends are similar for most Pacific countries. In addition, the share of those aged 60 and older

                                                               3
has begun to increase and is expected to grow very rapidly in the coming years. Since NCDs
disproportionately affect this age group, the incidence of these diseases can be expected to
accelerate in the future.

Figure 2 Population Growth and Aging in the Pacific Island Countries


                18                                                                                     14.00
                16                                                                                     12.00
                14
                                                                                                       10.00
                12
     Millions




                10                                                                                     8.00




                                                                                                               %
                 8                                                                                     6.00
                 6
                                                                                                       4.00
                 4
                 2                                                                                     2.00
                 0                                                                                     0.00
                     1960     1970     1980    1990      2000     2010     2020   2030   2040   2050
                            PP countries minus Marshall Islands, Palau, Tuvalu



Source: WDI based on (1) United Nations Population Division. World Population Prospects, (2) United Nations Statistical
Division. Population and Vital Statistics Report (various years), (3) Census reports and other statistical publications from national
statistical offices, (4) Eurostat: Demographic Statistics, (5) Secretariat of the Pacific Community: Statistics and Demography
Programme, and (6) U.S. Census Bureau: International Database.


The second force is the high level of NCD risk factors prevalent in the Pacific. Behavioral
risk factors, including tobacco use, physical activity, and unhealthy diet, are responsible for most
of deaths due to NCDs. Figure 3 presents the NCDs death rates attributable to behavioral risk
factors of individuals for nine countries. Tuvalu and Palau were excluded due to lack of available
data. The results were aggregated across both genders and all ages. 1 Dietary risk (e.g. diet high in
sweetened beverages, diet high in trans-fat, diet high in sodium etc.) is the greatest risk factor for
cardiovascular diseases induced deaths in the Pacific. Dietary risk factors also constitute the
highest behavioral risk factors for death due to diabetes. Low physical activity imposes significant
risk of death caused by cardiovascular diseases, diabetes, and cancer.

Figure 3 NCD Mortality Rates Attributable to Behavioral Risk Factors




1
    These risk factors are not mutually exclusive such that an NCD death may be attributable to multiple risk factors.

                                                                         4
Source: Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation (IHME).



Tobacco use is the only risk factor common to all four main NCDs and exacerbates virtually
all NCDs. Tobacco use is the most significant behavioral risk factor of chronic respiratory disease
(CRD) and cancer (figure 4). WHO notes that “tobacco is the leading behavioral risk factor
causing substantially large number of potentially preventable deaths worldwide…one death every
six seconds” (WHO, 2012). Tobacco smokers lose at least one decade of life expectancy compared
to those who never smoked (Jha et al., 2013). Prevalence of tobacco consumption in the Pacific
is much higher than the global average of 21 percent (figure 4). In 2012, adult males in Kiribati
and PNG had the 3rd and 5th highest rates of smoking in the world with prevalence rates of 67
percent and 55 percent respectively (Ng et al., 2014). Tobacco consumption among males in
Tonga, Solomon Islands, and Vanuatu is also quite high; 43 percent, 45 percent, and 43 percent
respectively.

Figure 4 Prevalence of Tobacco Consumption in the Pacific




                                                              5
 80%
         67%
 70%
 60%            52%                                      55%
 50%                                                                                      45%           43%              43%
                                                               41%
            37%        36%              37%                              36.5%
 40%                                                                                            32%
                                                             27%                 25.6%                         27%             25%
 30%                             21%            23%
                                                                                             18%
 20%                                                                       13.7%                            12%
                             7%               9%                                                                              8%
 10%
  0%
          Kiribati         Marshall          Palau      Papua New          Samoa           Solomon          Tonga        Vanuatu
                           Islands                        Guinea                            Islands

                                                        Male       Female         total
Source: World Health Organization (WHO), Noncommunicable Diseases Country Profiles 2014.




The behavior changes lead to key metabolic/physiological changes. One key metabolic risk
factor is obesity or overweight status. The Pacific has high overweight and obesity levels. The
top seven most obese countries in the world are in the Pacific. As seen in figure 5 below, over one-
fourth of the adult population in most PICs is clinically obese (Body Mass Index equal to or greater
than 30). Tonga and Samoa have the highest obesity rates (58 percent and 54 percent, respectively).
This is much higher than the 13 percent global average. School age obesity and overweight
percentages are also high in many countries (Anderson, 2013a).

Figure 5 Prevalence of Obesity Rates in the Pacific
 80%
                                                                                     66%                     69%
 70%
                                                                                                                  58%
 60%                  54%         52%          53%         54%                            54%
                           46%                               49%                                            47%
 50%                                   45%               44%                       44%
          41%        38%         38%                 41%                                         38%
 40%                                                                                                                     34%
                                             28%                                                      30%                     28%
              31%
 30%    20%                                                            21%                      23%                     21%
 20%                                                                     16%
                                                                     12%
 10%
  0%




                                                      male     female       total

Source: World Health Organization (WHO), Noncommunicable Diseases Country Profiles 2014.


Other trends and risk factors also point to a substantial worsening of the situation. More than
70 percent of women have insufficient physical activity in FSM and Marshall Islands; and over 30
percent of adult men and women in Vanuatu suffer hypertension (Kessaram et al., 2015). While

                                                                     6
rates of physical inactivity and alcohol consumption have decreased in both Samoa and Tonga
over the last ten years, rates of obesity have barely changed in Tonga and have increased in Samoa
(WHO, 2014a).

The Financing Challenge: NCDs Place Increasing Pressure on Government Budgets

PICs also face a significant health financing challenge that affects development (Anderson,
2013a, 2013b, 2013c). Public expenditure on health including external grants, is already much
larger as a percentage of GDP in the Pacific than lower-middle-income countries globally (figure
6). Tuvalu, where public expenditure on health was 19.7 percent of GDP in 2013, has a ratio that
is more than six times the global average for lower-middle-income countries. Nine countries in the
Pacific have a larger share of public expenditure allocated to health as a percentage of GDP than
the global average for upper-middle-income countries.

               Figure 6 Public Health Expenditure as % GDP, 2000 and 2013


                                  Tuvalu
                         Marshall Islands
                 Micronesia, Fed. States
                                  Kiribati
                                   Palau
                                  Samoa
                         Solomon Islands
                                   Tonga                                         2013
                       Papua New Guinea                                          2000
                                 Vanuatu
                                      Fiji


                      Low income globally
           Lower middle income globally

                                             0   5        10      15   20   25
                                                 percent of GDP

       Source: WDI.


The share of public health expenditure is growing for most countries in the Pacific, raising
questions about long-term financial sustainability. Figure 6 shows that nine of the 11 Pacific
Island countries increased their share of public expenditure on health as a percentage of GDP
between 2000 and 2013 (latest year available). This pattern is consistent with the global trend in
which most countries increase public health expenditure as their economies and financial resources

                                                      7
grow. However, the Pacific is presented with the challenge of sustaining increased public health
expenditure in the face of historically low rates of economic growth; low rates of government tax
revenue as a percentage of GDP; and high vulnerability to external economic shocks and natural
disasters. All of this raises the question as to whether the expansion of public health expenditure
as a share of the economy is financially sustainable.

Health expenditure is already absorbing a significant – and growing – share of government
expenditure. Thus, the financial and political sustainability of continuing increasing public
expenditure in health become very important. Figure 7 illustrates the public health expenditure as
a percentage of total government expenditure. To put this chart in perspective, it is worth noting
that only nine of 61 countries in Sub-Saharan Africa with high health burdens allocate 15 percent
of government expenditure to the health sector, a goal set as part of the Abuja Declaration in 2001.
Four countries in the Pacific have exceeded that percentage, and all countries in the Pacific exceed
the global public health expenditure average of 6.6 percent for lower-middle-income countries.
Figure 7 shows that eight of the 11 countries, for which comparable data is available, have seen an
increase in the share of government health expenditure since 2010. Again, this raises questions
about the long-term financial sustainability of government health expenditure when PICs face
modest or volatile economic growth and limited capacity to generate tax revenue due to relatively
small private sectors. There are also important questions about the overall effectiveness, efficiency,
equity, and quality of existing service expenditure (Anderson, 2013a, 2013b, 2013c; Anderson,
Ivatts, Somanathan, & Rolfe, 2014).

  Figure 7 Public Health Expenditure as a Percentage of Total Government Expenditure,
                                     2000 and 2013




                                                  8
               Marshall Islands
                        Tuvalu
                         Palau
      Micronesia, Fed. States.
                        Samoa
                      Vanuatu
                        Tonga
               Solomon Islands                                                      2013
           Papua New Guinea                                                         2000
                       Kiribati
                            Fiji


         Low income globally
 Lower middle income globally

                                   0   5     10      15       20    25      30
                      public health expenditure as percent of total government expenditure

Source: WDI.


NCDs are a major driver of overseas medical referrals: a significant and often fast-growing
component of government health expenditure that benefits a small fraction of the population.
PICs, especially those with small populations, understandably do not have the facilities and
specialized personnel to treat more complicated cases of cancer, heart disease, diabetes or other
diseases. Several countries therefore support overseas referrals to Australia, Fiji, New Zealand,
India or elsewhere to receive specialized medical care. The government usually pays for the travel,
as well as hospital and treatment costs (which can be for an extended period) of the patient and, in
some instances, accompanying family members. The public policy and public financing challenge
is to ensure such schemes are cost-effective compared to alternative use of the finances. The
effective management of these programs is difficult, especially for smaller island countries. Recent
research (details available on request) found that over one-third of the government health budget
can be allocated to overseas referrals for the benefit of around one percent of the population. An
earlier study by the Ministry of Health in Samoa noted that the overseas treatment program
absorbed 15 percent of total public health expenditure in 2009/10, to the private benefit of less
than 0.1 percent of the nation’s population. The overseas treatment program absorbed 11 percent
of total public health funding in 2008/09, and this had grown to 15 percent by 2009/10.

Diabetes places particular health burdens on individuals and households, and financial
burdens on PIC governments. Diabetes is usually a life-long disease and can have disabling
complications including blindness and amputations. Diabetes has particular financial
consequences for PICs because drug treatment is usually required for the duration of the patient’s

                                                          9
life. For example, recent analysis (Anderson et al., 2013) found that one insulin-dependent patient
in Vanuatu requires the equivalent drug resource allocation of 76.4 other citizens, on average, in
that country. Only 1.31 percent of the total population could be treated with insulin for diabetes,
or 5.3 percent treated with the full regimen of anti-hypertensive drugs, before the total government
drug budget in Vanuatu was fully spent. In brief, government funding for diabetes-related insulin
was simply unaffordable and unsustainable. Diabetes can also lead to kidney damage that requires
dialysis. While dialysis clinics in the Pacific are generally less expensive than overseas referrals,
dialysis raises some fundamental questions about the affordability and financial sustainability of
dialysis treatment in the Pacific context (see Box 1).



                   Box 1 The National Kidney Foundation (NKF) of Samoa


There are several positive aspects to the NKF of Samoa. NKF has a clear mission statement: “To
actively pursue the reduction of the incidence of kidney failure and kidney related diseases, with
sustainability in the provision of quality holistic care for patients already with end stage renal
failure.” Access to hemodialysis (“dialysis”) for kidney failure has been increasing, from 89
patients in 2012/13 to 116 in 2014/15. A total of 188 dialysis therapy sessions were given to 54
“holiday patients”, which NKF believes “will continue to rise as more overseas Samoans are
confident with the services offered.” NKF screened 874 people for kidney disease as part of its
outreach program, and the total number of people on the Pre Dialysis Register is 745 as of June
30, 2015. NKF has been able to attract in-kind overseas specialist assistance valued at around
ST$500,000 (US$192,000) annually.

However, there are also worrying trends in terms of overall effectiveness, cost-effectiveness,
equity and “opportunity cost”, and the financial sustainability of NKF operations. The NKF’s latest
annual report acknowledged that the mortality or death rate in the NKF dialysis patients “has been
high”: 29 out of 116 patients (25 percent) died in the last fiscal year. Cost effectiveness is
questionable: total NKF expenditure through June 30, 2015 was ST$6.5 million. The average
patient treatment cost is ST$56,312 (US$21,708). This is more than five times the GDP per capita
of Samoa. Average dialysis expenditure per patient of US$21,708 is also more than 100 times the
average government expenditure on health per capita in Samoa of US$214 in 2012 (WHO, 2014b).
In other words, one dialysis patient at NKF absorbs, on average, the equivalent government health
allocation of more than 100 other Samoan citizens. This raises questions of equity and “opportunity
cost” as other, higher impact interventions could be provided for the amount of resources currently
allocated to dialysis patients. It is difficult to determine the gender and socio-economic profile of
the 116 patients or whether there is equitable access to dialysis treatment from public sources.

Finally, and importantly, the overall affordability and financial sustainability of the dialysis


                                                 10
program is questionable. The long-term financial sustainability of NKF operations is also a
challenge bearing in mind that the Samoan government provides more than 95 percent of NKF’s
overall income, and patient fees contribute less than three percent. Future long-term affordability
and sustainability of NKF operations is a particular challenge when more than two-thirds of
patients at the NKF currently have diabetes, and the “feeder pool” is so large.

Source: National Kidney Foundation of Samoa Annual Report 2013/14 and 2014/15 (National Kidney Foundation of Samoa,
2015).


Long-term Macroeconomic Impacts of NCDs

The global evidence increasingly shows that NCDs result in long-term macroeconomic
impacts on labor supply, capital accumulation, and GDP growth (Abegunde, Mathers, Adam,
Ortegon, & Strong, 2007; Abegunde & Stanciole, 2006; Daar et al., 2007; Mayer-Foulkes, 2011;
Nikolic, Stanciole, & Zaydman, 2011; Suhrcke & Urban, 2010). NCDs directly affect the quantity
of the labor force through premature death of workers, or disability as the result of stroke or
diabetic-related blindness and amputation. NCDs also affect the quality of the labor force through
a variety of channels including absenteeism, co-morbidity including mental health issues, and
disability. Premature death and disability caused by NCDs can also have indirect and longer-term
effects as well. If young children are taken out of school to look after a relative with diabetic
blindness then the possibility for the next generation to improve their own living standards is
compromised. There are particularly adverse long-term social effects if young girls are taken out
of school to look after sick relatives (Hill & King, 1995). NCDs affect the savings potential and
capital accumulation of individuals due to direct out-of-pocket spending, which could otherwise
be invested in productive assets for households. This is a particular problem in Asia where out-of-
pocket expenditures are high, and can lead to impoverishment. Out-of-pocket expenditure is much
less of a problem in the Pacific where government health expenditure absorbs most of the burden.
Pacific Island governments are increasingly aware that rapidly rising public expenditure on NCDs
has a high opportunity cost in terms of resources that could have been allocated elsewhere, both
health and non-health investment, such as rural roads and electricity generation.

There is only limited published research on the impact of NCDs on Pacific economies, with
most research focusing on the impact on government health budgets (Anderson, 2013a; World
Bank, 2014). There is little hard data, and virtually no peer reviewed literature, on the broader
economic impacts including the effects of premature death, absenteeism, and disability on
workforce participation, or savings and investment.

In the absence of hard data on the broader economic costs of NCDs in the Pacific, modeling
was undertaken for Pacific Possible. The modeling estimates the economic costs of NCDs using,
respectively, a “value of lost output” approach for NCDs mortality (i.e. death) and a “cost of
illness” approach for NCDs morbidity. While the methods are not all encompassing of the total

                                                          11
                                  economic burden that NCDs pose, they provide a lower bound estimate of the severity of the
                                  problem that the Pacific nations face. Details of the method are in annex 2. The approach uses
                                  similar methods as Bloom et al. (2011) used to estimate the global economic costs of the NCDs,
                                  which was presented in the World Economic Forum in 2011.


                                  NCD Mortality Burden

                                  A key finding reveals the NCD mortality burden is much greater in the Pacific Island
                                  countries than global standards. The estimated effect of four major types of NCDs
                                  (cardiovascular diseases, chronic respiratory diseases, diabetes, and cancer) on the global economy
                                  is approximately 3.25 percent of the 2010 global GDP, as illustrated by the red dotted line in figure
                                  8. The orange dotted line represents the average NCD burden for middle-income countries as a
                                  proportion of middle-income GDP. The projected 2030 economic burden for eight of the Pacific
                                  countries analyzed (PNG, Vanuatu, Tonga, Fiji, Marshall Islands, Micronesia, Palau, and Tuvalu)
                                  is significantly higher than the middle-income average burden. Kiribati, Samoa, and Solomon
                                  Islands are near to the middle-income average burden in 2030.

                                  Figure 8 Economic Burden of NCDs as a Proportion of GDP, 2030 and 2040


                               20.0
Economic Costs as % 2010 GDP




                               16.0                                                                   15.1                                       14.9      14.3
                                                                13.6        12.9          12.7                                       12.3
                               12.0      10.9
                                                     9.2                                                           8.5      8.6
                                8.0                                                                                                                                 5.22
                                                                                                                                                                    3.25
                                4.0
                                         6.8         6.5        10.0         8.3          8.7         9.1          5.6      4.9       8.3        10.5       8.4
                                0.0
                                         Fiji      Kiribati    Marshall   Micronesia      Palau    Papua New   Samoa      Solomon    Tonga       Tuvalu   Vanuatu
                                                               Islands                               Guinea                Islands

                                                                  2030             2040           Global Average         Middle Income Average




                                  Source: Staff calculation.


                                  The economic burden is estimated to escalate even further from 2030 to 2040. That is because a
                                  premature death due to NCDs has a long-term impact on the economy through the loss of the
                                  deceased’s potential productivity in the workforce. If no action is taken, the economic burden of
                                  NCD mortality is projected to increase significantly.



                                                                                                    12
The direness of the situation is similar for the five smaller Pacific nations. Due to lack of data,
estimates for the five smaller Pacific nations required more assumptions. However, the burden is
expected to increase from 6.5 percent to 9.2 percent in Kiribati, 10.0 percent to 13.6 percent in the
Marshall Islands, 8.3 percent to 12.9 percent in Micronesia (F.S.M), 8.7 percent to 12.7 percent in
Palau, and 10.5 percent to 14.9 percent in Tuvalu. The paucity of age disaggregated labor force
participation rates required the assumption that these five countries, for which only aggregated
labor force participation rates are available, assume the average disaggregation rate for the
countries with available data. This average was calculated based on Fiji, Samoa, Solomon Islands,
Tonga and Vanuatu. Papua New Guinea was excluded due to its resources driven economic profile
compared with all other 10 countries included in the Pacific Possible study. 2

Cardiovascular disease accounts for the greatest mortality burden in the Pacific Islands,
followed by diabetes. The disease mortality burden breakdown is presented in figure 9.
Cardiovascular disease is projected to account for 43 percent of lost economic output in the 11
Pacific countries, compared with 51 percent globally. However, diabetes contributes a far greater
economic burden at nearly one quarter (24 percent) of lost economic output, on average, compared
to the global share of just 6 percent. This is partly due to the relatively high incidence and
prevalence of diabetes in the Pacific. Of the 11 countries analyzed, in 2040, Fiji will suffer the
highest cardiovascular burden at roughly 60 percent. In 2040, Vanuatu will suffer the highest
diabetes burden at roughly 38 percent, even higher than the burden from cardiovascular disease.

Figure 9 Average Share of the Lost Economic Output by Diseases in the Pacific Countries,
2040




2
    Other necessary assumptions include: first, the start technology level, national savings rate, and capital depreciation rate for Tuvalu is equal
to the average of the available countries (less Papua New Guinea); second, because external data for labor force participation are required, the
corresponding population estimates are used in place of the population data inbuilt into the WHO EPIC model. The external population data was
disaggregated by age bracket using the same rates found in the WHO EPIC population data; and third, DALY numbers from IHME are not available
for Tuvalu and Palau. In order to scale up the five EPIC diseases to meet the four major NCD types, the average DALY scale factors of the nine
remaining countries are used.



                                                                         13
      Cancer
       15%
                       Diabetes
                         25%
  Chronic
Respiratory
Disease 17%

                     Cardiovascular
                      Disease 43%




               Source: Staff calculation.
               The biggest driver of lost output is the potential loss of labor due to early death from NCDs.
               Table 2 illustrates the potential loss of effective workers due to NCDs by the year 2040. In 2040,
               NCD mortalities will potentially reduce the labor force by 9 percent to 30 percent across the 11
               countries. Again, cardiovascular disease will have the greatest impact, causing an especially high
               amount of lost labor in Fiji and Micronesia. Diabetes is especially severe in Vanuatu, which has
               almost double the burden than any of the other countries. It should be noted this is the estimated
               overall potential labor loss to the labor force, not the employed labor force. Thus higher
               employment levels will be associated with greater potential economic loss. In another words, the
               actual economic loss may be less if there is high unemployment or under-employment. However,
               there will inevitably be large social losses with every premature death, which is not counted in the
               model, such as the premature death of parents that result in orphans.


               Table 2 Percentage of Lost Effective Labor Force in the Year 2040 due to NCDs
                Country           Diabetes     Cardiovascular       Chronic        Cancer    Total
                                                   Disease        Respiratory
                                                                     Disease
                Fiji                 3.7             10.0              1.2         1.5       16.4

                                                               14
 Kiribati                    3.5           3.6                0.8            3.0          10.8
 Marshall Islands            3.5           7.2                2.3            3.1          16.2
 Micronesia                  8.6          11.3                8.2            1.8          29.9
 Palau                       3.1           5.7                2.5            2.4          13.8
 Papua        New            2.7           7.2                3.1            1.8          14.7
 Guinea
 Samoa                       1.7          5.6                 2.8            2.4          12.4
 Solomon Islands             2.4          3.8                 2.3            1.0           9.4
 Tonga                       3.8          7.1                 3.7            3.9          18.5
 Tuvalu                      3.7          7.1                 2.6            3.2          16.6
 Vanuatu                     7.1          5.7                 3.1            3.1          18.9
Source: Staff calculation.


In summary, four results stand out in terms of projected economic costs of NCD mortality
analyses in the Pacific. First, the economic burden of NCDs in the Pacific is greater than the
global average for middle-income countries; second, although cardiovascular disease is the biggest
contributor to the mortality burden in the Pacific, diabetes plays a far greater role in the Pacific
countries compared to the global average; third, the economic burden is increasing with time,
especially as incomes rise; and fourth, in the absence of these four NCDs, the labor force could be
at least nine percent, and up to 30 percent, larger across the eleven Pacific countries.


NCD Morbidity Burden

The estimation of NCD morbidity economic costs is more complicated than NCD mortality
costs. When an individual dies prematurely from an NCD, that person ceases any further
contribution to economic activity and no additional medical costs are incurred. However, in the
case of NCD morbidity, individuals can continue partially or fully contributing to productive
activities. Their contribution is difficult to estimate in advance. They also continue to require
medical treatment including drug costs and health worker time. Again, those costs will vary a great
deal according to the severity of the disease.

The morbidity burden is estimated using a cost-of-illness approach, restricting the initial
analysis to diabetes due to data limitations. The prevalence of diabetes projections comes from
the Global Status Report on Noncommunicable Diseases 2014, which provided the 2014
prevalence rates of raised blood glucose. The rates are disaggregated by gender for ages 18 years
and over. The 2015 and 2040 (International Diabetes Federation) diabetes prevalence rates allow
projections, using a constant growth rate, for growth rates ranging from 0.99 to 3.13 percent yearly,
dependent on the country. Three major areas contribute to the economic cost of NCD morbidity:
medical costs, loss of income, and the loss of tax revenue. Details of method are listed in annex 2.



                                                 15
The diabetes morbidity burden is scaled up to the four noncommunicable diseases using
relationships derived in the mortality analysis. The 2040 morbidity burden for the other three
NCD categories is calculated using the country-specific disease burden proportions in 2040 from
the mortality estimates (figure 10). The projection for all other years is then scaled back to 2015
by assuming that the three disease burdens grow at the same rate as the diabetes morbidity burden.
An implicit assumption of this method is that those countries with higher diabetes morbidity costs
will also have higher cardiovascular diseases, chronic respiratory disease, and cancer prevalence
rates.
The estimated morbidity burden associated with diabetes ranged between 2.5 percent and
7.4 percent of country-specific GDP in 2015. Figure 10 shows the results. The data is organized
by the three major geographic areas in the Pacific: Melanesia, Polynesia, and Micronesia. The
costs are expected to grow, reaching levels of 4.0 percent to almost 12.0 percent by 2040, with the
biggest share attributable to loss of income. The economic burden due to diabetes is highest among
Polynesian countries, particularly in Tuvalu. Melanesian countries are currently experiencing a
lower economic burden due to diabetes, but the burden is projected to rise quickly. The cost of
diabetes is already quite high in most Micronesian countries and will continue to rise.
Melanesian countries face a double burden of diseases. The prevalence of NCDs is rapidly
increasing, particularly in urban areas. This burden will be further compounded by the high
stunting rates for children under five, particularly in Papua New Guinea. Research has shown that
stunted children are more prone to developing NCDs in adulthood (Jinabhai, Taylor, & Sullivan,
2005; Martins & Sawaya, 2006; Sawaya, Martins, Hoffman, & Roberts, 2003). The steep slope of
the burden curve, over the analysis time period, indicates the severity of the problem if no action
is taken to reduce diabetes morbidity.


Figure 10 The Economic Burden of Diabetes Morbidity as a Proportion of Country Specific
GDP, 2015




Source: Staff calculation.


The overall national cost curve associated with NCD morbidity can be modified or bent

                                                16
through interventions targeted to reduce disease prevalence. Figure 11 illustrates two
scenarios. In Scenario 1, NCD prevalence was reduced by three percent over the previous year
with a discount rate of five percent. In Scenario 2, NCD prevalence was reduced by six percent
over the previous year with a discount rate of five percent.

Figure 11 The Economic Burden of NCD Morbidity as a Proportion of Country Specific
GDP, 2015 (status quo and intervention scenarios)




Source: Staff calculation.


Scenario 1 resulted in a significant burden reduction but the cost curve still increased for most
countries included in the analyses. However, Scenario 2, resulted in downward trends of NCD

                                               17
morbidity for all countries except Papua New Guinea, Solomon Islands, and Vanuatu, such that
by 2040 the economic burden would actually be less than the 2015 burden estimates as a proportion
of 2015 GDP.

It is important to note this modeling suggests the cost curve for treating NCDs can be bent
at a national level with important benefits for economy; but the appropriate types of
interventions will vary according to countries. The modeling demonstrates that bending the cost
curve may result in substantial economic, as well as obvious health benefits. Intervention methods
to reduce incidence will vary for individual countries according to the incidence and prevalence
trends, risk factors, cost of prevention and treatment, and availability of trained health workers and
specialized equipment. Thus the costs of interventions are not incorporated in the model.



Responding to the NCD Crisis: Prevention is Possible and Achievable, but Urgent Action is
Required

NCDs are preventable. Multiple factors inside – and beyond – the health sector are driving
the rise in NCDs, therefore a multisectoral approach is essential. Continued and intensified
leadership from the health sector in promoting population-wide tobacco control and scaling up the
Package of Essential NCD interventions (PEN) for high-risk groups is therefore essential.
Pharmaceutical and similar treatments have a vital role to play in preventing and treating NCDs,
however, ‘medicalising’ the NCD response through drugs and medical interventions alone is
inadequate. The social determinants of health need to be addressed. Changes in lifestyle provide a
simple, low-cost and effective way to combat NCDs while saving scarce health resources.
Stakeholder analysis identifies numerous areas where multisector approaches are needed.
Development partners also have an interest in supporting a multisector approach through their
investments in infrastructure, other sectors, and trade policies.

Pacific Island Forum leaders declared that the Pacific region was facing a “human, social
and economic crisis” from NCDs at the 42nd Pacific Islands Forum in 2011. More specifically:

       Leaders expressed their deep concern that non-communicable diseases (NCDs) has reached
       epidemic proportions in Pacific island countries and territories (PICTs) and has become a
       ‘human, social and economic crisis’ requiring an urgent and comprehensive response.
       Leaders expressed alarm that 75 percent of all adult deaths in the Pacific are due to NCDs
       the majority of whom are in the economically active age bracket and that many more times
       this number suffer severe side effects that undermine their capacity to contribute further to
       economic development. Leaders expressed grave concern that NCDs can undermine the
       achievement of the Millennium Development Goals (MDGs) which for a region that is
       already struggling to meet the 2015 targets provides an even greater challenge. Conscious
       of the assessment by the World Economic Forum ranking NCDs as one of the top global

                                                 18
       threats to economic development, Leaders noted with concern the huge economic costs of
       NCDs in the Pacific and in particular the rapidly rising expenditure on NCDs comprising
       well over 50 percent of the total health budget of many island countries. Leaders were
       particularly concerned that if allowed to continue unabated NCDs has the potential to
       undermine labor supply, productivity, investment and education, four of the main factors
       driving economic growth with potentially devastating consequences, especially in Pacific
       island countries and territories. Leaders recognised the seriousness of the threat that NCD
       poses to the people in Pacific Island countries and territories and the urgency to address it
       and declared the ‘Pacific is in an NCD Crisis’ (Secretariat of the Pacific Community,
       2011).

In recognition that NCDs are largely preventable, the Pacific leaders tasked Pacific
development partners to work with countries to prepare an NCD Roadmap Report with
analysis and NCD response options for the Pacific region and individual countries within the
region. The analysis and recommendations in the NCD Roadmap Report were based on the best
available international evidence for effective, feasible, and “best buy” strategies, as well as
widespread consultation among key stakeholders including PICs and their development partners.
The NCD Roadmap Report was then presented to a Joint Forum Economic and Pacific Health
Ministers’ Meeting in the Solomon Islands in July 2014.This was the first joint meeting of
ministers responsible for economics and finance, and ministers for health in the Pacific. The
economic and health ministers in attendance reconfirmed that NCDs undermine social and
economic development, and underscored the fiscal and broad development implications of NCDs.

They also jointly agreed to the following five strategic action areas (Secretariat of the Pacific
Community, 2014):
        i.    Strengthen tobacco control by an incremental increase in excise duties to 70 percent
              of the retail price of cigarettes over the medium term;
      ii.     Consider a tax increase for alcohol products as a way of reducing harmful alcohol
consumption;
      iii.    Consider policies such as targeted preventative measures, taxes, and better
              regulation to reduce consumption of local and imported food and drink products
              that are high in sugar, salt, and fat content as they are directly linked to obesity,
              diabetes, heart disease, and other NCDs in the Pacific;
      iv.     Improve the efficiency and impact of the existing health budget by reallocating
              scarce health resources to targeted primary and secondary prevention measures for
              cardiovascular disease and diabetes, including through the Package of Essential
              Noncommunicable Disease Interventions; and
      v.      Strengthen the evidence base to enable better investment planning and programme
              effectiveness, thereby ensuring that interventions work as intended and provide
              value for money.



                                                19
The Importance of Implementation

Implementation is a key part of the national and regional response following the declaration
of a NCD “crisis” and the adoption of the NCD Roadmap in the Pacific. It is quite common for
good policy to be developed and laws enacted in developing countries, only to find that actual
implementation is neglected or not given adequate resources and attention (Thomas & Grindle,
1990). Many factors contribute to weak implementation: inadequate financing and resourcing;
weak or ambiguous lines of accountability; weak monitoring and evaluation; perceptions that
leaders and managers are no longer interested in the issue; and opposition to change by vested
interests.

Weak implementation has economic and political costs. The economic costs are the ineffectual
use and wasted time of leaders and managers who developed a policy that was not implemented
properly. This imposes a particularly high cost in the Pacific where the time, energy, and political/
bureaucratic capital of skilled leaders and managers is a precious resource that should not be
wasted. The political cost is the erosion of leaders’ credibility and authority when the population
fails to see tangible follow up to a declared crisis.

Regional sharing of information and lessons learned may further enhance NCD policy
implementations at the country level. Nearly all Pacific countries share some things in common
when it comes to implementation of NCD responses. Sharing lessons learned from successes and
failures in the following areas would be very helpful across the region: the scale-up and
implementation of the Package of Essential NCD interventions (PEN); the expansion and
strengthening of NCD preventive care; the broadening of health promotion in primary care settings
to relieve pressure on hospitals; and the implementation of tobacco control policies, particularly
with domestic, loose-leaf tobacco producers.

On the other hand, differences in implementation capacity need to be recognized. A one size
fits all approach cannot be applied when some countries have just one or two public health officials
available to work on NCDs, while others have potentially more available staff. Individual countries
are in the best position to determine implementation priorities, how to budget and resource
implementation, and how to hold agencies and individuals responsible and accountable for results.

The section below summarizes the implementation to date of the key policy priorities that were
recommended under the NCD Roadmap, which all countries in the Pacific should and can
implement.

Tobacco control
There has been some progress around the recommendations for tobacco control. Tobacco is
the leading, preventable cause of NCDs and tobacco control has recently been identified as the


                                                 20
“the single best health policy in the world” (Savedoff & Alwang, 2015). All 11 countries covered
by the Pacific Possible report – with the exception of Tuvalu – have increased taxes on tobacco or
are in the process of doing so.

However, there are significant gaps in the implementation of tobacco control
recommendations. First, if the Pacific is to reduce NCD impacts and achieve the Pacific leaders’
stated declaration of achieving a “Tobacco Free Pacific” by 2025, all countries need to raise the
absolute level of tobacco prices, and most still need to significantly raise the level of excise duties
to 70 percent of retail prices. Second, countries need to proactively measure and analyze the sales,
additional revenue, and consumption trends of tobacco in light of excise duties and other
interventions. It does not appear that any Pacific Island countries established a baseline of sales
and revenue prior to the increase in excise duties. Unfortunately, the lack of evidence base does
not allow policy makers to fine tune policies and meet government objectives or to defend
themselves against the inevitable criticisms of the tobacco industry. Third, countries need to invest
in, and widely publicize, the implementation and prosecution of existing laws and regulations,
including laws against the still widespread practice of selling cigarettes to children (Anderson,
2013a; World Bank, 2014). Fourth, countries in the Pacific need to work together and share
strategies to control the consumption of home-grown and loose leaf tobacco, which is usually
beyond the reach of excise duties (Hou, Xu, & Anderson, 2015).


Reducing consumption of unhealthy food and drinks

Reducing consumption of unhealthy food and drinks that are associated with NCDs is an
important strategy for the Pacific. As noted previously, parts of the Pacific have some of the
highest levels of obesity in the world. The change in diet from traditionally consumed fish and
fruits to highly processed imported foods including biscuits, noodles, and high fat products such
as turkey tails and mutton flaps, is a factor contributing to obesity levels, particularly when
combined with increasingly sedentary lifestyles (DiBello et al., 2009; WHO, 2010c). High
consumption of sugar sweetened beverages (SSBs) is also of concern because significant sugar
levels – often around eight to 10 teaspoons of sugar per medium sized bottle – are in a liquid form
and therefore ultimately damage the body’s metabolic system and insulin response, leading to
diabetes (Malik et al., 2010). Excessive alcohol consumption is associated with domestic violence,
traffic accidents, and certain cancers. Excessive consumption of salt is a risk factor for
hypertension. However, many factors affect dietary choices including the price and availability of
healthier fruits and vegetables, advertising, and knowledge and awareness of the benefits of
healthy eating. Increasing taxes on unhealthy products, including SSBs, is one option under
consideration because price changes can, in the right circumstances, affect consumer behavior.

There has been some limited progress in efforts to reduce the consumption of unhealthy


                                                  21
foods, especially sugar-sweetened beverages (SSBs) and salt. 3 Tonga, Samoa, and Vanuatu all
increased the tax on sugar-sweetened drinks. There are also ongoing efforts to introduce food
safety regulations requiring nutrition labels on processed foods. A number of countries have draft
regulations awaiting adoption. But there have also been some setbacks. In April 2014, Kiribati
reduced a 70 percent import duty specific to soft drinks to zero percent and replaced it with VAT
& excise taxes of 40 percent. Of the few countries that have raised the price of unhealthy foods
and drinks, none have measured the change in consumption levels to see if the policy is working
or cost effective. There is little information available about reducing salt consumption, including
in processed foods. Nor is there good information to promote the growing and marketing of more
nutritious foods, including fruits and vegetables. Development partners are also considering
options for analytical work regarding the impact of taxes on unhealthy food and drink consumption
and the potential risk factor reduction for obesity and NCDs such as diabetes.

Improving the efficiency and impact of the health budget

Improving the efficiency and impact of the existing health budget by making better use of
existing financial, human, and other resources in the health sector is a major strategic
priority for countries. The starting point for responding to the growing challenges in the health
sector is to make sure that ministries of health are making the best use of existing financial and
human resources. There is a good deal of capacity to strengthen the planning, priority setting,
resource allocation, and financial management of existing budgets in the Pacific Island countries.
Such efforts would help free up existing resources that can be allocated to higher impact and more
sustainable investments. The World Health Organization estimates that around 20-40 percent of
health expenditure globally is wasted or could be better allocated, and has identified 10 areas where
efficiencies can be improved (WHO, 2010b).

Reallocating scarce resources to well-targeted primary and secondary preventions is
particularly relevant to achieve improved health outcomes in a way that is affordable, cost-
effective, and financially sustainable. PICs cannot afford to finance treatment of many expensive
or complex NCDs at this stage in their development. However, PICs can afford to finance well-
targeted and evidence-based primary prevention programs (interventions designed to prevent an
adverse health event from occurring in the first place) and secondary prevention programs
(interventions that occur after an event, such as a heart attack, that are intended to reduce incidence
re-occurrence or further health deterioration). Primary and secondary prevention strategies for
diabetes and hypertension are particularly important policy priorities for most countries in the
Pacific given the high health, financial, and economic burdens that those diseases impose on
countries. Recent studies in Vanuatu (Anderson et al., 2013) show, for example, that slowing the

3
 High consumption of SSBs is unhealthy because significant loadings of sugar – often around eight to 10 teaspoons
of sugar per medium sized bottle – are in a liquid form and therefore ultimately damage the body’s metabolic
system and insulin response, facilitating diabetes. Excessive consumption of salt is a risk factor for hypertension.

                                                        22
progression of diabetes in a person through well-targeted primary and secondary prevention has
significant financial benefits to government, as well as health benefits to the individual. Every
person who adopted a healthy lifestyle and was able to avoid diabetes or keep it under control
would avert direct drug costs to government of up to $367 per person per year. Effective and
targeted secondary prevention is an especially strategic and potentially cost-effective intervention.
That is because the pool of people at risk of progressing to insulin is limited, so targeting can be
better focused. But it is also because those who stabilize their condition through adherence to
medication and improved lifestyle choices can avoid the necessity of insulin injections, and save
the government around US$275 per patient per year. Figure 13 shows there is a similar step wise
increase in the pharmaceutical costs of treating hypertension in Vanuatu. Those able to avoid or
control hypertension by adopting healthy lifestyles would avert drug costs to government of up to
US$75 per person per year: the equivalent of current government spending, on average, for 18
healthy citizens. Effective and well-targeted primary and secondary prevention similarly yields
health benefits for the individual and significant and sustained cost savings to government.

Figure 12 Average Pharmaceutical Cumulative Costs per Annum for One Diabetes Patient
in Vanuatu
                     400
                     350
                     300
   Cost (2012 US$)




                     250
                     200
                     150
                     100
                      50
                       0
                           Blood glucose    Oral medication Oral medication    Insulin stage*   Insulin stage with
                           testing strips    (metformin)         stage 2                            additional
                                                            (Glibenclamide)                          drugs**
                                   Progressive requirements of different stages of diabetes

Source: (Anderson et al., 2013)

Note: data was collected in October, 2012. The average annual cost at each stage of treatment was based on the actual unit cost of
the main drugs and the dosage used at the various stages in treating diabetes in Vanuatu.

Figure 13 Average Pharmaceutical Cumulative Cost per Annum for One Hypertensive
Patient in Vanuatu




                                                                              23
                     80
                     70
                     60
   Cost (2012 US$)


                     50
                     40
                     30
                     20
                     10
                      0
                          Hydrochlorothiazide   Add Enalapril       Add Atenolol     Add Simvastatin and
                                                                                           Aspirin
                                  Progressive drug therapies beginning with Hydrochlorothiazide

Source: Anderson et.al. (2013).
Note: data was collected in October 2012. The average annual cost at each stage of treatment was based on the actual unit cost of
the main drugs and the dosage used at the various stages in treating hypertension in Vanuatu.

There has been some positive movement toward implementing the NCD Roadmap
recommendation to improve the efficiency and impact of the health budget. The Cook Islands,
Fiji, FSM (Pohnpei), Kiribati, Nauru, Niue, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Tokelau, Tonga, Tuvalu and
Vanuatu have all commenced implementing the WHO supported Package of Essential NCD (PEN)
Interventions for Primary Health Care in Low Resource Settings (WHO, 2010d). When used
judiciously and adapted to each country’s disease burden, risk factors, cost structures, and health
system capacities then such an approach should identify and deliver the “best buys” for diagnosing
and treating NCDs.

But there is more to be done to improve the allocation and technical efficiency of public
expenditure, and increase equitable outcomes. The Roadmap and other World Bank reports
(Anderson, 2013c; World Bank, 2014) show that dialysis treatment for diabetes is largely
ineffective (in one PIC two-thirds of patients died within two years), inefficient (annual treatment
costs were 12 times the national GDP per capita, four times higher than WHO’s recommended
benchmark for cost-effectiveness), and inequitable. Recent analysis of the pharmaceutical diabetic
costs in Vanuatu found that less than two percent of the population could be treated with insulin
before the total government drug budget was exhausted. That analysis confirmed the
overwhelming importance of allocating scarce resources to primary and secondary prevention
efforts for high risk groups if treatment is to be financially sustainable for governments (Anderson
et al., 2013). It is unclear whether Pacific Island governments are, in fact, focusing scarce
resources on targeted prevention. Indeed, a well-conducted study that is awaiting publication found
that one PIC allocates around one-third of its total government health budget to overseas treatment
referrals for just 100 patients. Despite a lack of transparency and accountability in the use of public
funds, it appears that the health outcomes for this older and privileged group were limited and
modest at best, raising fundamental questions about the efficiency and equity gains in reallocating
health resources. There are also broader, untapped, areas beyond just NCD treatments for

                                                                    24
increasing the effectiveness and equity of public health expenditure in the Pacific, including public
financial management, improving health worker supervision and management, and improving
quality and effectiveness of diagnostic / clinical services (Anderson et al., 2014).

Strengthening the evidence base for improved investment

Strengthening the evidence base is key to improving investment planning, program
effectiveness, and ensuring value for money spent. PICs, and their development partners, need
to know that they are allocating scarce financial and human resources to programs that are well-
targeted, effective, and provide value for money. Many PICS are now undertaking WHO supported
STEPS surveys, 4 thereby gaining up-to-date insight into the prevalence and incidence of risk
factors for NCDs. For example, Tokelau, Cook Islands, Solomon Islands, and Kiribati have
undertaken a sample STEPS survey; Tuvalu has one underway; Nauru and PNG are planning
STEPS; and the Marshall Islands is planning a hybrid survey. French Polynesia, Cook Islands,
Fiji, and Samoa are now in advanced planning or already undertaking surveys.

There are still major gaps in the cost and consequence evidence base of NCDs and in
documentation and sharing of best practices in the Pacific context. In PICs, there is very little
data collection and analysis to help countries understand the financial cost of NCD prevention and
treatment. In addition, there is a lack of data surrounding the broader economic costs of
productivity losses to industry and government due to NCD related absenteeism; the equity and
financial sustainability implications of public expenditure on NCDs; or the “best buys” for
preventing and treating high burden / high cost NCDs in the context of the Pacific. Few, if any
countries – or their development partners – are undertaking baseline studies prior to commencing
interventions or seeking to measure the financial and broader resource cost (including human
resources) of scaling up interventions, especially to more remote areas. Expanding the evidence
base of “what works”, for whom, and at what cost, starting with a few key countries in the Pacific,
would be a useful knowledge product and regional public good that policy makers throughout the
Pacific could use to improve their resource allocation decision making.


Other actions that PICs could and should take

The NCD Roadmap Report also identified more than 30 important multisector actions that
can be taken by 16 different ministries 5 outside of the Ministry of Health, as well as

4
  STEPS is not an acronym. Instead, it is a term used to cover the WHO STEP wise approach to Surveillance of risk
factors and diseases. Further details on STEPS is available at http://www.who.int/chp/steps/en/.
5
  The 16 ministries outside of the Ministry of Health where important multisectoral action could and should occur
are the Prime Minister’s Department; the Attorney General’s Office; the Ministries of Agriculture, Communications,
Customs and Excise, Education, Finance and Economic Planning, Labour and Industry (including the Public Service
Commission), Police, Sport, Trade, Urban Planning (including town councils), Transport, and the National Statistics
Office.

                                                        25
development partners and the private sector to reduce NCDs. Each of the recommended
multisector actions identifies the key ministry or stakeholder responsible for the intervention; the
proposed action; the expected, tangible, benefit in reducing NCDs; suggested specific indicators
to verify progress; likely financial cost and/or increased government revenue implications; the
likely feasibility and obstacles to implementation; and political implications, including possible
“winners and losers”. Examples of specific actions include the need for the prime minister’s office
to use its convening power and authority to establish, and then actively chair, a regular meeting of
a multisector task force to supervise progress in addressing NCDs and ensure inter-sectoral
collaboration. The Ministry of Agriculture could more actively promote the farming and marketing
of fresh fruit, vegetables, and fish (perhaps by supporting investments in refrigeration at local
markets) and restrict the use of land for small-scale tobacco leaf production. The Ministry of
Communication could counter the aggressive marketing of unhealthy food and sugar-sweetened
drinks, especially those deliberately targeted at children. Examples of specific, feasible actions
that should be implemented by the other 14 ministries, development partners, the private sector,
and civil society are available in annex 6 of the NCD Roadmap Report (World Bank, 2014).


NCD: Poverty, Gender, and Climate Change

NCD and Poverty

The burden from NCDs disproportionately affects low-income groups. Although acquisition
of an NCD is more likely among the wealthy in a low- or middle-income country, the poor are less
prepared to manage a disease (D Bloom et al., 2011). The NCD burden on low-income households
is exacerbated due to the correlation with lower levels of education. Lower educational
achievement at younger years leads to greater NCD susceptibility in adulthood. Households going
through financial difficulties result in children being nine times more likely not to attain any
educational qualifications, and thus three and a half times more likely to contract an inhibiting
illness than a child from a financially secure household (WHO Regional Office for the Western
Pacific, 2007).

The poverty and low-income segments of the population thus suffer from an NCD trap.
Although not exclusive to NCDs, a vicious cycle exists where poverty - in the form of lower
education, employment, and economic deprivation - leads to higher prevalence and more severe
NCDs, and in turn results in economic impacts on individuals and households. The economic
impacts, such as increased health expenditure, which is a greater proportion of income for the poor,
job loss, and reduced productivity, tends to continue the poverty status (Murthy et al., 2001).

Lower-income groups are more susceptible to NCD risk factors. Because high-fat, lower-fiber
foods are usually cheaper than healthier alternatives, poorer people are generally more constrained
to purchase low-cost food. In the Pacific, part of this problem is attributed to changing lifestyle

                                                26
patterns as there is more reliance on high-fat and high-sugar imported foods (WRPO, 2007). One
example is mutton flaps, a low-quality rib meat (Watson & Treanor, 2016). Dietary choices, more
sedentary lifestyles, and genetic factors have led to the obesity problem in the Pacific.
Unfortunately, as a nation’s per-capita income rises above US$2,500, the probability of obesity is
greater among lower socio-economic status groups than their higher economic status counterparts
(Monteiro, Moura, Conde, & Popkin, 2004). As of 2015, just three of the 11 Pacific Possible
nations do not meet this threshold.

Prevention and treatment of NCDs is lower among those in poverty. Poverty reduces the
chance that NCDs such as diabetes and cancer will be prevented or treated in its early stages
(Johnson et al., 1995). In addition, if diagnosed, poverty reduces the probability of complications
being diagnosed early due to the inability to access, or lack of available quality healthcare. There
is a correlation between low levels of education and NCD awareness in poverty groups and even
if symptoms are recognized, this segment of the population is often unable to afford primary care
(WHO, 2000). Furthermore, although diseases such as cardiovascular disease is more prevalent
among the poor, surgery is less likely to be classified as urgent for disadvantaged patients, and
poor patients are less likely to be offered surgery once a NCD has developed (Pell et al., 2000).

NCD and Gender

Noncommunicable diseases do not discriminate across males and females. Males have a greater
risk of acquiring cardiovascular disease, while women are more prone to diabetes (WHO, 2002).
The greater diabetes prevalence in females is often due to the more sedentary lifestyle that women
lead, causing obesity which is more prevalent among Pacific women than men (Ng et al., 2014;
WRPO, 2007). Obesity among the poor also appears earlier in women (Monteiro et al., 2004).
Unfortunately, diabetes is further known to precede the onset of heart disease and stroke (Hu,
2013). The result is that, although cardiovascular disease is often more commonly associated with
men’s health issues, it is in fact the number one killer of women globally (WHO, 2013). After
developing CVD, the health burden for women is more severe than for men, as women tend to
wait longer to seek treatment after the onset of symptoms, and require longer hospital stays
following a stroke or myocardial infarction (Allen & Szanton, 2005; Pilote et al., 2007).

Alcohol and tobacco consumption contribute to NCD prevalence across the genders. Hypertension
is more common among males, partially attributable to their greater alcohol consumption (WHO,
2007). Males also consume more tobacco than females, resulting in a greater number of smoking-
related NCDs among men (WHO, 2011a). In the case of Papua New Guinea, the male smoking
prevalence is more than double that of females (Eriksen, Mackay, Schluger, Gomeshtapeh, &
Drope, 2015). About half of all lifetime smokers die early from smoking; on average a smoker’s
death is 15 years premature (WHO, 2011a). The smoking prevalence of boys and girls in more
than half of the world indicates no significant difference across the genders (Warren et al., 2008).


                                                27
This bodes poorly for future generations as the gap between male and female smoking prevalence
is closing. Future health policies should begin to address the closing gender gap in smoking and
identify ways to educate the female population particularly because they are more adversely
affected by tobacco use.

Caring for a family member with an NCD can make the term ‘noncommunicable’ seem
communicable. Designated caregivers often must interrupt their education or withdraw from the
workforce which in turn impacts their security and health (Brands & Yach, 2002). The caregiver
can no longer work and save money and due to the strong link between poverty and disease, the
caregiver is more likely to contract an NCD. Because females are more likely to assume the
caregiving position, the aforementioned relationship is more burdensome for females than males.
The correlation between the poor – often women and children – and ill health requires more
gender-specific health policies (Brands & Yach, 2002).


NCD and Climate Change

Climate change and climatic factors increase the burden of noncommunicable diseases. “In
low- and middle-income countries with long coastlines [relative to country size], millions of
people will be affected by flooding, leading to displacement and poverty among ‘environmental
refugees’” (Kjellstrom, Butler, Lucas, & Bonita, 2005). As discussed, there is a significant link
between poverty and NCDs. Growing sea levels and extreme weather events also damage
agricultural systems and increase instances of malnutrition.

Climate change can also have direct physiological effects. Heat exhaustion is one of the main
climate change contributors to the burden of NCDs. Studies have shown that during heat waves,
developing countries have reported increased mortality (Hajat, Armstrong, Gouveia, & Wilkinson,
2005). This increase is mainly due to an “overloading” of the cardiovascular and respiratory
systems, and is more common among individuals who already suffer disease or weakness of these
systems (Parsons, 2003). Heat waves are also known to increase hospital admissions, and
consistently hot, arid climates can increase dehydration amongst the population resulting in the
occurrence of kidney stones (Cramer & Forrest, 2006; Knowlton et al., 2009).

Obesity escalates heat exposure symptoms. Obese individuals reach higher core body temperatures
more rapidly than their non-obese counterparts, initiating the associated symptoms of
cardiovascular diseases (Dougherty, Chow, & Kenney, 2009). This problem is exacerbated if much
of a country’s production is in primary industry where labor-intensive work is necessary. Growing
global temperatures, combined with the Pacific’s humid, tropical environment, will escalate the
impacts of obesity in the Pacific Islands (Bridger, 2003). Therefore, rising temperatures related to
climate change present an additional challenge in curbing the burden of NCDs in the Pacific


                                                28
Islands.


Conclusion

It is clear why Pacific Island leaders have formally declared NCDs a “crisis” in the region. NCDs
affect the overall development process and prospects. As this report shows, all countries in the
Pacific are dealing with the challenges of communicable diseases, reproductive health, and rapid
population growth. In addition, PICs are experiencing a rapid rise in the incidence and prevalence
of NCDs: in many countries at rates that are among the highest in the world. Unfortunately, the
capacity to respond to these growing challenges is constrained because of the already high absolute
and relative levels of government expenditure on health. Given generally low or at least volatile
economic growth, and limited capacity to increase tax revenue from a nascent private sector,
governments have increasingly limited scope to allocate more resources for health in a way that is
financially sustainable. The NCD Roadmap has a suite of evidence-based, feasible, affordable,
cost-effective and in some cases, cost-saving interventions specifically designed for the Pacific
Islands. The recommendations involve key programs from the Ministry of Health, a wide range of
other multisectoral ministries, and stakeholders. Pacific Island countries that successfully pursue
measures to prevent and control NCDs will be able to bend the cost curve of NCD treatment and
generate broader budgetary and macroeconomic benefits.




                                                29
      Annex 1 Summary of NCD Prevalence and Risk Factors in the Pacific, 2010



                                                   Micronesia                        Papua
                                          Marshall                                                           Solomon
    Indicator           Fiji     Kiribati          (Federated             Palau       New         Samoa                     Tonga       Tuvalu      Vanuatu
                                          Islands                                                             Islands
                                                     States)                         Guinea
Total population
                      886,000     110,000       53,000        104,000     21,000 7,464,000        192,000      572,000       106,000      10,000    259,000
2014 (UNDP)
Premature NCD
Mortality 2012*           30.8          …           …               …          …          26.4          …          24.1            …          …          …
(%)
Alcohol 2012**             3.0         2.8          …              3.1         …           3.0          …            2.0          1.6         1.5       1.2
Current Tobacco
                            …           …           …               …        26.4           …           33           …           29.6         …          …
Smoking 2012
Insufficient
Physical activity         15.7        39.6        47.6            36.6         …          12.0        15.3         34.0          21.6         …         7.1
(adults)
Raised blood
                          24.0        21.8        22.8            23.6       24.3         23.7        22.2         24.3          22.4       23.5       24.8
pressure 2014
Raised blood
                          16.9        21.1        19.6            18.7       22.7         12.8        23.5         13.4          23.6       19.9       16.0
glucose 2014
Overweight and
obesity 2014 (18+         70.4        72.3        74.9            63.0       78.4         56.7        72.0         55.6          71.8       72.1       64.2
years)
2014 Mean Body
                          27.2        29.6        29.2            29.4       29.4         25.3        31.7         25.5          31.9       29.3       26.2
Max Index (BMI)
      * Probability of dying between exact ages 30 and 70 from any of cardiovascular disease, cancer, diabetes, or chronic respiratory disease.
      ** Per capita Consumption of pure alcohol (litres) Crude adjusted projected estimates
      Source: (WHO, 2010a).
      Note: These are the statistics used by the WHO in its Global Status Report on NCDs 2014. Individual countries may have different estimates.

                                                                             30
Annex 2 Data Source and Methods

This study estimates the economic burden of NCDs for each year over the 2015-2040 period,
focusing on the Pacific Island nations: Fiji, Kiribati, Marshall Islands, Micronesia (F.S.M), Palau,
Papua New Guinea, Samoa, Solomon Islands, Tonga, Tuvalu, and Vanuatu. Two methods were
used to estimate the mortality and morbidity burden using a ‘value of lost output’ and ‘cost of
illness’ approach respectively. While the methods are not all encompassing of the total economic
burden that NCDs pose, they provide a lower bound estimate of the severity of the problem that
the Pacific nations face.


Data source

The following data sources were used for the mortality burden analysis: labor force projections
from the International Labour Organization (ILO); disease-specific mortality projections, country
macro parameters, and population projections were provided by the WHO Global Burden of
Disease Estimates; and GDP per capita estimates were sourced from World Bank staff estimation.
The following data sources were used for the morbidity burden analysis: The Global Status Report
on Noncommunicable Diseases 2014, provided 2014 raised blood glucose prevalence rates -
representative of diabetes prevalence rates - for 18-year-olds and over. From the International
Diabetes Federation’s (IDF) projected diabetes prevalence rates for 2015 and 2040, a constant
growth rate in diabetes prevalence was calculated for years 2015 through to 2040 and applied to
the Global Status report figures. Estimated medical costs per diabetic were also sourced from IDF.
While employment and GDP figures, to derive GDP per employed, were sourced from World Bank
staff estimation.


Mortality Burden

The economic burden of NCDs mortality in the Pacific countries was estimated using the WHO
EPIC model which takes a ‘value of lost output’ approach to disease mortality burden (Abegunde
& Stanciole, 2006). This tool estimates country-specific economic output (GDP in 2010 US$)
using a standard growth model that relates aggregate output to capital and labor inputs, augmented
by technology. NCDs mortality enters the model with a two-fold effect on aggregate output: first,
NCD mortality depletes the labor force, and second, capital accumulation is impeded as savings
are diverted to NCD associated healthcare consumption.
The economic burden of NCDs is estimated by taking the difference between the status quo (SQ)
projections of country output, also known as the ‘business-as-usual’ output, and the counterfactual
(CF) scenario output, described as the projected output had there been no NCD mortality cases.
The SQ output projections are simply the product of year-specific population projections and GDP


                                                31
per capita, while the CF output draws its roots from the simulation of a Solow growth model of
the following form (Solow, 1956):


                                             , =  ,       1−
                                                                                     , ,

Yi,t describes the output in country i in year t; A gives the level of technology which is exogenous
to the model and grows at a constant rate of one percent each year; K and L are the aggregate
stock of capital and labor respectively, and α represents the capital share.
The full-time equivalent labor force, under the CF scenario, is derived by augmenting the status
quo labor force projections with the labor force that would be added from averted deaths each year.
Additional labor added to the country’s economy from an averted death, has a multi-period effect
which is dependent on the age when death was averted. The capital accumulation of a country is
restricted when expenditure from savings is diverted to healthcare consumption instead of physical
capital accumulation.
Initially, the model estimates the number of lives added to the population from averted deaths.
This is done by multiplying the number of deaths averted with the survival rate of any other cause
of mortality for that year and age group. This figure is also supplemented by the added population
from averted deaths in previous years, who survive all other mortality causes year on year. The
additional population is multiplied by age-group and country specific employment rates, as well
as an experience factor. The WHO EPIC model assumes no one under the age of 15 is in the labor
force.
The NCDs impact on capital, under the CF scenario, feeds into the following equation:
                                   ,+1 =  , + (1 − δ),
where  denotes the rate of capital depreciation, and s represents the saving rate. Capital
accumulation under the CF scenarios differs to the SQ scenario because of varying levels of labor
driven output as labor is augmented to SQ estimates with averted deaths. The aggregate factors
each year are solved simultaneously. The savings rate, capital depreciation rate, and capital share
are assumed to be constant across years and exogenous to the model.


The WHO EPIC tool estimates the CF output by country and disease per simulation (choosing
from diabetes, ischemic heart disease, cerebrovascular disease, chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease (COPD), and breast cancer). To reflect the burden of the four main NCDs of the UN High-
Level meeting (cardiovascular diseases, chronic respiratory diseases, diabetes, and cancer), the
EPIC diseases are scaled up using DALY’s data from the Institute for Health Metrics and
Evaluation (collected August 2015). This is done by deducing relative share of an EPIC disease’s
(i.e. breast cancer) DALYs to its domain disease (i.e cancer) by country, and scaling up the EPIC
disease relative to their domain disease proportion.




                                                                      32
Morbidity Burden

The morbidity burden is estimated using a cost-of-illness approach, restricting the initial analysis
to diabetes due to data limitations. The prevalence of age-standardized adjusted diabetes
projections comes from the Global Status Report on Noncommunicable Diseases 2014, which
provided the prevalence rate of raised blood glucose for 18 years of age and older in the year 2014.
Using the International Diabetes Federation’s diabetes prevalence rates for 2015 and 2040, a
constant growth rate gives projections for 2015 through to 2040 with growth rates ranging from
0.99 to 3.13 percent yearly, dependent on the country. Loss income and medical costs are
estimated following the Bloom et al. report. The disability prevalence among low- and middle-
income countries is estimated to be eight percent (Barcelo, Aedo, Rajpathak, & Robles, 2003).
This percentage was also adopted by the World Economic Forum (D Bloom et al., 2011). Medical
costs are applied to diabetics 15 years of age and over while the loss of income and tax loss are
only accounted for 20- to 65-year-old diabetics. The method also assumes that an individual driven
to early retirements from diabetes does so at the beginning of the year.
The medical care costs associated with diabetes is drawn from IDF Diabetes Atlas 7th Edition,
which provides healthcare expenditure by country for the years 2015 and 2040. A constant growth
rate between the two years provides the medical cost associated with all other years of analysis.
The loss in tax revenue is calculated as that year’s tax that would have been paid had the individual
not been removed from the workforce due to diabetes. This the lost tax revenue is calculated at the
average income level tax rate by country. The GDP per employed from World Bank staff
estimation was used to represent the expected income of an individual by country. One strong
assumption made is that the country-specific tax rate is constant across all years.
In order to produce estimates for Kiribati, Marshall Islands, Micronesia, Palau, and Tuvalu,
additional assumptions over and above the other six Pacific Possible countries were required. First,
the 2015 and 2040 population statistic was disaggregated by age bracket using the average rates
from the available six countries; second, prevalence rates by age group from the Global Status
Report on Noncommunicable Diseases 2014 began at 18-years-old while the closest sub-
population available is from 15+-years-old.
Taking the human capital approach to estimating the productivity costs of disability, the value of
lost income is estimated using the value of GDP per employed multiplied by the disability
prevalence. 6 The economic costs is the difference in income between employment and
unemployment. The summation of these economic burdens gives the lower bound estimate of total
economic burden due to diabetes morbidity.
The diabetes morbidity burden is scaled up to the four non-communicable diseases using
relationships derived in the mortality analysis. The 2040 morbidity burden for the three other NCD
groups is calculated using the country-specific disease burden proportions in 2040 from the
mortality estimates (figure 9). The projections for all other years is then scaled back to 2015 by

6
 Where disability benefit information is available, disability benefit should also be considered to be an economic
burden to the economy.

                                                        33
assuming that the three disease burdens grow at the same rate as the diabetes morbidity burden.
An implicit assumption that results from this method is that those countries with higher diabetes
morbidity costs will also have higher cardiovascular diseases, chronic respiratory disease, and
cancer prevalence rates.


A particularly interesting outcome of a reduction in diabetes prevalence is that the cost curve
associated with diabetes morbidity can be bent. Re-estimation of the cost curve is illustrated under
two scenarios. The first scenario reduces the diabetes prevalence, beginning at the year 2015, by
three percent on the status quo prevalence, with this three percent discounted by five percent each
year. Furthermore, the reduction is compounded so that the reductions in one year is added to the
proportion of reduction in every year following. The second scenario uses the same method,
however, the initial reduction begins at six percent.

Limitations

There are a number of caveats that this study needs to acknowledge.
This study does not take into account the distribution of NCDs across income levels. It is well
known that disease is not impartial and that the less educated are encumbered by more than their
equal share of the disease burden. The less educated tend to earn lower wages while the assumption
states that an individual cured of a disease would on average earn the expected wage of an
economy. Therefore, the estimated loss of output may be overestimated.
Second, the costs associated with diabetes morbidity are not all encompassing. Among the costs
not calculated in this study are the loss of income (and productivity) for those who are withdrawn
from the labor force to look after diabetic family members. Temporary disability, as in the case
where a diabetic is withdrawn from the workforce for a short period, is not accounted. The Pacific
Island countries are known to receive a high number of remittances. The lack of inclusion for this
form of income may cause overestimation in the lost income estimates. However, the households
with diabetics receiving remittances may use this income to ease the burden of diabetes i.e. to
supplement the family members caring for the ill. These remittances, used to ease financial burden
associated with disease, can then be considered an indirect cost of morbidity. The degree to which
this is the case is difficult to determine.
Third, tax rates are often changed intermittently and, for some countries, the tax rate is a fixed fee
within an income range, plus a proportion out of every unit over the lower bound of the bracket.
Under such scenario, a constant tax rate was calculated and given as the fixed fee plus the
proportion out of every unit up to the GDP per employed, as a proportion of the GDP per employed,
using this rate for all years.




                                                 34
Annex 3: Diabetes Prevalence Rates by Age, 2013

                             Male                 Female
 Fiji




 Kiribati




 Marshall
 Islands




                                            35
Micronesi
a (F.S.O)




Papua
New
Guinea




Samoa




            36
Solomon
Islands




Tonga




Vanuatu




Source: International Health Metric and Statistics.
Note: Graphs from the Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation (IHME) Epi Vizualization Tool, y-axis for each graph is the
prevalence rate, x-axis is age, dark green line is the global prevalence rate encompassed by its light green confidence level, dark
blue line represents country specific prevalence rate encompassed by light blue confidence interval, results based on modeling.




                                                               37
References

Abegunde, D., Mathers, C. D., Adam, T., Ortegon, M., & Strong, K. (2007). The burden and
        costs of chronic diseases in low-income and middle-income countries. The Lancet,
        370(9603), 1929-1938.
Abegunde, D., & Stanciole, A. (2006). An estimation of the economic impact of chronic
        noncommunicable diseases in selected countries World Health Organization Working
        Paper, 1-21.
Allen, J., & Szanton, S. (2005). Gender, ethnicity, and cardiovascular disease. Journal of
        Cardiovascular Nursing, 20(1), 1-6. quiz 7-8.
Anderson, I. (2013a). The Economic Costs of Noncommunicable Diseases in the Pacific Islands:
        A Rapid Stocktake of the Situation in Samoa, Tonga, and Vanuatu.
Anderson, I. (2013b). Health Financing in Vanuatu: Challenges and Options: World Bank.
Anderson, I. (2013c). Health Financing Options for Samoa: Challenges and Opportunities.
Anderson, I., Ivatts, S., Somanathan, A., & Rolfe, B. (2014). The challenges of health financing
        in five South Pacific countries. Asian‐Pacific Economic Literature, 28(1), 29-46.
Anderson, I., Sanburg, A., Aru, H., Tarivonda, L., Ivatts, S., Latu, R., & Kool, J. (2013). The
        costs and affordability of drug treatments for type 2 diabetes and hypertension in
        Vanuatu. Pacific Health Dialog, 19(2), 1.
Barcelo, A., Aedo, C., Rajpathak, S., & Robles, S. (2003). The cost of diabetes in Latin America
        and the Caribbean. Bulletin of the World Health Organization, 81, 19-27.
Barker, D. (1990). The fetal and infant origins of adult disease: the womb may be more
        important than the home. British Medical Journal 301(6761).
Bhutta, Z. A. (2013). Early nutrition and adult outcomes: pieces of the puzzle. The Lancet,
        382(9891), 486-487.
Black, R. E., Allen, L. H., Bhutta, Z. A., Caulfield, L. E., De Onis, M., Ezzati, M., . . . Rivera, J.
        (2008). Maternal and child undernutrition: global and regional exposures and health
        consequences. The Lancet, 371(9608), 243-260.
Bloom, D., Cafiero, E., Jané-Llopis, E., Abrahams-Gessel, S., Bloom, L. R., Fathima, S., . . .
        Mowafi, M. (2011). The global economic burden of noncommunicable diseases.
Bloom, D., & Williamson, J. (1998). Demographic Transitions and Economic Miracles In
        Emerging Asia. . World Bank Economic Review, 12(3), 419-455.
Brands, A., & Yach, D. (2002). Women and the rapid rise of noncommunicable diseases. NMH
        reader no 1, World Health Organization Geneva.
Bridger, R. (2003). Introduction to Ergonomics (2nd ed.). London: Taylor & Francis.
Cramer, J., & Forrest, K. (2006). Renal lithiasis: addressing the risks of austere desert
        deployments. Aviation, space, and environmental medicine, 77(6), 649-653.
Daar, A. S., Singer, P. A., Persad, D. L., Pramming, S. K., Matthews, D. R., Beaglehole, R., . . .
        Ganguly, N. (2007). Grand challenges in chronic non-communicable diseases. Nature,
        450(7169), 494-496.
DiBello, J., McGarvey, S., Kraft, P., Goldberg, R., Campos, H., Quested, C., . . . Baylin, A.
        (2009). Dietary patterns are associated with metabolic syndrome in adult Samoans. The
        Journal of Nutrition, 139(10), 1933-1943.
Dougherty, K., Chow, M., & Kenney, W. (2009). Responses of lean and obese boys to repeated
        summer exercise in the heat bouts. Med Sci Sports Exercise 41, 279-289.

                                                  38
Eriksen, M., Mackay, J., Schluger, N., Gomeshtapeh, F. I., & Drope, J. (2015). The Tobacco
        Atlas. China.
GBD 2013 Mortality and Causes of Death Collaborators. (2013). Global, regional, and national
        age–sex specific all-cause and cause-specific mortality for 240 causes of death, 1990–
        2013: a systematic analysis for the Global Burden of Disease Study 2013. The Lancet,
        385(9963), 117-171. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(14)61682-2
Hajat, S., Armstrong, B., Gouveia, N., & Wilkinson, P. (2005). Mortality displacement of heat-
        related deaths: a comparison of Delhi, Sao Paulo and London. Epidemiology 16, 613-620.
Hill, M. A., & King, E. (1995). Women's education and economic well-being. Feminist
        Economics, 1(2), 21-46.
Horton, R., & Lo, S. (2013). Investing in health: why, what, and three reflections. The Lancet,
        382(9908), 1859-1861.
Hou, X., Xu, X., & Anderson, I. (2015). Determinants of Tobacco Consumption in Papua New
        Guinea: Challenges in Changing Behaviours. Asia & the Pacific Policy Studies, 2(2),
        255-265. doi: 10.1002/app5.85
Hu, J. (2013). Women and Diabetes: A Global Perspective. Journal of Women’s Health, Issues
        & Care, 2(1), 1-2.
International Diabetes Federation. (2015). IDF Diabetes Atlas, ( 7th Edition ed.). Brussels:
        International Diabetes Federation.
Jha, P., Ramasundarahettige, C., Landsman, V., Rostron, B., Thun, M., Anderson, R. N., . . .
        Peto, R. (2013). 21st-Century Hazards of Smoking and Benefits of Cessation in the
        United States. New England Journal of Medicine, 368(4), 341-350. doi:
        doi:10.1056/NEJMsa1211128
Jinabhai, C., Taylor, M., & Sullivan, K. (2005). Changing patterns of under- and over-nutrition
        in South African children—future risks of non-communicable diseases Annals of
        Tropical Peadiatrics, 25(1), 3-15.
Johnson, K., Anderson, N., Bastida, E., Kramer, B., Williams, D., & Wong, M. (1995). Panel II:
        Macrosocial and environmental influences on minority health. Health Psychology, 14(7),
        601-612.
Kessaram, T., McKenzie, J., Girin, N., Roth, A., Vivili, P., Williams, G., & Hoy, D. (2015).
        Noncommunicable diseases and risk factors in adult populations of several Pacific
        Islands: results from the WHO STEPwise approach to surveillance. Australian and New
        Zealand journal of public health, 39(4), 336-343.
Kjellstrom, T., Butler, A., Lucas, R., & Bonita, R. (2005). Public health impact of global heating
        due to climate change: potential effects on chronic non-communicable diseases.
        International journal of public health, 55(2).
Knowlton, K., Rotkin-Ellman, M., King, G., Margolis, H., Smith, D., Solomon, G., . . . English,
        P. (2009). The 2006 California heat wave: impacts on hospitalizations and emergency
        department visits. Environmental health perspectives, 117(1), 61.
Malik, V., Popkin, B., Bray, G., Després, J., Willett, W., & Hu, F. (2010). Sugar-sweetened
        beverages and risk of metabolic syndrome and type 2 diabetes a meta-analysis. Diabetes
        care, 33(11), 2477-2483.
Martins, P., & Sawaya, A. (2006). Evidence for impaired insulin production and higher
        sensitivity in stunted children living in slums. British Journal of Nutrition,, 95(5).
Mayer-Foulkes, D. A. (2011). A survey of macro damages from Non-communicable chronic
        diseases: another challenge for global governance. Global Economy Journal, 11(1).

                                               39
McCarthy, D., Wolf, H., & Wu, Y. (1999). Malaria and Growth. Policy Research Working
         Paper.
Monteiro, C., Moura, E., Conde, W., & Popkin, B. (2004). Socioeconomic status and obesity in
         adult populations of developing countries: a review. Bulletin of the World Health
         Organization, 82(12), 940-946.
Murthy, S., Bertolote, J., Epping-Jordan, J., Funk, M., Prentice, T., Saraceno, B., & Saraceno, S.
         (2001). The World Health Report 2001: Mental Health: New Understanding, New Hope:
         World Health Organization.
Ng, M., Freeman, M., Fleming, T., Robinson, M., Dwyer-Lindgren, L., Thomson, B., . . .
         Gakidou, E. (2014). Smoking Prevalence and Cigarette Consumption in 187 Countries,
         1980-2012. Journal of American Medical Association, 311(2).
Nikolic, I. A., Stanciole, A. E., & Zaydman, M. (2011). Chronic emergency: why NCDs matter.
Parsons, K. (2003). Human Thermal Environments: The Effects of Hot, Moderate, and Cold
         Environments on Human Health, Comfort and Performance (2nd ed.). New York: CRC
         Press.
Pell, J., Hart, J., Pell, A., Norrie, J., Ford, I., & Cobbe, S. (2000). Effect of socioeconomic
         deprivation on waiting time for cardiac surgery: retrospective cohort study. British
         Medical Journal, 320(7226), 15-19.
Pilote, L., Dasgupta, K., Guru, V., Humphries, K., McGrath, J., Norris, C., . . . Tagalakis, V.
         (2007). A comprehensive view of sex-specific issues related to cardiovascular disease.
         Canadian Medical Association Journal, 176(6), S1-S44.
Ranis, G., Stewart, F., & Ramirez, A. (2000). Economic growth and human development. World
         Development, 28(2), 197-219.
Savedoff, W., & Alwang, A. (2015). The Single Best Health Policy In The World: Tobacco
         Taxation. In C. f. G. Development (Ed.).
Sawaya, A., Martins, P., Hoffman, D., & Roberts, S. (2003). The link between childhood
         undernutrition and risk of chronic diseases in adulthood: a case study of Brazil. Nutrition
         reviews, 1(61), 168-175.
Secretariat of the Pacific Community. (2011). Forum Leaders’ Statement on Non-Communicable
         Diseases: Pacific in an Crisis, Leaders Declare: Secretariat of the Pacific Islands
         Community.
Secretariat of the Pacific Community. (2014). Joint Forum Economic and Pacific Health
         Ministers Meeting Outcome Statement.
Sen, A. (1999). Health in Development. Bulletin of the World Health Organization, 77, 619 -
         623.
Solow, R. M. (1956). A Contribution to the Theory of Economic Growth. The Quarterly Journal
         of Economics, 70(1), 65-94. doi: 10.2307/1884513
Spence, M., & Lewis, M. (2009). Health and growth: World Bank Publications.
Suhrcke, M., & Urban, D. (2010). Are cardiovascular diseases bad for economic growth? Health
         Economics, 19(12), 1478-1496.
Thomas, J., & Grindle, M. (1990). After the decision: implementing policy reforms in
         developing countries. World Development, 18(8), 1163-1181.
Warren, C., Jones, N., Peruga, A., Chauvin, J., Baptiste, J., Costa, D., . . . Bettcher, D. (2008).
         Global youth tobacco surveillance, 2000-2007. Morbidity and mortality weekly report.
         Surveillance summaries, 57(1), 1-28.



                                                40
Watson, K., & Treanor, S. (2016). How mutton flaps are killing Tonga. from
      http://www.bbc.com/news/magazine-35346493
WHO. (2000). Prevention and Control of Noncommunicable Diseases Regional Committee 51st
      Session, Manila, Philippinesn 18-22 September (Vol. WPR/RC51/8): World Health
      Organization,.
WHO. (2001). A summary of the findings of the Commission on Macroeconomics and Health:
      investing in health for economic development Report of the Commission on
      Macroeconomics and Health.
WHO. (2002). Globalization, Diets and Noncommunicable Diseases: World Health
      Organization.
WHO. (2007). Noncommunicable Disease and Poverty: The Need for Pro-poor Strategies in the
      Western Pacific Region - A Review Regional Office for the Western Pacific World
      Health Organization,.
WHO. (2010a). Global Status Report on Non-Communicable Diseases. Geneva.
WHO. (2010b). Health System Financing: The Path to Universal Coverage. Geneva: World
      Health Organization.
WHO. (2010c). Pacific Islanders pay heavy price for abandoning traditional diet Bulletin of the
      World Health Organization (Vol. 88): World Health Organization.
WHO. (2010d). Package of Essential Noncommunicable (PEN) Disease Interventions for Primay
      Health Care in Low Resource Settings: World Health Organization,.
WHO. (2011a). Gender, Health, Tobacco and Equity: World Health Organization.
WHO. (2011b). Noncommunicable Diseases Country Profile 2011. Geneva: World Health
      Organization.
WHO. (2012). WHO Global Report: Mortality Attributable To Tobacco.
WHO. (2013). Women’s Health: Fact sheet number 334: World Health Organization.
WHO. (2014a). Noncommunicable Diseases Country Profiles 2014. Geneva: World Health
      Organization.
WHO. (2014b). World Health Statistics 2014: World Health Organization.
WHO Regional Office for the Western Pacific. (2007). Noncommunicable Disease and Poverty:
      The Need for Pro-poor Strategies in the Western Pacific Region - A Review. In W. H.
      Organization (Ed.).
World Bank. (1993). World Development Report Investing In Health. Washington DC: Oxford
      University Press.
World Bank. (2014). NCD Roadmap Report Working Paper.
WRPO. (2007). Noncommunicable Disease and Poverty: The Need for Pro-poor Strategies in the
      Western Pacific Region - A Review. In World Health Organization: Regional Office for
      the Western Pacific (Ed.).
WRPO. (2012). WHO Multi-Country Cooperation Strategy for the Pacific 2013–2017: World
      Health Organization Western Pacific Region,.




                                              41
worldbank.org/PacificPossible
