                      Nam Theun 2 Hydroelectric Project Update: Resettlement
                                          August 2017

This note explains recent updates on the Project’s Resettlement Implementation Period (RIP), one of five
key areas of the Nam Theun 2 Social and Environment Project. Notes about the other four areas
(Revenue Management, Operations, the Nakai Nam Theun watershed and the Downstream program) will
be forthcoming over the next three months. The notes provide additional detail to the World Bank’s
Implementation Status and Results Report that can be found here. Questions may be posted to
laos@worldbank.org.

The Resettlement Implementation Period (RIP) is the period over which nearly 6,300 project affected
people on the Nakai Plateau were resettled and support provided to ensure a basis of livelihoods
sustainability. Physical resettlement in the Nam Theun 2 project area was completed in 2008. Resettlers
were moved into 1,330 new houses which were designed in consultation with the villagers. The
resettlement also involved the installation of water pumps and construction of village infrastructure such
as nursery schools, primary schools, health centers, roads, markets, and warehouses. A concise overview
can be found here.

The RIP started from the commencement of the resettlement and was originally intended to be
approximately nine years in duration. Income opportunities were developed so that the livelihoods of
resettled families continue to improve on a sustainable basis. A Comprehensive Action Plan (CAP) for the
RIP and Beyond was prepared between November 2015 and January 2017 in response to the Panel of
Experts’ (PoE) recommendation in their 24th report in 2015 to continue the formal RIP to December 31,
2017 to ensure continued and sustainable improvement of livelihoods.

The CAP was developed by a Joint Working Group (JWG) that includes representatives of the
Government of Lao PDR (GoL) at the national, provincial, and district levels; the Nam Theun 2 Power
Company (NTPC); as well as several development partners including the World Bank, Asian
Development Bank (ADB), Agence Française de Développement (AfD), and the European Investment
Bank (EIB). The Ministry of Energy and Mines chairs the JWG. The CAP benefitted from consultations
with the PoE as well as stakeholder groups, including resettled households and representatives from the
district, provincial and national governments.

The CAP is divided into two parts. The first part is a List of Actions (LoA) that focuses on establishing
the basis for sustainable livelihoods before the end of the RIP, which is scheduled for December 31, 2017.
Details can be found in Table 1 below.

The second part is a Medium-Term Development Plan (MTDP), which will begin after closure of the
RIP and run until 2035 (the end of the NT2 Concession Period). It includes initiatives to support
sustainable livelihoods for resettled communities over the longer-term. The MTDP uses village
development priorities and is financially supported by the Nam Theun 2 Development Fund with
$750,000 a year from the NTPC (a voluntary measure beyond the Concession Agreement). The MTDP
also includes the Nakai Plateau Livestock Agriculture, Livestock, and Fisheries project (NP-LAF), which
is funded by AfD, GoL and NTPC. The NP-LAF project proposes to support the development of
agricultural, livestock and fishing activities and will support the district and provincial governments to
develop programs which contribute to sustainable incomes through agricultural and fisheries sectors.
The table below summarizes the seven areas included in the CAP. Each component contains numerous
actions and objectives, also noted in the table.


Table 1: Summary of Comprehensive Action Plan List of Actions

 Action Areas           Objectives and Illustrative Activities
 Fisheries              • Objective: Protect and manage habitat for basis of sustainable income generation.
                        • Activities:
                                o Strengthen local fisheries institutions
                                o Expand marketing system
                                o Share fisheries information on sustainable management awareness
                                    campaigns.
 Forestry               • Objective: Manage forest resources according to community priorities
                        • Activities:
                                o Prepare strategic plan to determine preferred use of village forest
                                    resources, supported by a Forest Management Plan
                                o Strengthen the enabling environment
 Off-farm income (Eg.   •   Objective: Enhance non-farming livelihood activities accessible to communities
 tourism, handicraft    •   Activities:
 production)                    o Identify means of accessing off-farm livelihood opportunities
                                o Convert opportunities into income generating activities
 Agriculture and        •   Objective: Mobilize long-term program under the District Agriculture and Forestry
 Livestock                  Office
                        •   Activities:
                                o Strengthen land management and address land conflicts
                                o Improve/adapt irrigation system and farming systems to better fit the
                                      needs for agriculture.
                                o Improve farming systems
 Gender                 •   Objective: Mainstream gender in all livelihood areas
                        •   Activities:
                                o Build capacity of district authorities
                                o Increase women’s agency and voice
 Poor and vulnerable    •   Objective: Support vulnerable, poor and other high risk households
 households             •   Activities:
                                o Provide sufficient support to bring vulnerable households above the
                                      poverty line
                                o Provide support for poor and other high risk households to remain above
                                      the poverty line after closure the RIP
 Ethnic Groups          •   Objective: Facilitate full and effective participation in political, economic, and
                            public life
                        •   Activities:
                                o Ensure that ethnic minority households benefit, wherever eligible, from
                                      relevant social support programs
                                o Provide skill development and education opportunities
