                                                                                        1
!

       STRENGTHENING QUALITY ASSURANCE AND PERFORMANCE
           EXCELLENCE IN THAILAND’S HIGHER EDUCATION
            Report on Lessons Learned and Recommendations
                    Dr. Luís Ma. R. Calingo, Consultant


1.     Overview of Engagement

The Office of Higher Education Commission (OHEC) has engaged Dr. Luís Ma. R.
Calingo, principal consultant to the Thailand Quality Award (TQA) Program, as the
international consultant for the World Bank-funded project, “Strengthening Quality
Assurance and Performance Excellence in Thailand’s Higher Education” (hereafter
referred to as “EdPEx”). Dr. Calingo’s local counterpart has been OHEC’s
Subcommittee on the EdPEx Fast-Track Project (hereafter referred to as the “EdPEx
Subcommittee”), which was involved in the planning, training, group work, and review
of lessons learned. To implement this three-year project, OHEC has identified about
30 prospective pilot universities throughout Thailand.          After several initial
consultations and preparation, the Consultant has accomplished the following as of
June 30, 2014:
1. Designed, conducted, and continuously improved the EdPEx Organizational Self-
    Assessment Workshop for four cohorts consisting of a total of 26 participating
    schools from 20 universities.
2. Led site visit reviews of Mahidol University, Faculty of Science on 21 December
    2012 and Chiang Mai University, Faculty of Medicine on 5 July 2013.
3. Conducted Skype videoconferences with all participating schools to guide them in
    interpreting the EdPEx Criteria and in preparing their Self-Assessment Reports
    (SARs).
4. Conducted face-to-face consultations with the participating schools from Cohorts
    1-3 to guide them in interpreting their EdPEx Feedback Reports, in prioritizing
    their opportunities for improvement, and in refining their Self-Assessment
    Reports.
5. Provided ongoing consultative advice to OHEC as regards the continuing
    development of the EdPEx Program.

Cohort and Workshop Dates                     Participating Schools
1 (5-7 June & 18-20              1.   Chiang Mai University, Faculty of Medicine
December 2012)                   2.   Hatyai University
                                 3.   Khon Kaen University, Faculty of Medicine
                                 4.   Mahidol University, Faculty of Science
                                 5.   Suan Dusit Rajabhat University
                                 6.   Ubon Ratchathani University, Faculty of
                                      Pharmaceutical Sciences
                                 7.   University of the Thai Chamber of
                                      Commerce




!                                        1
                                                                                     2
!


Cohort and Workshop Dates                      Participating Schools
2 (2-4 July 2013)               8.   Kasetsart University, Bangkhen Campus,
                                     Faculty of Engineering
                                9.   Mahidol University, Faculty of Dentistry
                               10.   Naresuan University, Faculty of Science
                               11.   Phuket Rajabhat University, Faculty of
                                     Humanities and Social Science
                               12.   Rajamalanga University of Technology,
                                     Faculty of Industrial Textiles and Fashion
                                     Design
                               13.   Suranaree Institute of Technology, Institute
                                     of Social Technology
                               14.   Walailak University, School of Nursing
3 (18-20 December 2013)        15.   Chiang Mai University, Faculty of Economics
                               16.   Dhurakij Pundit University
                               17.   Kasetsart University, Faculty of Engineering
                                     at Si Racha
                               18.   Stamford International University
                               19.   Suranaree University of Technology,
                                     Institute of Medicine
                               20.   Walailak University, School of Pharmacy
4 (30 June-2 July 2014)        21.   Assumption University, Martin of Tours
                                     School of Management
                               22.   College of Research Methodology and
                                     Cognitive Science, Burapha University
                               23.   King Mongkut University of Technology
                                     Thonburi, Faculty of Information Technology
                               24.   National Institute of Development
                                     Administration
                               25.   Prince of Songkla University, Faculty of Fine
                                     and Applied Arts
                               26.   Thammasat University, Faculty of Medicine

The EdPEx Organizational Self-Assessment Workshop included the following topics:
• Review of EdPEx Criteria Core Values and Concepts
• Overview of the Criteria Categories: Best Practices and Basic & Overall Item
   Requirements
• Category-by-Category Evaluation of the Self-Assessment Reports (SAR I)
• Identifying Cross-Cutting Strengths and Priority Opportunities for Improvement
• Action Planning for Improvement Priorities
The format of the course was about 30 percent lecture-discussion and about 70
percent of facilitated self-assessment workshops. There was ample opportunity for
the individual participants to learn from each other and for the participating
universities to receive and provide feedback from other universities about their
practices, systems, and processes.



!                                       2
                                                                                               3
!

2.     Lessons Learned

The Cohort 1 participants agreed upon a common set of key performance
measures/indicators that the universities might use to track organizational
performance and to benchmark each other’s performance outcomes. The OHEC
staff has possession of the list of these measures. Although having a uniform set of
key performance measures has a lot of merit from a comparability standpoint,
educational institutions still need to have sufficient flexibility in determining their most
appropriate key performance measures given the diversity of missions and strategic
orientations in Thai higher education.

The training for Cohort 1 by the Consultant was conducted over a total period of
six days in June and December 2012. Training efficiency was improved by
having pre-training sessions prior to the Consultant’s arrival. Starting with Cohort
2, members of the EdPEx Subcommittee led by Professor Rachavarn
Kanjanapanyakom (hereafter referred to as the “EdPEx Training Team”)
delivered a three-day EdPEx criteria training to the participating schools, which
enabled them to complete their prework assignment for the Consultant’s
workshop. The prework assignment for this pre-training was a self-assessment
report (SAR I) that is responsive to the basic requirements of the EdPEx criteria.

Starting with Cohort 2, the prework assignment for Consultant’s workshop consisted
of an Organization Profile (5 pages) and a 40-page Self-Assessment Report (SAR II)
that was responsive to the overall requirements of the 2013-2014 Baldrige Award
Education Criteria for Performance Excellence. The facilitated self-assessment
workshops provided the participating schools an opportunity to identify their most
important strengths and most significant OFIs, which should be prioritized and
addressed in their improvement planning. At the conclusion of the course, the
participating schools identified their top five priority OFIs and action plans for
addressing these OFIs during the next 6-12 months.

Two process redesigns that have been implemented include (a) Skype
videoconferences conducted with participating schools about 2-3 months after their
training by the Consultant and (b) 50-minute consultative meetings with the
participating schools about six months after their training by the Consultant. The
videoconferences provided the participating schools an opportunity to report on their
action plans for addressing priority OFIs and the Consultant to respond to the
schools’ questions about the EdPEx criteria and to provide them further guidance as
they prepare or improve their SAR reports. The consultative meetings provided the
schools an opportunity to have the Consultant clarify and, when appropriate, prioritize
the opportunities for improvement (OFIs) contained in their respective feedback
reports. Each meeting lasted about one hour and ended with the Consultant offering
specific recommendations as to next steps for the school.

The quality of a Feedback Report may be demonstrated by its accuracy in terms of
strengths and OFIs in response to the overall requirements of the EdPEx criteria.



!                                            3
                                                                                            4
!

Although judging accuracy is a subjective determination, it is still possible for an
experienced Baldrige examiner who has read both SAR II and its feedback report to
conclude whether the EdPEx assessment team was more prone to commit Type I
errors (false positives) or Type II errors (false negatives). After reviewing the initial
Feedback Reports (specifically for Cohort 1), the Consultant’s determination is that
the EdPEx assessment teams were more likely to have committed Type II errors,
which is evident in the greater instances of missing strengths than of missing OFIs
and the tendency to assign lower scoring ranges than higher scoring ranges to the
criteria items. The commission of Type II errors makes it very likely that more
participating schools, especially those from Cohort 1, might have been inaccurately
assessed as not meeting the EdPEx 200 mark.

This type of non-calibration—elevation inaccuracy—is a very likely occurrence
among first-year assessors (whether in TQA, Baldrige or similar programs) because
first-year assessors are more likely to treat the performance excellence criteria as an
audit checklist.

3.     Plan for Final Consultant Visit on December 2014

The EdPEx Subcommittee and the Consultant agreed to the following schedule for
the Consultant’s final visit in December 14-29, 2014:

Activity                                                         Dates
EdPEx assessor calibration course (preparation and               December 15-17
delivery) – Consultant will prepare assessor calibration
course materials (presentation and participant manual) and
recommend an appropriate case study.
Site visit review of a Cohort 4 participating school             December 18-19
(tentatively     National    Institute    of    Development
Administration) – Consultant will review and improve the site
visit team’s feedback report prior to presentation to the
school leadership.
Executive briefing of university presidents of Cohorts 1-4       December 19
institutions; consultative meetings with selected Cohorts 1-4
schools – Consultant will prepare presentation for university
presidents and review progress reports of schools.
Travel to Mueang Chiang Rai                                      December 20
Working session with OHEC staff and EdPEx                        December 21-23
Subcommittee to plan next steps and prepare report to
World Bank
Holiday                                                          December 24-25
Exit meeting with OHEC Secretary General                         December 26

In preparation for the December 2014 visit, the EdPEx Subcommittee will organize
Skype videoconferences with Cohort 4 schools on October 2 and 7, 10:00-11:00
a.m. ICT.


!                                          4
                                                                                          5
!



Although this Report on Lessons Learned and Recommendations constitutes the
Consultant’s final deliverable, the Consultant will produce additional documents in the
course of the December 2014 visit.

4.     Recommendations

4.1    Leveraging the Experience of the EdPEx Pilot Program

The EdPEx Program should identify potential “success stories” among Cohort 1
schools and mentor them to undergo not only the EdPEx formal assessment, but
also the journey to achieve the Thailand Quality Class (TQC) and eventually TQA
recognition.

The EdPEx Program should deploy to all participating schools the common set of key
performance measures/indicators that were initially developed with Cohort 1 schools
and continually refined over the cohorts. Included in this report (Appendix A) is a
copy of this common set of KPIs.

The EdPEx Program should enter into a formal partnership with the TQA Program so
as to involve more TQA assessors, especially those from the education sector, as
team leaders, backup team leaders, and coaches of EdPEx assessment teams.

The EdPEx Program should develop an EdPEx assessor preparation and calibration
course that is suited to the process improvement and consultation orientation of
EdPEx. Although experienced TQA assessors employed in the higher education
sector might be the initial pool of EdPEx assessors, they will need to be retrained or
reoriented to provide feedback that: (a) is responsive to the basic or overall
requirements (as opposed to the multiple requirements) of the EdPEx Criteria, and
(b) includes examples of possible tools that will enable the schools to address more
fully the EdPEx Criteria requirements.

The EdPEx Program should consider improving the design of the EdPEx assessor
preparation courses by using an actual or hypothetical EdPEx Self-Assessment
Report as case study or learning materials. A comprehensive set of learning
materials would include:
• Self-Assessment Report—For example, see Nightingale College of Nursing
   (Baldrige 2009 Case Study), which is included as Appendix B and which may be
   downloaded from:
   http://www.quality.nist.gov/PDF_files/2009_Nightingale_Case_Study.pdf
• Feedback Report—For example, see the Nightingale College of Nursing
   Feedback Report, which is included as Appendix C and which may be
   downloaded from:
   http://www.nist.gov/baldrige/publications/upload/2009_Nightingale_Feedback_Re
   port.pdf




!                                         5
                                                                                            6
!


•     Action Plan—Create a template based on the Action Plan submitted by the
      Mahidol University, Faculty of Science, a copy of which is included in this report
      as Appendix D. The goal of these Action Plans should be that, collectively, they
      would lead to a 50-point increase in total score (or an average 5% increase in
      Item scores).
•     Revalidation Report—An annual report, in tabular format, showing the (i)
      strengths and opportunities for improvement (OFIs) from the Feedback Report,
      (ii) actions taken to sustain each strength or address each OFI, and (iii) evidence
      of each action taken, such as references to new procedures or supporting
      documents. Appendix E presents a proposed template for this Revalidation
      Report.

4.2      National Deployment of the EdPEx Program

The OHEC website lists a total of 171 higher education institutions in Thailand as of
December 2012, consisting of 80 public HEIs, 71 private HEIs, and 20 community
colleges. OHEC will need to think “outside the box” and create a system to deploy
the EdPEx Program to the more than 100 colleges and universities that are not
beneficiaries of a significant infusion of resources to bring them to world-class status.
The Consultant proposes a system that has two major elements: (a) institutional
mentoring, and (b) organizational machinery.

4.2.1 Institutional Mentoring

The EdPEx Program should encourage and establish educational partnerships with
first- and second-tier institutions for technical assistance in upgrading educational
programs. The best and most sustainable of these partnerships occur when all
partner-institutions benefit from the partnership, thereby advancing their respective
missions. An example of a mutually beneficial linkage here might be a regional
university working with one of Thailand’s 20 community colleges so that associate’s
degree holders of that community college can seamlessly transfer to the university to
complete their bachelor’s degrees. Institutional mentoring might be jumpstarted by
having each of the Cohorts 1-3 participating schools “adopt” a not-yet-participating
school as a mentee.

4.2.2 Organizational Machinery

OHEC should create new EdPEx Institute that will be responsible for the overall
management of the evaluation function and oversight (but not direct responsibility
for) of the consultancy function. The activities of the EdPEx implementing
organization should be aligned and integrated with the Office for National
Education Standards and Quality Assessment (ONESQA), the Thailand
Qualification Framework (TQF), the OHEC-mandated Internal Quality
Assessments, and other components of the Thai Government’s quality
assurance system for higher education. Ideally, the new EdPEx Institute should
be operational during the 2014/2015 fiscal year.


!                                           6
                                                                                                7
!



4.2.3 Business Model for the EdPEx Institute

In overseeing the national implementation of the EdPEx Program, the proposed
EdPEx Institute might adopt the business model (including the use of volunteer peer
reviewers) of the Academic Quality Improvement Project (AQIP) of the Higher
Learning Commission of the North Central Association of Schools and Colleges.1
The AQIP pathway to accreditation requires participating institutions to first complete
a Systems Portfolio2 and then annual Action Projects3 that would be the continuous
improvement plans that the institutions will execute. The recommended adaptation
of the AQIP approach to Thailand might be an EdPEx Self-Assessment Report
prepared every five years, an annual improvement planning day to identify action
items to address opportunities for improvement identified in the EdPEx Feedback
Report, and an annual submission containing an Action Project similar to AQIP and a
progress report of actions taken during the past year to address opportunities for
improvement.

The EdPEx Institute might initially be formed and organized along the lines of the
now-defunct US Federal Quality Institute (FQI).4 FQI was created in June 1988
as a temporary organization to advance and promote quality management
programs in the US federal government, which had 3.8 million employees at that
time. It was initially staffed with four people and no budget, with all equipment
either on loan or rented, and with its 34 staff members on loan from various
federal agencies (usually for 1-2 years at a time). FQI coordinated and produced
the annual National Conference on Federal Quality and the President’s Quality
Award. In September 1995, FQI was closed and its functions transferred to the
US Office of Personnel Management.

The difference between the proposed EdPEx Institute and the US Federal
Quality Institute is that, unlike the FQI, the EdPEx Institute is not meant to be a
temporary organization without a budget. There are two options for organizing
the EdPEx Institute, each with its own governance and staffing implications:

•     The first option is to create the EdPEx Institute as a government-chartered
      Public Organization (PO) that will be autonomous yet organizationally
      related to OHEC. The founding staff of the EdPEx Institute might be
      professionals seconded from various government agencies and public
      universities, with additional staff recruited from among higher education
      professionals. A role model for the Public Organization form for the EdPEx
      Institute might be the Healthcare Accreditation Institute of Thailand (HA),

!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
             1
               http://aqip.org/AQIP/aqip-home.html
             2
               https://www.ncahlc.org/AQIP-Systems-Appraisal/aqip-portfolio.html
             3
               https://www.ncahlc.org/AQIP-Action-Project-Directory/aqip-action-projects.html
             4
               Brad Stratton, “Federal Quality Missionaries,” Quality Progress, May 1991, 67-
69.


!                                                          7
                                                                                        8
!

      which has a quite similar mission as the proposed EdPEx Institute.5 For
      reasons that will be provided later, the Public Organization is the more
      preferred option.

•     The second option is to create the EdPEx Institute as a not-for-profit
      foundation under contract with OHEC. This is similar to the organizational
      relationship between the U.S. Baldrige Performance Excellence Program
      (BPEP) and the American Society for Quality (ASQ), which is the contract
      administrator of the Baldrige Award). 6 This is somewhat similar to the
      relationship between the Foundation for Thailand Productivity Institute (FTPI)7
      and the Thai Government in the administration of the Thailand Quality Award
      (TQA), except that, unlike the BPEP-ASQ relationship, the Office of the TQA
      is actually a financial responsibility center within FTPI.

4.2.4 Organization for the Consultancy Function

Design the organizational machinery for the delivery of the consultancy function
under the EdPEx Institute’s oversight. Whatever organization design OHEC
decides to utilize for the national implementation of the EdPEx Program, there
should be a “firewall” between the units or personnel involved in assuring higher
education institutions’ (HEIs) compliance with EdPEx and other standards
(evaluation function) and those involved in assisting HEIs address the EdPEx
criteria requirements (consultancy function). Limiting the EdPEx Institute’s scope
to the evaluation function and oversight of the consultancy function ensures that
there would be a firewall between evaluation and consultancy. The consultancy
function might be jumpstarted with a set of about 5-10 founding consultants and
trainers from among selected Thailand Quality Award assessors in the higher
education sector and participants from the advanced EdPEx cohorts.

There are two options for the continuing delivery of the consultancy function
beyond the set of founding consultants and trainers:

•     The first option is for the EdPEx Institute to subcontract the consultancy
      function to not-for-profit, non-governmental organizations such as the
      Foundation for Thailand Productivity Institute. For example, the business
      scope of FTPI might be expanded to include the provision of consultancy and
      training to Thailand’s HEIs on the EdPEx framework and its associated tools
      and methods. These training programs might be provided in collaboration
      with Thailand’s business and education schools that might be familiar with the
      EdPEx framework and its implementation. The surplus net income resulting
      from this expanded business scope might be shared between FTPI and the


!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
             5
               http://www.ha.or.th/
             6
               http://www.prweb.com/releases/2013/11/prweb11371791.htm
             7
               http://www.ftpi.or.th


!                                                          8
                                                                                                9
!

      EdPEx Institute, thereby leading to a non-governmental source of funding to
      partially support the EdPEx Institute.

•     The second option is for the EdPEx Institute to create a process for certifying new
      consultants and trainers beyond the founding set. The certification program might
      be based on a validation of the candidate’s education and documented EdPEx
      assessment process experience; completion of TQA Assessor, EdPEx Assessor
      or Certification training programs; and performance in a written examination on
      the EdPEx criteria and processes. A role model for this certification process
      might be the Baldrige Institute of the Missouri Quality Award.8 After completion
      and certification, the consultants and trainers might reimburse the EdPEx Institute
      for their training costs in the form of either a forgivable loan (via service as a peer
      reviewer over a 2-3-year period) or installment payments through withholding of a
      nominal percentage of their consulting/training fees.

4.2.5 Institutionalization of a Peer Review System

The U.S. model of a voluntary system of accreditation based on peer review, as
opposed to government regulation, has succeeded because of the mass base of
peer reviewers who participate in accreditation reviews not for compensation, but as
a contribution to the profession. Over time, the success of the national deployment of
the EdPEx Program hinges on the development of a peer review culture in Thai
higher education. If such a voluntary system of peer review is not feasible in the Thai
context, then the cost of engaging peer reviewers as paid professionals will need to
be incorporated into the program budget.

5.           Acknowledgments

Dr. Calingo would like to express his gratitude to the staff of the Office of Higher
Education Commission (OHEC), particularly its subcommittee on the EdPEx Fast-
Track Project, and OHEC’s partners from the Thailand Quality Award Program. Dr.
Calingo would also like to recognize (1) Professor Avudh Srisukri who has taken the
lead to move the whole EdPEx initiative forward and (2) Dr. Nantana Sirisup who has
been the main project coordinator overseeing overall planning and implementation.
Their commitment, dedication, and passion for raising the level of academic quality
and organizational excellence in Thailand’s higher education institutions is
commendable and inspiring. It has always been a pleasure working with them.




!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!!
             8
                 http://www.baldrigeinstitute.org/Pages/Home.aspx !


!                                                          9
