    Report No: ACS17905

.




    Republic of Tunisia
    Tunisia WASH and Poverty Diagnostic
    Phase 3 Report: Synthesis and Policy Recommendations

.
    July 2017



.
    GWA05

    MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA

.
.
.

    Standard Disclaimer:

.

    This volume is a product of the staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The World Bank. The
    findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Directors
    of The World Bank or the governments they represent. The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included
    in this work. The boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any
    judgment on the part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such
    boundaries.

.

    Copyright Statement:




                                                               ii
.

    The material in this publication is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting portions or all of this work without permission may be
    a violation of applicable law. The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The World Bank encourages
    dissemination of its work and will normally grant permission to reproduce portions of the work promptly.



    For permission to photocopy or reprint any part of this work, please send a request with complete information to the Copyright
    Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, USA, telephone 978-750-8400, fax 978-750-4470,
    http://www.copyright.com/.



    All other queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to the Office of the Publisher, The World
    Bank, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA, fax 202-522-2422, e-mail pubrights@worldbank.org.




                                                              iii
                                                        2017




WASH Poverty
Diagnostics Tunisia
PHASE 3 REPORT - SYNTHESIS AND POLICY RECOMMENDATIONS
WORLD BANK
Contents

Contents................................................................................................................................................... i
Executive Summary ................................................................................................................................. ii
Acknowledgements ...............................................................................................................................viii
Acronyms and abbreviations .................................................................................................................. ix
1.      Introduction .................................................................................................................................... 1
     Study objectives .................................................................................................................................. 1
     Poverty and WASH services: a conceptual framework.......................................................................... 2
     Report structure .................................................................................................................................. 3
2.      Tunisia: remarkable progress on WASH services despite water resource constraints ....................... 4
     Country overview ................................................................................................................................ 4
     Access to improved water and sanitation services has increased but remains unequal ........................ 9
3.      Poverty and WASH services in Tunisia ............................................................................................ 11
     Poverty in Tunisia: current status and recent evolution ..................................................................... 11
     Poverty and access to WASH services in Tunisia ................................................................................. 16
     What are the impacts of inadequate WASH services on poor people? ............................................... 24
4.      How is financing allocated in the WASH sector in Tunisia? ............................................................. 27
     WASH expenditure has increased over the last three years................................................................ 31
     WASH expenditure has increased in recent years but disparities in resource allocation remain
     between urban and rural areas and across governorates ................................................................... 33
     Public finance for water is well-targeted to reduce regional disparities but efforts are needed to
     improve public finance allocation for sanitation ................................................................................ 36
     Raising tariffs would lower SONEDE and ONAS financing gaps and not hurt the poor ......................... 39
5.      Policy recommendations................................................................................................................ 43
References ............................................................................................................................................ 53
Annex 1 – Governorates and regions in Tunisia...................................................................................... 55




                                                                              i
Executive Summary

Key findings
Remarkable progress has been achieved, both in poverty reduction and access to WASH services
Tunisia has made remarkable progress on reducing poverty and increasing access to WASH services in
recent decades. Between 1990 and 2012, access to improved drinking water rose from 82% to 97% of
the population, while access to improved sanitation rose from 73% to 92%. More than 4 million people
have gained access to improved sanitation between 1990 and 2015, with the same number for water.

Poverty has decreased overall in Tunisia in the last decades, but it remains unevenly distributed.
According to recent government estimates, poverty rates dropped from 25% in 2000 to 15% in 2015,
with a total estimated 1.7 million poor people in 2015. The highest poverty rates are found in the North
West and Centre West regions, with 28% and 31% respectively, compared to lows of 12% and 5% in the
Centre East region and Grand Tunis. The Centre West region remains the poorest region in terms of both
poverty and extreme poverty rates. Poverty is primarily a rural phenomenon in Tunisia. This applies both
for income-poverty and human development indicators, such as stunting and health outcomes (e.g.
maternal mortality).

Brief overview of Tunisia WASH sector organization

 Tunisia is divided into 7 regions and 24 governorates. It is home to 11 million people, 33% of which live in
 rural areas. Two state-owned enterprises (SOEs) are responsible for providing the majority of WASH services
 in Tunisia.
  The main water service provider is SONEDE (Société Nationale d’Exploitation et de Distribution des Eaux),
      which serves 100% of the urban population and 51% of the rural population. Most of the remaining rural
      population is served by the Ministry of Agriculture, which has delegated operational responsibilities to so-
      called GDAs (Groupements de Développement Agricole), which are community-based organizations in
      charge of distributing water for human consumption and irrigated agriculture.
  Sanitation services, primarily sewerage and wastewater treatment, are provided by the state-owned
      enterprise ONAS (Office National d’Assainissement). ONAS is responsible for services in municipalities
      (communes) which are within its service area but also provides sewerage services in some more densely-
      populated rural areas. Responsibilities for sanitation services in rural areas have been recently clarified by
      an inter-ministerial decision in 2016, although implementing decrees are still to be defined.



Reaching universal access will be challenging since those remaining unserved are harder to reach

Despite progress on extending access to improved WASH services, around 250,000 people in Tunisia
still rely on unimproved drinking water, mostly unprotected wells and springs . Around 650,000 people
are served by standposts managed by GDAs, which means walking off-plot and carrying water home.

In addition, 900,000 people use unimproved sanitation, about half of which use shared latrines, with
the rest using mostly unimproved latrines. There are still instances of open defecation in Tunisia.

Although achieving the SDG targets for water and sanitation definitely seems within reach, Tunisia
still has work to do in order to meet the water Sustainable Development Goals, which call for

                                                          ii
delivering universal access to safely managed water and sanitation services by 2030 and eliminating
open defecation. In addition, SDG 6 (the so-called water SDG) sets out specific targets for improving
efficiency in the management of water resources and protecting natural resources.

If left unaddressed, deficiencies could become more severe in coming years. This is especially the case
since Tunisia is a water-scarce country, and water security challenges are predicted to be exacerbated
by climate change in the coming years. There are substantial imbalances in terms of water resource
distribution between the better-endowed North and the semi-arid South.

The poorest quintile of the Tunisian population is significantly worse off than other quintiles in terms
of access to WASH services. The poorest quintile is the only one where people practice any open
defecation or use unimproved sanitation facilities. SONEDE is the water service provider with the largest
number of poor customers in absolute terms, whereas GDAs are the formal service providers with the
highest proportion of their customers who are poor (27%). In addition, those using self-supply are most
likely to be poor (59%) but are less numerous in absolute terms.

Challenges in poverty and WASH service coverage are concentrated in certain parts of the country .
The Centre West and North West regions have the greatest deficiencies in access to water , with the
largest proportion and number of people using unimproved sources for drinking. The South East and
Centre West regions have the largest proportions of people using non-networked improved water
services, which are predominantly local rainwater harvesting systems such as a Majel. Open defecation
and unimproved sanitation are concentrated in the three governorates in the Centre West region, and
these are also the regions with the lowest access to networked sanitation via piped sewerage and fairly
high use of pit latrines. A small number of “challenging governorates” face overlapping problems in
access to WASH services and poverty. Concentrated in the North West and Centre West regions, these
are the six governorates of Kasserine, le Kef, Kairouan, Siliana, Béja and Jendouba.

Variation in other levels of service experienced is another key equity issue, but unfortunately little
data exists which is comparable by governorate and that allows drawing firm conclusions. Considering
volumes consumed, volumes sold by SONEDE vary from 70 to 130 litres per capita per day (LPCD)
depending on the geographical area. The mean for those served by GDAs is around 50 LPCD. According
to WHO, consumption below this threshold means that hygiene can be compromised. Given that the
figure of 50 LPCD for GDA users is a mean, this suggests that some proportion of households (including
those who receive water through standpipes managed by GDAs, as well as those who are not formally
served by GDAs) are likely to be using significantly less and therefore put their health at risk.

Good-quality information on water service levels is not available by type of service providers and by
governorate. Even at aggregate level, limited robust data is available. Insights can nonetheless be made
based on estimations and anecdotal evidence. Water quality does not appear to be a serious issue for
SONEDE customers, but no data is systematic collected for GDAs or for households who self-supply.
There is similarly no robust data on service continuity.

There are strong associations between poor WASH outcomes and poor health and nutrition outcomes
in Tunisia, reinforcing the case for investing in improving WASH service delivery. Considering data on
stunting and health outcomes such as diarrhea prevalence amongst children under-five, the poorest
regions (e.g. the larger governorates of Centre West) are also those that score amongst the worst on
these indicators. World Bank analysis based on UNICEF’s synergies model for undernutrition suggests


                                                   iii
that WASH interventions in Tunisia contribute to improved child nutrition. It also suggests that there are
positive interactions (synergies) between adequate WASH services, health services and individual care
practices. However, synergies differ across samples of poor, non-poor, urban and rural households. In
rural areas, access to WASH and health services are correlated with significant improvements in child
nutrition. For non-poor households, adequate WASH and food intake have positive and significant
effects. However, for the most vulnerable (the poorest quartile of rural households), positive and
meaningful improvements in nutrition are observed only when adequate access to food, health, WASH
and care are all present.


Even though households are the main contributors of funding to the water sector, water services
remain by and large affordable even for the poor
Total WASH expenditure was estimated for the first time in Tunisia, on the basis of the TrackFin
methodology developed by the World Health Organization (WHO, 2016). This methodology compiles
total WASH expenditure, including from private sources (mostly households, via tariffs and investments
in self-supply) and from public sources (mostly domestic tax transfers as well as concessional financing).
WASH expenditure was collated based on all available data and was then classified by types, sources and
geographic distribution in order to produce so-called WASH Accounts and indicators.

Total WASH expenditure (both public and private) has increased by around 14 percent in USD nominal
terms between 2013 and 2015. Total WASH expenditure has increased between 2013 and 2015 from
USD 589 million to USD 671 million, amounting to around 1.5% of GDP. Total expenditure per capita
for both water and sanitation is higher in urban than in rural areas. For water, this is explained by the
higher levels of water consumption and higher expenditure on bottled water in urban as compared to
rural areas. For sanitation, both private and public expenditure are significantly lower in rural areas
when compared to urban areas.

Public WASH expenditure accounts for around 1.6% of total public expenditure, as compared to 14%
for health. In per capita terms, total WASH expenditure per capita has increased slightly from USD 51 in
2013 to USD 57 in 2015. However, wide disparities between urban and rural areas, and governorates
remain. For example, in 2015, total WASH expenditure per capita in urban areas was around USD 66 as
compared to just USD 38 in rural areas. Inequality is even wider between governorates, with total water
and sanitation expenditure ranging between USD 30 per capita in Le Kef (one of the most vulnerable
areas) and USD 109 in Tozeur in 2015.

Both water and sanitation expenditures are predominantly funded by households themselves, either
through tariffs or investments in self-supply. This so-called “private expenditure” is particularly high in
governorates that are predominantly urban, such as Tunis, Ariana, Ben Arous and Monastir.

Household water expenditure accounts for a very small share of total household expenditure, 0.54%
on average. It accounts for 1.5% of total household expenditure for the very poorest, which is well
below 3%, i.e. what is normally used as an affordability benchmark. Ability to pay is unlikely to be the
limiting factor on households increasing their consumption: policies should focus on increasing service
levels and consumption so as to increase benefits to households. It is difficult to know the per litre prices
faced by the poor as opposed to the rich, as private water expenditure is a function of the price and the
volume consumed. Per litre prices for those who are served by SONEDE do not vary: the first block of
consumption for a volume up to 220 litres per day is set at 0.2 DT/m3. However, price of services by

                                                     iv
GDAs formal providers do vary (ranging from being aligned with SONEDE tariffs to 1.5 DT/m 3). Prices
from informal sources vary hugely per litre, with tanker trucks being very expensive (around 5 DT/m3 for
those using their neighbours’ water and between 15 to 25 DT/me for tanker water) whereas handpump
or majel water is “free” (although households would have had to make the initial investment).

Modelling of potential tariff reforms aimed at reducing or eliminating government subsidies found
that this would not hurt the poor in a significant way. Given that richer people consume more water,
they capture far more of the subsidy from the government to SONEDE. SONEDE falls short of cost
recovery, with a financial gap of around US$ 50 million, which is implicitly subsidised by the government.
Being consumption-based, the tariffs are theoretically progressive. However, the richest 20% of
households consume four times more water than the poorest 20%, and so capture far more of the
government subsidy.

The targeting of public WASH expenditure could be improved. Public water expenditure is fairly well
targeted at governorates with high poverty levels, but could be better targeted at governorates with
large numbers of people not served by formal water providers as well. Achieving both objectives should
be possible. Areas with high numbers of people unserved by formal water providers, such as Kairouan,
are not receiving significantly higher levels of public resources per capita. For sanitation, public
sanitation expenditure is not well-targeted, and addressing the rural sanitation challenge should be a
high priority.
Although there is a need for a shift of focus in the distribution of public resources for sanitation,
especially in poor and rural areas, a clear definition of responsibilities for service provision will need
to precede resource re-allocation. Contrary to water, there is a negative correlation between public
expenditure for sanitation and poverty levels. This is partly explained by the lack of a clear allocation of
responsibilities for service provision in rural areas, which is also where poverty is concentrated – while
ONAS has a mandate to serve urban areas, there is currently no service provider for largely rural
governorates.
Most financial resources for both water and sanitation are spent on operations and management
(O&M), followed by investments. In 2013, O&M (including staff costs, fuel, and any other expenses
required to keep services running) for water accounted for 65 per cent of total expenditure while for
sanitation it accounted for 52 per cent. O&M excludes large capital maintenance costs (e.g. system
renewal and rehabilitation), for which only 5 percent of resources are allocated across both water and
sanitation, thereby endangering the sustainability of these investments.




                                                      v
Recommendations
Recommendation 1 – Conduct Strategic Financial Planning for the WASH sector

Strategic Financial Planning analysis could be conducted for all four sub-sectors in order to identify the
financing needs to achieve the water SDG and government objectives in Tunisia up to 2030 , including
for new investments, operations and crucially, for maintenance; the potential for freeing up resources
via generating efficiency gains at the level of service providers; and how resources can be mobilized to
meet spending requirements, e.g. from public sources via taxation and concessionary finance or via
domestic commercial financing.

Recommendation 2 – Bring tariffs closer to cost-recovery levels whilst preserving affordability

The analysis conducted for this study has identified that current private expenditure on WASH services
is affordable by the majority of the population, including the poor. The analysis presented here shows
that it would be possible to reform water tariffs whilst not significantly affecting poor customers.
Removing SONEDE tariff subsidies would help strengthening the company’s financial viability and credit -
worthiness, whilst freeing up scarce public resources for being allocated to other sub-sectors (such as
rural sanitation, which has been chronically under-funded) where public funding is critically required and
it would be harder to mobilize commercial financing. To that end, well-designed reforms of the tariff
structure are needed, which could align with social transfer schemes.

Recommendation 3 – Mobilize and target public WASH sector funding more strategically

Going forward, public expenditure for water and sanitation will need to be allocated to the areas that
need it the most – that is, the governorates that have lower levels of coverage and limited capacity to
generate their own resources, i.e. mainly governorates in North West and Centre West of the country
and rural areas. As Tunisia gets closer to achieving the SDGs, reaching the harder to reach will likely cost
more and beneficiaries may have less ability to generate private financing. It will also be important to
better coordinate WASH interventions with nutrition interventions, as improved WASH services are
necessary (albeit not sufficient) factors in combatting undernutrition and stunting.

Transparent public formulas for allocating WASH funding to the regions that need it most (where there
are the highest number of poor people with inadequate services) should be defined and mechanisms for
transferring funds from urban WASH service users to more deprived rural ones should be established.

Recommendation 4 – Define a clear strategy for delivering improved access to sanitation in rural areas

Rural sanitation needs to be prioritised, as neither ONAS nor GDAs have made significant investments
to improve service delivery in rural areas. This will require operationalising a recent decision by an
inter-ministerial committee to clarify responsibilities for sanitation services according to the size of the
locality. Although this decision was adopted in June 2016, the relevant law and implementing decrees
has yet to be published, which means that an operational strategy still needs to be defined.

Supporting rural sanitation will need the definition of a clear strategy and support structures,
particularly in areas where responsibilities are unclear (i.e. localities with less than 3000 people). At
present, households are responsible for investing in sanitation but do not receive support, either in
terms of technical or financial assistance, to invest in durable safely-managed sanitation solutions.

                                                     vi
Additional elements on what such assistance could entail are provided in the detail of
recommendations. This will require dedicated public funding, which can be estimated as part of a
Strategic Financial Planning exercise.

Recommendation 5 - Improve sector monitoring to track progress towards the SDGs

Refinements to Tunisia’s WASH monitoring framework will be required to measure progress towards
the SDGs. SDG 6 commits Tunisia to universal access to safely managed water and sanitation services.
This includes proper management of fecal waste and wastewater along the whole sanitation services
chain. It also means universal access to safely managed water supply, implying piped water on premises
for all by 2030. To a large extent, existing data availability on levels of service for WASH in Tunisia (for
example on water quality and service intermittency) are not sufficient to monitor SDG implementation.

The lack of robust data on service levels is a serious barrier to targeting investments to improve
services. The key providers tend to manage services either in aggregate or at the individual system level,
rather than at a level in between. This hinders improving the allocative efficiency of public funds
through targeting problem areas. Improving the availability of information on service levels, e.g. by
benchmarking at the governorate level, should be a priority in the SDG era and will require the
establishment of robust monitoring and regulatory systems.

Finally, the preparation of WASH Accounts should be repeated in 2 to 3 years, in order to track
whether sector allocations have increased and are better allocated. In order for such WASH Accounts
to include improved financial data, it will be necessary to promptly identify the institution that will be
tasked with supervising the preparation of WASH Accounts and for ensuring that the above
recommendations on data improvements are duly followed through. As for the first exercise, the MDICI
could take on this responsibility but would need to identify financial and human resources to that end.




                                                     vii
Acknowledgements
This synthesis report is the main output of the WASH Poverty Diagnostics in Tunisia. The study was
carried out in 3 phases:
     Phase 1 sought to identify the links between poverty and WASH services in Tunisia. This
        included an analysis of household survey data so as to estimate subsidies implicit in water
        tariffs;
     Phase 2 analysed financial flows in the Tunisian WASH sector so as to understand how the four
        sub-sectors (urban and rural, water and sanitation) are currently financed. This generated WASH
        accounts using the WHO/GLAAS TrackFin methodology;
     Phase 3 summarises all findings and makes recommendations for improving WASH services.

Esther Illouz (Infrastructure Specialist, GWA-MENA) and Daniel Camos Daurella (Senior Infrastructure
Economist, GWA-MENA), led the team that produced the Phase 1 study. Sophie Trémolet (Senior
Economist, GWASP) was the Task Team Leader for producing the WASH Accounts (Phase 2) and the
present synthesis report (Phase 3). The World Bank greatly appreciates the collaboration with the
Tunisian Government, in particular the Ministry of Agriculture, the Ministry of International Cooperation
and Investment, SONEDE and ONAS in the preparation of this report.

The main team for Phase 1 included Jose Cuesta (Senior Economist, GPVDR) and Esther Illouz Loening
(Infrastructure Specialist, GWADR), Gabriel Lara-Ibarra (Economist, GPVDR), Laura Maratou-Kolias
(Consultant, GWASP), and Abdel Rahmen El Lahga (Consultant, GPVDR).

The analysis of sector funding flows is based on work conducted under a consultancy conducted in 2016-
17 by Oxford Policy Management (OPM). Team members included Ana Mujica (OPM), Ian Ross (OPM),
Madih Mnif (independent) and Faouzia Said (independent).

Direction was provided by a steering committee of stakeholders from key ministries chaired by
Belgacem Ayed, for which Radhia Ben Aziza was the focal point for communication with the team. The
team is grateful to them and the steering committee for their insights and readiness to share data to
improve the analysis.

The authors are also grateful to the World Bank peer reviewers, who provided comments and insights
on the final version of this report. These have included Luis Andres, Lead Economist (GWASP), Yogita
Mumssen, Senior Infrastructure Economist (GWA05), Gabriel Lara Ibarra, Economist (GPV05) and
Abdoulaye Sy, Senior Economist (GMF05).




                                                   viii
Acronyms and abbreviations

DGFIOP    General Directorate for Finance, Investments and Professional Agencies (Direction Générale du
          Financement, des Investissements et des Organismes Professionnels)
DFID      UK Department for International Development
GDA       Agriculture Development Group (Groupement de Développement Agricole)
GDP       Gross Domestic Product
HDI       Human Development Index
INS       National Institute of Statistics (Institut National de la Statistique)
MDG       Millennium Development Goal
MICS      Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey (Enquête par Grappes à Indicateurs Multiples, EGIM)
NSBCL     National Survey on Households’ Budget and Consumption and Living Standards (Enquête
          Nationale sur le Budget, la Consommation et le Niveau de Vie des Ménages, ENBCV)
ONAS      National Sanitation Office (Office National de l’Assainissement)
OPHI      Oxford Poverty and Human Development Initiative
SDG       Sustainable Development Goal
SOE       State-Owned Enterprise
SONEDE    National Society for Water Supply and Distribution (Société National d’Exploitation et de
          Distribution des Eaux)
UNDP      United Nations Development Programme
UNICEF    United Nations Children’s Fund
WASH      Water, Sanitation and Hygiene
WHO       World Health Organisation




                                               ix
    1. Introduction

    Study objectives

The World Bank funded the present study, referred to as the “Tunisia WASH Poverty Diagnostics”, to
assist the Government of Tunisia with exploring the linkages between poverty and WASH services. The
study in Tunisia was carried out as part of global WASH Poverty Diagnostics, which took place
simultaneously in 18 countries, with varying areas of emphasis and depth. The water sector is also a
priority for World Bank support in Tunisia. The Country Partnership Framework with the World Bank
indicatively allocates US$ 150 million of lending to the water sector over 2016-18 and US$ 150 million to
irrigation (World Bank, 2016c).

Box 1-1 – Defining WASH services

 WASH stands for water supply, sanitation and hygiene. It is an acronym commonly used to summarise four
 types of interventions, related to water availability, water quality, excreta disposal and hygiene promotion
 (DFID, 2013). The hygiene element usually refers mainly to handwashing with soap at critical times, particularly
 after defecation, rather than a broader concept including food hygiene, for example. These interventions are
 jointly referred to as “WASH” because they are all public health interventions that primarily tackle pathways for
 faecal-oral diseases. Other interventions which tackle such diseases in different ways (e.g. rotavirus vaccines)
 are not considered part of WASH.


The study in Tunisia was carried out in 3 phases:
     Phase 1 sought to identify the links between poverty and WASH services in Tunisia. This
        included an analysis of household survey data so as to estimate subsidies implicit in water
        tariffs;
     Phase 2 analysed financial flows in the Tunisian WASH sector so as to understand how the four
        sub-sectors (urban and rural, water and sanitation) are currently financed. This generated WASH
        accounts using the WHO/GLAAS TrackFin methodology;
     Phase 3 summarises all findings and makes recommendations for improving WASH services.

Phase 1 aimed to provide an in-depth understanding of the Tunisian context and establish key facts
about the current distribution of service use by level of income. The analysis also examined the linkages
between WASH and nutrition. The methodology for Phase 1 was based on an analysis of various
household survey datasets, which included both WASH and welfare variables. It also modelled the
distributive effects of tariff reforms. The full results are available in a separate report (World Bank,
2016b). The analysis showed that the majority of subsidies implicit in water and sanitation tariffs benefit
comparatively richer customers, due to their higher levels of consumption.

During Phase 1, it became clear that only limited information was available regarding financial flows in
the Tunisian WASH sector. This prevented the development of a sound understanding concerning
whether public funds are adequately allocated to those regions or sub-sectors that need them most.

                                                         1
In an environment where available financial resources are limited, it is critical to assess how financial
resources could be better utilised. The analysis of financial flows in Phase 2 is designed to fill this gap,
with the aim of allowing more detailed recommendations on WASH sector financing beyond just tariff
reform, for example related to allocative efficiency (between governorates).

Phase 2 used the TrackFin methodology developed by the World Health Organisation (WHO) for
assessing financial flows to water, sanitation and related hygiene activities. This involved collecting data
from different stakeholders involved in financing the WASH sector and coding each flow along different
dimensions (such as different service types, financing units and cost types). This allowed for the
development of detailed cross-tabulations along the different dimensions, providing an in-depth
understanding of financial flows in the Tunisian WASH sector. The full results and analysis are available
in a separate report (World Bank, 2017).

The present Phase 3 report presents a synthesis of the findings from both Phase 1 and Phase 2,
summarising key analytical conclusions and drawing together recommendations focused on policy
reforms, including to improve the present allocation of financing and leverage additional financing.


    Poverty and WASH services: a conceptual framework

Around the world, lack of water, sanitation and hygiene (WASH) services is associated with poverty, and
improvements in WASH services are associated with its reduction. WASH services have various positive
impacts through different causal pathways. The figure below summarises these visually, showing that
improvements in WASH services can generate benefits related to health, education, nutrition,
employment, and the environment. These in turn all have knock-on benefits related to economic growth
and opportunities. Cost-benefit analyses have found that US$ 1 of investments in WASH services can
generate a US$ 4 return through these various benefits, though these may take time to materialise due
to the lengths of the causal chains (Hutton, 2012).

Figure 1-1       Impact of improved WASH services on economic opportunities and sustainable growth




                                             Source: World Bank.

                                                      2
In addition, inadequate access to WASH services is a marker of poverty. In most countries there is strong
correlation between the two, and analysts of multi-dimensional poverty use WASH services as one
indicator in their composite index (OPHI, 2016).


    Report structure

The present report is structured as follows:

       Section 2 provides a brief overview of the water resources and WASH context in Tunisia;
       Section 3 explores the linkages between WASH services and poverty;
       Section 4 summarises the main findings from the analysis of financial flows; and
       Section 5 provides recommendations to improve WASH services and financing.




                                                    3
      2. Tunisia: remarkable progress on WASH services despite water
         resource constraints

    Key Findings

         Tunisia is a water-scarce country and challenges will worsen with climate change
         There are substantial imbalances in water resource distribution between the North and South
         Tunisia made remarkable progress on WASH services in the MDG era, especially on water
         However, inequalities in access persist, for example in service availability and quality across various
          dimensions (geography, urban/rural, providers, etc.)
         The majority of WASH services across the country are provided by two state-owned enterprises, one for
          water (SONEDE) and one for sanitation (ONAS)


      Country overview

Tunisia, the smallest country in the North African region, has a total surface area of 163,610km2. It is
divided in four physiographic regions - the mountains of the Northwest, the mountains of the South, the
coastal plains, and desert plains. From an administrative perspective, the country is divided into 7
regions and 24 governorates, as shown in Annex A.1

Tunisia is home to 11 million people, 33% of whom live in rural areas. It went through a political
transition after the 2011 revolution, which triggered the so-called “Arab spring”, with the adoption of a
new Constitution in early 2014 followed by orderly elections. Six years later after the revolution, the
population has yet to yield the full benefits of the promised economic transformation, with the
implementation of an economic reform agenda only building up steam in 2015.

Economic performance has slowed in the years since the revolution. Real annual GDP growth was 2.3%
year-on-year in 2013 and 2014, but fell to 0.8% in 2015 due to social tensions related to the slowness of
reforms and the effects of several terrorist attacks. Inflation has also decreased from 5.8% in 2013 to
4.9% in 2015 (World Development Indicators, 2017). Tunisia’s human development index (HDI) score is
0.725, at a similar level to Colombia, Jamaica and Botswana (UNDP, 2017).

Tunisia is a water-scarce country. It has a Mediterranean climate, with an average rainfall of 207mm per
year. However, there are substantial imbalances in terms of water resource distribution between the
better-endowed North and the semi-arid South. One determinant of this is precipitation distribution, as
shown in Figure 2-1 below. There is already a 90% mobilisation rate of water resources through dams,

1
  The governorates are an administrative division that fall under the broader regions. The regions are more often
used for the purposes of sampling and data analysis in surveys, since there are fewer of them. Governorates are
distributed per region are as follows: North East (Bizerte, Tunis, Ariana, Manouba, Ben Arous, Zaghouan and
Nabeul), Nord West (Jendouba, Béja, Le Kef and Siliana), Centre East (Sousse, Monastir, Mahdia), Centre West
(Kairouan, Kasserine and Sidi Bouzid), South East (Sfax, Gabès, Mednine and Tataouine), South West (Gafsa, Tozeur
and Kébili).

                                                          4
while groundwater resources are over-exploited (World Bank, 2016a). A network of canals and transfers
exists to transport water from the North to the South.

Water security challenges are predicted to be exacerbated by climate change in the coming years. The
decrease in conventional water resources is estimated at about 28% by 2030 (World Bank, 2016c). The
decline in surface water availability is predicted to be around 5% by 2030, alongside increasing
salinization of coastal aquifers due to sea level rise.

Figure 2-1       Map of decennial daily rainfalls in Tunisia




                                                                       <50mm
                                                                       50-59mm
                                                                       60-79mm
                                                                       80-89mm
                                                                       90-99mm
                                                                       >99mm




   Source: Zahar & Laborde (2007) – lines are isohyets (lines connecting points of equal rainfall), with indicated
                                       number in mm being daily rainfall


Water sector policy framework

Water is a priority for Tunisia’s government, under Pillar 5 of its Strategic Guidance Document (Note
d’Orientation Stratégique), which is “promoting green growth for sustainable development”.

The Water Code, adopted in 1975, is the basic legal text governing any action in the water sector. Water
policies in Tunisia mainly aim to increase water resource mobilization and include (FAO, 2016):




                                                         5
       Master Plans (Waters of the North, Waters of the Center, Waters of the South) which are oriented
        on the setting up of water mobilization, distribution, and use infrastructures

       The 1990-2000 National Ten-Year Strategy

       The 2000-2011 Complementary Mobilization Strategy, and

       The 2030 Long-Term Strategy

All these plans and strategies allowed for defining current and future orientations for the development of
the WASH sector, which are summarized as follows (MARHP, 2013)

       Construction of medium- and small-sized structures to achieve a resource mobilization rate of
        95%,

       Integrated management of water resources,

       Water saving and demand control for all users, and

       Water resource protection.

Tunisia’s new constitution, adopted in 2014, ensh rines the right to water for all Tunisians. It falls to the
Government and relevant institutions to guarantee the safeguarding and proper governance of water
resources (SONEDE, 2014b).

Finally, Tunisia has adopted the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). SDG 6 focuses on improving
the management of the water cycle at large, and includes universal access to safely managed water
and sanitation services by 2030. This represents a significant shift from the more modest objectives set
under the Millennium Development Goal (MDG) era. This adoption commits Tunisia to universal access
to safely managed water supply, implying piped water on premises for all by 2030. Likewise, universal
access to safely managed sanitation is required under SDG 6, which means proper management of fecal
waste and wastewater along the whole sanitation services chain.


Institutional arrangements for the WASH sector

Two state-owned enterprises (SOEs) are responsible for providing the majority of WASH services
across the country.

With respect to water, the drinking water sector in Tunisia is mainly managed in two ways, under the
supervision of the Ministry of Agriculture:

       The main water service provider is SONEDE (Société Nationale d’Exploitation et de Distribution
        des Eaux), which has the mandate to ensure water supply across the Tunisian territory. Currently,
        SONEDE supplies water to all urban areas as well as rural agglomerations. In 2015, SONEDE
        ensured the drinking water supply of 85% of the Tunisian population. This rate includes 100% of


                                                     6
        the urban population and 51% of the rural population. In total, the population served with
        drinking water by SONEDE is in the region of 9.5million.

       The Rural Engineering services of the Ministry of Agriculture, Water Resources and Fisheries are
        in charge of implementing drinking water systems in scattered rural areas. The systems are
        managed by GDAs Groupements de Développement Agricole): these are community-based
        organizations in charge of distributing water for human consumption and irrigated agriculture.
        Currently, there are approximately 1,400 drinking water GDAs and 140 mixed GDAs for drinking
        water supply (DWS) and irrigation. These associations benefit from support and supervision from
        the Rural Engineering services, namely at the setting up phase.


Sanitation services, primarily sewerage and wastewater treatment, are provided by the state-owned
enterprise ONAS (Office National d’Assainissement). ONAS is responsible for services in municipalities
(communes) which are within its service area but also provides sewerage services in some more densely-
populated rural areas. It is supervised by the Ministry of Environment. ONAS currently works in 173
communes out of a total of 283 distributed across the entire Republic. The towns covered by ONAS hold
a population of 6.8 million inhabitants, making up 91% of the country's urban population (7.4 million
inhabitants in 2014).

Communes that are not covered by ONAS (110 Communes) are generally small. These communes have
poor or no sanitation infrastructures. Households use septic tanks or cesspools.

The number of inhabitants connected to the sanitation network in the communes covered by ONAS
amounts to approximately 6.2 million (2014), i.e. a rate of connection of 91%. Households that are not
connected to the ONAS network use septic tanks or cesspools. The Government can request ONAS to
construct sanitation infrastructure works even out of the communes it covers.

ONAS's mandate initially did not include rural sanitation. However, since the rural commune status does
not exist and governorate councils are not equipped to perform this activity, resulting in an apparent
institutional vacuum for the rural sanitation sub-sector. As a result, when the place of residence is
considered, strong disparities are found between urban and rural areas. In 2015, approximately 97% of
Tunisians living in urban areas used improved facilities, compared to 80% of those living in rural areas.

To ensure sanitation services in rural areas and to remedy to the noted institutional vacuum, it was
decided during an interministerial council, dated June 13, 2016, that the responsibilities for rural
sanitation would be assigned as follows, according to locality size:

       In localities where the population exceeds 3,000 inhabitants, sanitation services will be ensured
        by ONAS who will collect sanitation tariffs in this regard

       In localities where the population ranges between 1,000 and 3,000 inhabitants, the sanitation
        service falls to the Regional Councils and Communes, under the lead of the Ministry of Local
        Affairs and Environment, with participation of the private sector and technical assistance of ONAS

       In localities with a population under 1,000 inhabitants, the population will be encouraged to use
        on-site sanitation systems with the support of CRDAs. The Ministry of Agriculture, Water


                                                    7
        Resources and Fisheries has been invited to plan for the mechanisms required to help construct
        these infrastructures.

It must be noted that the legal texts (decrees and acts) required for the enforcement of sanitation
responsibilities in rural areas in Tunisia have not yet been published. It may be a better option to
implement collective sanitation facilities in the case of some localities with less than 1,000 inhabitants but
where habitat is grouped.

In terms of institutional supervision, the main actors are as follows:

       The Ministry of Agriculture, Water Resources, and Fisheries (MARHP) is in charge of water policy
        for urban and rural sub-sectors, and is the supervising ministry

       The Ministry of Local Affairs and the Environment (MALE) is in charge of sanitation policy for
        urban and rural sub-sectors and is the supervising ministry.

Other public actors, such as the Ministry of Development, Investment, and International Cooperation
(MDICI) and Ministry of Health (MS) are also involved in the water and sanitation sector. The MDICI is
particularly in charge of allocating public resources for the WASH sector.

The WASH sector in Tunisia is very centralized, with most budget and funding allocations decided at the
central level. Nevertheless, at the sub-national level, Regional Governorate Councils are involved through
the development and implementation of regional development projects in the drinking water sector. In
addition, the Directorate General of Rural Engineering and Water Development (DGGREE) covers
scattered rural areas through the Rural Engineering arrondissements of the Regional Agricultural
Development Commissions (CRDAs) - twenty-four (24) arrondissements, i.e. one per CRDA. Rural DWS
projects are planned under a close collaboration between DGGREE and SONEDE, in consultation with
regional services.

Figure 2-3 summarizes the key institutions involved in the water sector. It is structured according to three
levels of decision-making:

       Advisory boards, represented by the National Water Council, chaired by the Ministry of
        Agriculture and comprised of representatives of several ministries, businesses, and national
        organizations

       Bodies in charge of policies, represented by the ministerial departments involved in the drinking
        water and sanitation sector

       Water utility operators and water users' associations




                                                      8
Figure 2-3       Organization of the water sector in Tunisia




        Source: OECD water studies (La gouvernance des services de l’eau en Tunisie, 2014). Adapted by the authors.


Access to improved water and sanitation services has increased but remains unequal

Tunisia has accomplished remarkable progress in terms of providing water, sanitation and hygiene
(WASH) services. Between 1990 and 2012, access to improved drinking water rose from 82% to 97% of
the population, while access to improved sanitation rose from 73% to 92% (trends are explored more in
Section 2). This puts Tunisia above North African averages, which stand at 93% for water and 89% for
sanitation in 2015, according to the WHO/UNICEF Joint Monitoring Programme (WHO/UNICEF, 2015). It
also made Tunisia one of only nine countries worldwide which succeeded in halving the proportion of
the population without improved drinking water in both rural and urban areas. More than 4 million
people gained access to improved sanitation between 1990 and 2015, with the same number for water.
However, there are disparities in service availability and quality across various dimensions (geography,
urban/rural, service areas of key providers, etc.). If left unaddressed, deficiencies could become more
severe in coming years, particularly due to the increasing water scarcity described earlier.

Levels of access vary across the different regions of the country. Detailed analysis of service levels is
presented in the next section, but Error! Reference source not found. below briefly illustrated access to i
mproved water and sanitation by region.


                                                            9
Figure 2-4            Access to improved water and improved sanitation by region

                                              100
                                               90

                % population in each region
                                               80
                                               70
                                               60
                                               50
                                               40
                                               30
                                               20
                                               10
                                                0
                                                    Grand Tunis North East North West Center West Center East South East South West

                                                                   Improved water         Improved sanitation


                                               Source: Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey 2011/12 ( MDICI et al., 2013).


Refinements to Tunisia’s WASH mon itoring framework will be required to measure progress on the
SDGs. While significant progress has been made, the SDGs raise the bar significantly in terms of higher
levels of service with universal access. To a large extent, existing data availability on levels of service for
WASH in Tunisia (for example on water quality and service intermittency) are not sufficient to monitor
the SDGs. The WHO/UNICEF Joint Monitoring Programme’s SDG baseline summary will be available in
July 2017: it will be useful to assess what needs to be done in order to fill the gaps identified by this
assessment, both in terms of monitoring (to verify progress towards the objectives) and in terms of
investment (to effectively fill the gaps). As set out in the recommendations, strategic financial planning
can be used to assess how delivery of universal, safely-managed and sustainable services can be ensured
in order for Tunisia to achieve the SDGs.




                                                                                     10
    3. Poverty and WASH services in Tunisia

 Key Findings

         Poverty has decreased in recent decades, but it is unevenly distributed and substantial pockets remain.
         The socioeconomic profiles of the poor and bottom 40% have not changed in the last decade, with
          many non-poor households vulnerable to falling back into poverty.
         Poverty is primarily a rural phenomenon in Tunisia. This applies both for income-poverty and human
          development indicators, such as stunting and health outcomes (e.g. maternal mortality).
         Access to WASH services is inequitably distributed between urban and rural areas, and governorates.
          Poverty emerges as a strong predictor of differences in access to WASH services.


    Poverty in Tunisia: current status and recent evolution

Poverty has decreased overall in Tunisia in the last decades. However, it is unevenly distributed across
the national territory, with substantial pockets of poverty remaining. Poverty rates dropped from 25%
in 2000 to 15% in 2015, with a total estimated 1.7 million poor people in 2015 (INS, 2016). The extreme
poverty rate was estimated at 3% percent in 2015, compared with 12% in 2000, with an estimated
300,000 extreme poor people in 2015 (ibid.). A disaggregated analysis of poverty rates by governorates
is possible for the first time in Tunisia on the back of recent data generated by the Tunisian Institute of
National Statistics, as described in the box below.

Box 3-1 – Poverty data in Tunisia

 The Tunisian National Statistics Institute (INS) definition of poverty is followed throughout this report . In most
 cases where poverty data is used, the source is the INS’s most recent statistical bulletin from December 2016.
 This bulletin is based on the new NSBCL 2015 survey for which results became available in late 2016. It should
 be noted that INS, under instructions of the Commission Nationale de la Statistique, is currently carrying out a
 review of this data, which may lead to changes in poverty estimates for some governorates. However, these are
 likely to be small and not to affect the broad thrust of the analyses presented in this report using these data.

 In addition to these poverty estimates, some of the analysis presented here was conducted in Phase 1 of the
 study prior to the release of the 2015 data (World Bank, 2016b). Analysis from the Phase 1 report reflected in
 the present report therefore relies on data from NSBCL 2010 and is flagged as such.

 The Tunisian poverty line is calculated by a methodology agreed in 2012 between the INS, the World Bank and
 the African Development Bank (INS et al., 2012). The joint methodology defines poverty lines on the basis of
 basic nutritional caloric needs. A unitary value per caloric intake is calculated for each household in a reference
 group (the poorest quintile) based on its estimated caloric intake and the household’s food co nsumption
 monetary value. As a direct result of this methodological update in 2012, including changes to the reference
 basket, it is not possible to directly compare NSBCL 2010 poverty results with those based on NSBCL 2015.
 Therefore, this report does not do so.



Challenges in poverty and WASH service coverage are focused in certain parts of the country. Maps
overleaf illustrate (i) the size of the poverty challenge by governorate, (ii) the overlap of the poverty


                                                         11
challenge and broad WASH service challenge (i.e. people not served by SONEDE/GDAs and people using
unimproved sanitation). The WASH context is considered in more detail in the next section.

It is possible to identify a small number of “challenging governorates” which face overlapping
problems in WASH and poverty, based on these maps and data in later sections. Concentrated in the
North West and Centre West regions, these are the six governorates of Kasserine, le Kef, Kairouan,
Siliana, Béja and Jendouba.

Key insights based on the maps below are as follows:2

       Figure 3-1 a shows that absolute numbers of the extreme poor are generally concentrated in 4-5
        governorates with a high extreme poverty rate mainly in the North West and Central West
        regions (in particular in Kasserine, le Kef, Kairouan and Siliana);
       Figure 3-1 b shows that the same is true for poverty, with the addition of the governorates of
        Béja and Jendouba to the list of those with the highest poverty rates;
       Figure 3-1 c shows that the absolute numbers of people without a formally-provided water
        service (via SONEDE or GDAs) are concentrated in 2-3 governorates, and that the single biggest
        number are concentrated in Kairouan, which is also one of the poorest governorates. A
        significant number are also concentrated in Bizerte which is not one of the poorest;
       Figure 3-1 d shows that, in contrast to water, the numbers of people with unimproved sanitation
        are slightly more evenly distributed around different governorates, though still concentrated in
        the Centre West region and some in the Centre East;3
       Comparison to Figure 2-1 shows that there are some associations between the areas with low
        rainfall (60-80mm) and areas with poor water access (e.g. North West and Centre West regions).
        However, this correlation is not strong because the South East and South West regions have the
        same or lower rainfall and do not have the same low poverty and water access challenges.




2
  As explained in Box 2, INS is currently carrying out a review which may lead to changes in poverty estimates for
some governorates. However, these are likely to be small and not to affect the broad thrust of the analyses and
correlations using these data. This should be borne in mind where 2015 poverty data is used.
3
  The mean proportion of population connected to an ONAS-managed sewer nationally is 61%, with significant
variation between governorates.

                                                         12
Figure 3-1      Poverty, extreme poverty and access to water and sanitation services, 2014 & 2015

 a. Extreme poverty rate and numbers of extreme poor people    b. Poverty rate and numbers of poor people




 c. Poverty rate and numbers of people not served by           d. Poverty rate and numbers of people with unimproved
 SONEDE/GDAs                                                   sanitation




 Source: Data from INS (2016) and documents shared by SONEDE
 and ONAS




                                                       13
Nationally, the picture is of significant reductions in poverty, enabled by robust economic growth and
improvements in social protection during the early 2000s . The World Bank’s country poverty
assessment concludes that economic growth in Tunisia has contributed to reducing poverty but not
inequality. It also notes that the socioeconomic profiles of the poor and bottom 40% have not changed
in the last decade, and that vulnerability remains high, i.e. many non-poor remain at risk of falling into
poverty (World Bank, 2016a).

However, reductions in poverty have been unevenly distributed, as shown in 3-2. Considering poverty
status, the rates are found in the North West and Centre West regions, with 28% and 31% respectively,
compared to lows of 12% and 5% in the Centre East region and Grand Tunis. Turning to extreme
poverty, the highs are again in the North West and Centre West regions, at 6% and 8%. From a trends
perspective, the biggest falls in poverty and extreme poverty took place in the Centre West and South
West regions. Nonetheless, the Centre West region remains the poorest region in terms of both poverty
and extreme poverty rates. Both poverty and extreme poverty have fallen in all regions, though faster in
some than in others. Regions which retain significant poverty rates but also made little progress
between 2005-2015 include the North West and South East regions.

Figure 3-2                              Reduction in poverty and extreme poverty rates by region, 2005-15

     (a) Extreme poverty                                                      (b) Poverty
                                   60                                                                  60
       % population extreme poor




                                                           2005   2015                                      2005   2015
                                   50                                                                  50
                                                                                   % population poor



                                   40                                                                  40

                                   30                                                                  30

                                   20                                                                  20
                                   10                                                                  10
                                   0                                                                   0




                                                                  Source: INS (2016)

Poverty is primarily a rural phenomenon in Tunisia. This applies both for income-poverty and human
development indicators, such as stunting and health outcomes (e.g. maternal mortality). Figure 3-3
below maps poverty and extreme poverty rates by governorate against the proportion of the population
in that governorate that lives in rural areas and shows a strong positive correlation between these two
parameters. The correlation coefficient between rurality and the poverty rate is 0.78, with the
relationship being slightly less strong for the extreme poverty rate (0.63). The percentage of the
population in each governorate that lives in rural areas is shown in Figure 3-4 further below: it ranges
from 0% in Tunis and Monastir right up to 73% in Sidi Bouzid.




                                                                         14
Figure 3-3   Poverty rates vs. proportion of rural population by governorate, 2015




                           Source: World Bank (2017) based on INS (2016).

Figure 3-4   Proportion of rural population by governorate




                           Source: World Bank (2017) based on INS (2016).




                                                15
    Poverty and access to WASH services in Tunisia

Tunisia has accomplished remarkable progress in terms of extending access to improved WASH
services, particularly in rural areas over the past 25 years, as shown in Figure 3-5. Access to improved
WASH services is now almost universal, with 98% for water and 92% for sanitation at national level.
Nonetheless, around 250,000 people rely on unimproved drinking water, mostly unprotected wells and
springs. In addition, 900,000 people use unimproved sanitation, about half of which use shared latrines,
and the rest mostly unimproved latrines. Overall, high access rates show that the SDG target should be
achievable in Tunisia. While it will be harder to reach those remaining unserved, the numbers are not
especially high in a country of 11 million people. Nonetheless, achieving the SDGs will require targeted
efforts to ensure universal access to piped water on premises and safely managed sanitation.

Figure 3-5      Trends in access to WASH services, rural and urban

 (a) Water trends                                       (b) Sanitation trends




                    Source: WHO/UNICEF Joint Monitoring Programme (WHO/UNICEF, 2015).

When considering poverty and WASH services, service level disparities between rich and poor can be
seen. Data by wealth quintile (based on the asset index used in MICS 2011-12) are shown in Figure 3-6
for improved water and sanitation. The data show that there is significant “bottom inequality”, whereby
the trend through the quintiles is not smooth but the poorest quintile is significantly worse off that
other quintiles. This is not unusual in middle-income countries with a significant middle class.




                                                   16
Figure 3-6                    Water and sanitation status by wealth quintile in 2011-12

     (a) Water                                                                           (b) Sanitation
                        100                                                                                  100
                                                                                                             80




                                                                                              % population
                        80
         % population


                                                                                                             60
                        60
                                                                                                             40
                        40
                                                                                                             20
                        20                                                                                    0
                                                                                                                    Poorest 2nd    Middle   4th   Richest
                         0
                              Poorest            2nd   Middle    4th   Richest                                        Networked
                                                                                                                      Non-networked improved
                        Unimproved                        Other improved                                              Unimproved
                        On-plot improved                                                                              Open defecation


Source: INS Multiple Indicator Cluster Survey 2011/12 (MDICI et al., 2013)

Differences not just in headline access but also in levels of service by wealth quintile are observed.
Taking sanitation first, the poorest quintile is the only one which has any open defecation or use of
unimproved infrastructure. Furthermore, the poorest quintile are very unlikely to have a sewer
connection, though this latter point is unsurprising given that poorer households are concentrated in
rural areas (as shown in Figure 3-3).4 Considering water supply, it is again only the poorest quintile which
has significant numbers of people using unimproved water. Furthermore, less than 50% of the poorest
quintile have on-plot improved water, whereas for other quintiles this is around 80% or above. It is
clear, then, that increasing service levels for the poorest quintile should be a priority for the sector.

Stark inequalities are observed when overlapping deprivations in sanitation and water are considered.
The figure below shows the experience of different population segments in terms of the overlapping
deprivations of both improved water and improved sanitation at the same time (World Bank, 2016b).

Figure 3-75                   Proportions of population segments using both improved sanitation and water

                                               100

                                               80
                                % population




                                               60

                                               40

                                               20

                                                0
                                                       Urban    Non-poor Urban     National   Rural                  Poor       Rural
                                                                (national) Poor                                    (national)   Poor




4
 The data in MICS on sewer connections aligns with ONAS estimates based on their customer database. MICS puts
sewerage access at 56% in 2011-12 and ONAS puts sewerage coverage at 61% three years later in 2014.

                                                                                  17
Source: World Bank (2016b), based on the NSBCL (INS, 2010).5

Variation in other levels of service experienced is another key equity issue, but unfortunately little
data exists which is comparable by governorate. One possible level of service to analyse by
governorates is average volumes of water provided by SONEDE to domestic users. Volumes sold by
SONEDE vary from 70 to 130 litres per capita per day (LPCD) depending on geographical areas. However,
since data on poverty rates exist for the governorate as a whole and not for SONEDE customers only,
further analysis of SONEDE’s customers by income range would be necessary; this analysis was not
performed as part of the study.

Using data on volumes delivered, it can also be shown that people served by GDAs are using far lower
volumes of water on average, which reflects that not all of them have an at-home supply. Based on a
recent strategic review for rural water in Tunisia, it can be estimated that around 850,000 people had
domestic connections to a networked system run by a GDA in 2015.6 Given that around 1.5m people are
served by GDAs overall, this means that around 650,000 people are served by standposts managed by
GDAs. Figure below shows LPCD consumed by users of SONEDE and GDAs by governorate (governorates
without an orange bar have no GDAs providing services).7 Unsurprisingly, volumes for GDA users are
lower: people using standposts would most likely consume lower volumes due to having to walk back
and forth. These volume figures comprise use for all purposes, whereas the household survey data
above and from MICS only consider the primary source used for drinking.
Figure 3-8       Litres per capita per day consumed by users of SONEDE and GDAs by governorate




                                           Source: World Bank (2017).8


5
  For this figure, NSBCL 2010 data is used because the 2015 data was not available at the time the Phase 1 analysis
was conducted. The figure would be expected to look fairly similar if newer data were used, as the time period has
not been that long.
6
  DGREE data suggests that the total number of domestic connections managed by GDAs in 2015 was 169,972. The
figure of c. 850,000 is arrived at by assuming that 5 people rely on each connection.
7
  These were estimated based on aggregate volumes delivered by each service provider in each governorate
(based on metering or pumping hours where borehole-supplied systems are used), number of user households in
each governorate and average household size.
8
  Some households may use standposts for domestic purposes, and bottled water or other sources for drinking. In
addition, people are only considered “covered” by GDAs if they live within 500m of a standpost. Some people

                                                        18
It is likely that some GDA users and some of those not formally served are not consuming sufficient
levels of water to ensure hygiene. The World Health Organisation considers "basic access" to be 20
LPCD (at which level hygiene may be compromised) and "intermediate access" to be 50 LPCD (which
hygiene should not be compromised), and "optimal" access to be 100 LPCD (WHO, 2017). Consumption
in all governorates appears to be above the basic level on average, and the GDA mean is around 50 LPCD
which is the “intermediate” level. However, since this is the mean, it means that some proportion of
households are likely to be using significantly less than 50 LPCD, so are likely to be compromising
hygiene in some way.

Another proxy for level of service is to consider service type by geographical area. Some regions are
clearly more heavily dependent on ‘non-networked improved’ sources. Since the MICS questionnaire
only asks about primary drinking water sources, we do not know about other options available to these
households for other domestic uses beyond drinking. Figure 3-9 shows primary drinking water source by
region. It builds on 2-4 by showing in more detail how the Centre West and North West regions have the
greatest deficiencies in access to water.9 The South East and Centre West regions have the largest
proportions of people using non-networked improved water services, which in these cases are
predominantly local rainwater harvesting systems such as a Majel or Fetsquia.10

Figure 3-9       Primary drinking water source by region


                             South West
                              South East
                Centre West (Sidi Bouzid)
                  Centre West (Kairouan)
                 Centre West (Kasserine)
                             Centre East
                             North West
                              North East
                                    Tunis
                                             0          20          40        60           80      100
                                                             % population in that region
                        Non-networked unimproved                    Non-networked improved
                        Networked off-plot                          Networked on-plot or bottled water



                                                 Source: MICS (2011-12)




continue to walk further than that to use GDA water, meaning that the GDA figures below could be overestimates
since the denominator underlying the calculations for the chart below could be smaller than the reality.
9
  MICS 2011-12 breaks the Centre West region into its three constituent governorates because it is one of the
poorest regions and so was over-sampled by INS and UNICEF, since they wanted more detail for those areas.
10
   A majel or Fetsquia is an indigenous rainwater harvesting system which collects rainwater from the roof of the
house and channels is to an underground cistern usually made of clay.

                                                             19
Figure 3-10       Sanitation technology by region


                            South West
                             South East
               Centre West (Sidi Bouzid)
                 Centre West (Kairouan)
                Centre West (Kasserine)
                            Centre East
                            North West
                             North East
                                   Tunis
                                            0          20          40         60           80          100
                                                            % population in that region
                Open defecation      Unimproved       Improved latrines     Septic tanks        Networked


                                                Source: MICS (2011-12)

Open defecation and unimproved sanitation are concentrated in the three governorates in the Centre
West region. These are also the regions with the lowest access to networked sanitation via piped
sewerage and fairly high use of pit latrines.11 Use of septic tanks is most common in the South West and
South East regions.

Good-quality information on water service levels is not available by type of service providers and by
governorate. Even at aggregate level, limited robust data is available. More anecdotally, the level of
service provided by SONEDE and GDAs varies across the country, which occurs due to various reasons
(e.g. hydrogeology, cost of service delivery, population density etc.). Table 3-1 below summarises service
characteristics of the main water service providers. Key points to note include:

        SONEDE tariffs are fixed across networks whereas GDA tariffs vary depending on the system. A
         household of 4 people using 40m3 per trimester (i.e. c. 110 LPCD) would likely pay less if bought
         from a SONEDE connection than from a GDA.12 In other words, rural households are likely to pay
         more per litre at the WHO “optimal” level of consumption.13
        Water quality does not appear to be a serious issue for SONEDE customers, but no data is
         systematic collected for GDAs or as part of regulation of the private sector. There is similarly no
         robust data on service continuity.




11
   Based on ONAS data, the proportion of population connected to a sewer nationally is 61%, with significant
variation between governorates.
12
   For example, ((20m3 x 0.200 TD) + (20m3 x 0.325 TD) + 5,050 fee) / 40m3 = 0.389 TD / m3 on average.
13
   Data is available on the “average sale price per m 3” per provider by urban, rural and GDAs. The sale price per m 3
varies because some consumers use more water than others, and it is an increasing block tariff. We have not used
this data since it is potentially misleading, because it includes industrial users and tourism users, so the figure for
urban is inflated by these.

                                                            20
The lack of robust data on service levels is a serious barrier to targeting investments to improve
services. The key providers tend to manage services either in aggregate or at the individual system level,
rather than at a level in between. This hinders improving the allocative efficiency of public funds
through targeting problem areas. Improving the availability of information on service levels, e.g. by
benchmarking at the governorate level, should be a priority in the SDG era.
Table 3-1                  Service characteristics of different providers

              Estimated
              number of
                                              Tariffs                           Level of service and challenges
             poor people
                served
SONEDE                        SONEDE tariffs are the same               Good-quality service with reliable continuity,
               760,000
(urban)                       nationwide, whether rural or urban.       though this has been worsening in recent
                              They are based on an Increasing           years. Water quantity averages around
                              Block Tariff structure whereby (after     100LPCD. On water quality, data from the
                              a recent price rise in 2016) the first    SONEDE statistical report shows that in 2015
SONEDE
               370,000        block costs 0.200 DT/m3 for up to         on average 2.2% of samples nationally failed
 (rural)
                              220 litres per day.14 There is also a     bacteriological water quality tests, though the
                              fixed fee depending on the diameter       figure is around 10% for Jendouba, Zaghouan
                              of the pipe.                              and Tataouine.15
                                                                        Quantities used per capita are generally lower
                                                                        than SONEDE customers. Since about 1/3 of
                              Tariffs per m3 vary widely from one
                                                                        GDAs actually get their bulk supply from
                              GDA system to another, even within
                                                                        SONEDE, they may be assumed to deliver a
                              the same governorate. They range
                                                                        similar level of water quality depending on
  GDAs                        from a minimum of DT 0.200/m3 to a
               410,000                                                  the integrity of their system. The other 2/3
 (rural)                      maximum of DT 1.500/m3.
                                                                        get their supply from boreholes and no
                              Governorate-level averages range
                                                                        quality data is available. There is no robust
                              from TD 0.500/ m3 in Tataouine to
                                                                        data on service continuity, though it is known
                              TD 0.796/ m3 in Béja.
                                                                        to be more of an issue than for SONEDE
                                                                        customers.

                              Tariffs vary widely by service type.
                              This category covers a multitude of
                                                                        Service level depends on the system used,
                              service types. If people use someone
                                                                        e.g. one may have to walk to a handpump or
                              else’s cistern they might pay 5 DT /
  Self-                                                                 neighbour’s cistern, and therefore not be able
                              m3, or 15-25 DT / m3 for a tanker
 supply        160,000                                                  to carry large volumes back. Water tanker
 (rural)                      truck. If they have their own private     trucks may arrive intermittently. However,
                              source (e.g. well or Majel) then the      from all these sources, the water is of
                              regular tariff is zero (despite a         unregulated quality.
                              significant capital investment at
                              installation)



14
   The first “social” block in the IBT is up to 20m 3 per trimester (around 220 litres per day), with the second block at
0.325 DT/m3 being for between 21-40m3 per trimester. The latter is about 450 litres per day, which should be
enough to meet WHO “optimal" access for the average household size. Other blocks increase further – present
tariffs are available at http://www.sonede.com.tn/index.php?id=111. The very limited number of SONEDE-
managed standpipes are all chargeable at the “social” tariff of 0.200 DT/m 3
15
   5% is the threshold recommended by WHO.

                                                           21
GDAs are the formal service providers with the highest proportion of their customers who are poor
(27%). However, SONEDE in urban areas has the largest number of poor customers in absolute terms
(Figure ). Those using self-supply are most likely to be poor (59%). These estimates were made based on
data provided by SONEDE and GDAs concerning their users per governorate, and the levels of poverty in
each governorate split by urban and rural.16
Figure 3-11                         Numbers and percentage of poor people served by different water providers

                                   8.0
                                   7.0
              Millions of people




                                   6.0
                                   5.0
                                   4.0
                                   3.0
                                   2.0
                                   1.0
                                   0.0
                                                      10%                   20%                 27%               59%
                                            SONEDE               SONEDE                GDAs             Self-supply
                                            (urban)               (rural)             (rural)             (rural)

                                                      Poor people served (m)      Non-poor served (m)


                                                            Source: World Bank (2017).

Private spending on water and sanitation services represents a relatively small share of total
household spending, however. Phase 1 report estimated that spending on water services account for
0.54 percent of household spending overall, ranging from 1.5 percent for households in the poorest
quintile to 0.3 percent for households in the richest quintile (World Bank, 2016b), based on World Bank
analysis using data from NSBCL (2010). The report also estimated that sanitation services accounted for
0.26 per cent of households’ budget overall, ranging from 0.43 percent for the poorest quintile to 0.23
percent for the richest quintile. Poorest households are spending less overall on sanitation services,
because they are discharging less wastewater. This contrasts with the high percentage of household
income spent on energy services, which was estimated at 6 percent (Cuesta, El Lahga, and Lara 2015).

The absolute expenditures on water are a different question, since poor people’s total household
expenditure is also lower. What is clear from Phase 2 analysis is that the poorer or more rural the
governorate, the less the private expenditure on water (see Figure below).17 In this analysis, private
expenditure includes expenditure by households on tariffs or self-supply. This is shown in the charts in
Figure below, the left-hand of which maps private water expenditure against rurality and the right-hand
against poverty.



16
   An assumption inherent in the estimations is that poverty levels among those served by SONEDE/GDAs are likely
to be the same as poverty levels in the governorate as a whole. This assumption is unlikely to hold in practice (it is
probable that non-covered households are more likely to be poor). However, in the absence of detailed poverty
data for users by service providers, the level of bias is likely to be small at the national level.
17
   The methods for making these estimates are explained in section 4

                                                                            22
Figure 3-12     Private water expenditure per person per year by governorate




                                  Source: World Bank (2017) and INS (2016)

It is difficult to know the per litre prices faced by the poor as opposed to the rich, as private water
expenditure is a function of the price and the volume consumed. Per litre prices for those who are
served by SONEDE do not vary, and those served by GDAs do not vary much (see Table 3-1). However,
prices from informal sources vary hugely per litre, with tanker trucks being very expensive and
handpump water being “free”, as shown on the Figure below.

Volume consumed is likely to vary depending on the price. On the whole, the findings in the figures
below are logical because rurality is associated with poverty, and rurality is associated with lower service
levels and therefore lower consumption in terms of LPCD (see Figure 3-13). Most poor people are rural
and not facing an inefficient profit-seeking informal private sector as the urban poor in many countries
do. Richer people also spend more on bottled water.

Figure 3-13 - Variations in volumetric water tariffs charged to domestic consumers




Source: SONEDE and authors’ estimates


                                                    23
Since ability to pay is unlikely to be the limiting factor, policies should focus on increasing service
levels and consumption so as to increase benefits to households . It is likely that the poor consume less
water per capita, but it is unclear whether this is because they face an ability to pay (ATP) limit, or
whether the services available to them prevent higher consumption levels (due to the need to haul
water from off-plot). The fact that the very poorest spend only 1.5% of household expenditure on water
suggests that ATP is not the limiting factor. Therefore, the priority should be on increasing service levels
so as to increase consumption and thereby the benefits that poor people accrue from using the service.

Less information on service levels is available for sanitation. ONAS data collection systems are less
advanced than for SONEDE, and only 61% of the population is connected to an ONAS-managed sewer.
Therefore, a large proportion of people (especially the poor, see




Figure ) are using non-networked systems about which very little is known, for example on the fecal
sludge management services they use and how much they pay for those, etc. It is not possible to
produce a graph like Figure 3-11 for sanitation, but it is obvious from the MICS data in




Figure that rural sanitation represents a significant challenge for Tunisia. Nearly 1 million Tunisians use
900,000 unimproved sanitation facilities, who are mostly in rural areas.

    What are the impacts of inadequate WASH services on poor people?

WASH services have various benefits which ultimately impact on poverty, economic opportunities and
sustainable growth, as shown in Figure 1. Child malnutrition has long-run welfare consequences in
terms of impaired cognitive ability and reduced school and work performance – it has long been known
that the determinants of nutrition are multisectoral and therefore the solution to malnutrition requires
multisectoral approaches (UNICEF 1990).

Strong synergies among multiple determinants need to emerge before real progress in nutritional status
takes place, especially for those critical first 1,000 days in the life of a child. In other words, concrete
improvements in malnutrition are typically the result of integrated policies that include nutrition
interventions—such as fortification of foods, promoting breastfeeding, treating malnourished children
with therapeutic foods—as well as interventions from other sectors, such as childcare programs for
working mothers, the strengthening of safety nets, and WASH interventions (World Bank, 2016b). In
Tunisia, there is limited available data on the impacts of improving access to WASH services, though it is
possible to consider progress on some key outcomes related to undernutrition and diarrhoea.

Tunisia has made significant progress on undernutrition over the last 30 years. Moderate to severe
stunting among children aged between 0-3 years halved from 1988-2012. However, progress has
fluctuated – stunting recently increased, probably reflecting higher international food prices (World
Bank, 2016b). In addition, socio-economic differences prevail: stunting levels of children in the poorest
quintile are double those in the richest. Thus, Tunisia must still do more to eradicate child malnutrition.

                                                     24
Considering health outcomes, MICS 2011-12 data shows that 7% of under-5 children in Tunisia had
experienced diarrhoea in the two weeks preceding the survey. These data are shown in Figure below. It
can be seen that the poorest regions (e.g. the larger governorates of the Centre West region) are again
those that are scoring amongst the worst on these indicators.




Figure 6           Under-5 stunting and diarrhoea prevalence in Tunisia

     (a) U5 stunting (height-for-age)                               (b) U5 diarrhoea prevalence

                   South West                                                  South West

                    South East                                                  South East

              Centre West (Sidi…                                          Centre West (Sidi…

       Centre West (Kairouan)                                                  Centre West…
      Centre West (Kasserine)                                                  Centre West…
                   Centre East                                                 Centre East
                   North West                                                  North West
                    North East                                                  North East
                         Tunis                                                       Tunis

                                 0      5   10   15    20                                    0      5   10    15      20
                                     % under-5 children                                          % under-5 children


                                                      Source: MICS (2011-12)

The Phase 1 report found the stunting levels of children in the poorest quintile (of wealth) was double
those of the richest quintile, with approximately 16 percent of children in the poorest quintile being
stunted as opposed to just under 8 percent for the richest quintile.

Analysis carried out for the Phase 1 of this study suggests that WASH interventions in Tunisia
contribute to improved child nutrition (World Bank, 2016b). Based on UNICEF’s framework of analysis
for synergies in child malnutrition (see Figure 3-15), a methodology was developed to identify
correlations with and synergies among these underlying causes of malnutrition using descriptive and
regression analysis (Skoufias et al., 2015), which is summarised in a box below. Phase 1 of this study
applied such a methodology to help understand malnutrition in Tunisia, using MICS 2011–12 data. It
should be emphasised that this method does not allow drawing causal estimates, but associations only.

Figure 3-15        UNICEF conceptual framework for synergies in child malnutrition




                                                               25
                                    Source: authors, based on UNICEF, 1990

Box 3-2 – Method for estimating effects of interventions on the nutritional status of children

 Skoufias et al., (2015) developed a methodology for estimating the individual effects and combined
 interactions of interventions on the nutritional status of children, which was applied in the Phase 1 of this
 study. The approach is to estimate both the individual effects of several adequacies (that is, adequate access
 rates of basic services) and the effects of their combined interactions, on the nutritional status of children. This
 status is defined by height-for-age z-scores (HAZ scores) for children aged 0–2 years and 0–5 years. An
 econometric specification is estimated which correlates HAZ scores with the four adequacy measures (adequate
 care, adequate food, adequate WASH and adequate environmental health). Importantly, the interactions
 between them are also estimated, and an assessment is carried out to assess which of those interactions is
 significant in reducing malnutrition among young children. These interactions are interpreted as additional gains
 or losses to child nutritional status derived from the simultaneous adequate access to basic services.

 The model does not allow for causal inference on the effects of the various adequacy components on nutrition.
 However, it enables exploration of the correlation between the various adequacy measures and nutritional
 outcomes as measured by HAZ scores. Another caveat is that the estimation of the model is affected by the few
 observations of some of the synergies considered. Likewise, to the extent that adequacies are more strictly
 defined, the observations satisfying each adequacy may be very few, thus compromising the quality and
 precision of the econometric estimation.


Findings suggest that there are positive interactions (synergies) between adequate WASH services,
health services and individual care practices in Tunisia . However, synergies differ across samples of
poor, non-poor, urban and rural households. In rural areas, access to WASH and health services are
correlated with significant improvements in child nutrition. For non-poor households, adequate WASH
and food intake have positive and significant effects. However, for the most vulnerable (the poorest
quartile of rural households), positive and meaningful improvements in nutrition are observed only
when adequate access to food, health, WASH and care are all present.

Results from this analysis should be interpreted with caution, however. First, the positive links
between WASH and other interventions were not found to be systematic or always strong. Second,
although models estimating these relationships reflect the latest advances in statistical and conceptual
frameworks, they have limited predictive capacity. One reason for this limited capacity is that they fail to


                                                         26
capture other possible vectors of nutritional status - for example, biological factors, which are generally
not observed, and exposure to shocks that affect nutrition-related outcomes, which are generally not
reported in the data sources.

Overall, the case for investing in WASH services is strong, because there are strong associations
between poor WASH outcomes and poor health and nutrition outcomes in Tunisia. Alignment of
interventions may help target complex, multidimensional problems such as undernutrition, and
interventions should be targeted to the specific needs of different types of households, localities, and
vulnerabilities. There are significant poverty pockets in Tunisia which overlap with deficits in WASH
services. Even though access is almost universal from an MDG perspective, there are significant
disparities in service levels. This is having a tangible effect on the health and nutrition-related problems
which remain (not to mention other impacts on people’s time and productivity, etc.). Data gaps on
service levels are significant, so priority should be given to improve information by governorate on
water quality, water quantity consumed and prices paid.

     4. How is financing allocated in the WASH sector in Tunisia?

 Key Findings

        Total WASH expenditure (in nominal terms) has increased by around 14% between 2013 and 2015,
         amounting to around 1.5% of GDP.
        Expenditure allocation between urban and rural areas and across subsectors has remained relatively
         constant between 2013 and 2015.
        Expenditure is greater for urban water and sanitation as compared to rural areas.
        Water and sanitation are mainly funded by private sources of finance, i.e. tariffs and household’s
         investments in self-supply.
        While public expenditure for water is generally sufficiently allocated to poor governorates, poverty is
         not a determinant factor of public expenditure for sanitation.



To better explain observed trends and disparities in water and sanitation coverage between
governorates, an assessment of financial flows to the WASH sector was deemed necessary and
conducted as part of Stage 3 for this study. A key objective for this analysis was to assess whether
public expenditure for WASH is adequately allocated across subsectors (water, sanitation and hygiene in
urban and rural areas) and governorates – that is, to provide elements to evaluate whether funding to
the sector is directed to areas that need it most.

Application of the WHO TrackFin methodology in Tunisia
The analysis is based on the TrackFin methodology in order to improve the quality of financial
information in the WASH sector.18 This methodology, which was developed by WHO with a view to
strengthen the quality of sector financial information, provides a transparent framework for
disaggregating expenses by subsectors, sources of finance and service providers, among others. It has


18
  To facilitate the preparation of WASH Accounts, WHO has prepared a guidance document which is available at:
http://www.who.int/water_sanitation_health/publications/trackfin_guidance_document/en/

                                                       27
established standard classifications so as to facilitate comparison across countries. Crucially, the analysis
supported by the methodology includes not only public finance allocated to WASH but also
contributions from households, service providers, donors, etc. Additional information on the
methodology is provided in the box below.

Box 4-1 - TrackFin methodology: tracking financial flows in the WASH sector

 The TrackFin methodology has been developed by WHO and UN-WATER since 2012 with the purpose of
 creating a common methodology for tracking financing in the WASH sector encompassing all economic entities
 (WHO, 2016). The overall objective of the methodology is to inform evidence-based policy and decision-making
 by providing and in-depth understanding of the amount and allocation of financial resources to the WASH
 sector, including from public and private funding sources as well as from repayable financing. Private funding
 sources include all charges paid by customers of the service, including through tariffs or direct investments in
 self-supply. Public funding sources would typically include domestic government transfers (i.e. subsidies) and
 international transfers (Official Development Assistance or ODA, voluntary contributions from foundations, etc.)

 The objective of the methodology is to provide a comprehensive picture of recent financial flows to the sector
 (usually based on the last available two or three years of data) based on actual expenditure in the sector. Based
 on classifications specified in the TrackFin methodology, the expenditure is classified by type of expenditure
 (including operations and maintenance, rehabilitation, capital investments, financial costs, etc.), by sub-sector
 (e.g. distinguishing between urban and rural water and sanitation), by sources of funds or by geographical areas.
 Such disaggregation allows producing a series of tables, referred to as WASH Accounts as well as key indicators,
 such as the total amount of WASH sector funding and the percentage of public sector expenditure dedicated to
 WASH. The methodology is largely based on that used in the health sector for the last 40 years to produce the
 National Health Accounts. Common classifications as well as guidance on how to obtain, treat and estimate the
 data (where necessary) enhance comparability of WASH Accounts prepared in different countries and over
 time.

 WASH Accounts prepared with the TrackFin methodology can help answer the following key questions:

        What is the total expenditure in the sector?
        How are funds distributed between the different WASH services and types of costs?
        Who pays for WASH services?
        Which entities are the main channels of funding and what is their respective share of total spending?

 Additional country-specific questions can be answered depending on data availability and interest of key sector
 stakeholders. WASH Accounts can improve funding transparency, enhance monitoring of funding allocation and
 implementation of funding strategies, and increase the accountability of governments to national and
 international commitments to achieve sector targets.



In Tunisia, the application of the TrackFin methodology was helped by the fact that data was generally
available, as shown on the Table below. A key part of the exercise therefore consisted of mapping
existing financial flows in the sector and identifying available data sources to quantify those flows.




                                                        28
Table 4-1 Availability and source of financial data for the production of WASH Accounts in Tunisia

                               Availability of
     Sources of funding                                                    Comments
                                   data

                                                 Data on tariffs were obtained from service providers. They
 Tariffs of the services
                                                 were generally available with the largest service providers
 provided (networked
                                                 (SONEDE, ONAS), and to a lesser extent with operators of
 service providers)
                                                 the association type (GDAs).

 Tariffs of the services                         Estimations are based on the data from INS and assumptions
 provided (non-networked                         made by the Consultant, set out in the WASH Accounts
 service providers)                              report.

 Household expenditures                          Estimations are based on the data from INS and the
 on self-supply                                  assumptions made by the Consultant.


                                                 The data comes from several sources (relevant entities,
 National public transfers
                                                 portal of the Ministry of Finance's site, etc.).


 International public                            The data on international public transfers is available at the
 transfers (public or                            government's level, but are not sufficiently disaggregated
 multilateral donor grants)                      per subsector (water / sanitation, urban / rural)


 Voluntary contributions,                        No data was obtained on NGOs. The funding that NGOs
 transfers (NGOs)                                provides to the sector in Tunisia is considered minimal

 Repayable financing                             The data come from several sources (service providers,
 (loans)                                         ministries, etc.)

          Data available                                       Data partially available
          Estimation                                           Data unavailable

The largest part of the financial data that is necessary for producing WASH Accounts is available and was
provided by reliable sources. It was estimated that data from reliable sources make up approximately 85%
of the total financial flow amounts. Additional estimates were based on the results of the INS censuses
and surveys and statistics from SONEDE and ONAS. As such, the WASH Accounts findings are considered
to be reliable and provide a credible picture of the WASH sector's situation in Tunisia. The WASH Accounts
report formulated specific recommendations in order to improve the quality of the data for the remaining
15% of the financial flows that had to be estimated for this exercise. This may require modifications to
existing household surveys or the conduct of additional household surveys, as detailed in the summary
recommendations.

While a detailed assessment of WASH expenditure was carried out based on the TrackFin
methodology, investment needs have not been assessed. It is thus not possible to compare current
sector expenditure with the projected costs to achieve sector targets (including the SDGs), of providing



                                                    29
adequate water and sanitation services in urban and rural areas or by governorates. This could be the
objective of a separate analysis.

Distinction is made throughout between different sources of WASH expenditure. The most important
difference is between ‘Total WASH Expenditure’ and ‘Public WASH Expenditure’. Total WASH
Expenditure comprises all expenditure in the sector, whether made by public institutions, private
household through self-supply investments, private household expenditure through tariffs etc. Public
WASH Expenditure only includes expenditure made through public institutions. Furthermore, distinction
is sometimes made between sub-sectors (e.g. total water expenditure, public sanitation expenditure
etc.). Care is therefore needed in reading figure titles and axes to aid correct interpretation.

Emphasis is also placed on identifying who “holds the strings of the purse”, i.e. distinguishing between
sector financing units who have control over spending decisions versus others who mainly act as a
channel for financing. This distinction is important in Tunisia, where all public expenditure on WASH
services are centrally decided, with local governments simply acting as channels for such financing.




                                                    30
WASH expenditure has increased over the last three years

The following table summarises some key WASH accounts indicators. The main findings are the
following:

      Total WASH expenditure (in nominal terms) has increased by around 14 per cent in USD
       nominal terms between 2013 and 2015. This is reflected in a minor increase in expenditure as a
       proportion of GDP (from 1.3 to 1.5 per cent) and as a proportion of public expenditure (from 4.1
       to 5.6 per cent). The increase in nominal terms in TND was more significant (17 per cent),
       although it was approximately 12 percent in real terms, when taking account of domestic
       inflation rates (which were 5.7% in 2013, 4.8% in 2014 and 4.1% in 2015).
      WASH expenditure is mostly funded by households themselves, as users of the service,
       although this share has been decreasing over time. As shown in the WASH Accounts report, in
       2013, domestic users funded 68% of the total costs of the service via tariffs or households’
       direct investments. However, this share had dropped to 59.6% in 2015, as a result of a
       stagnation in tariffs and an increase in public investments. This is potentially a worrying trend,
       as tariffs are usually the most sustainable source of funding for the WASH sector.
      Public expenditure is very centralized. All public expenditure in the sector is funded by national
       authorities, with no funding generation at the local level. Even though the regional authorities
       (CRDAs) act as a channel for central funding, they do not act as “financing units” as per the
       WASH Account classifications, which means that they do “hold the strings of the purse” for any
       funding allocation decisions to the sector.
      Expenditure per capita for both water and sanitation is higher in urban than in rural areas. For
       water, this is explained by the higher levels of water consumption (as shown for SONEDE and
       GDA domestic users in Figure), higher O&M costs for SONEDE, and a higher expenditure on
       bottled water in urban as compared to rural areas. For sanitation, there are significantly lower
       levels of private and public expenditure in rural areas.
      WASH services are mainly managed by network corporate providers: SONEDE for water and
       ONAS for sanitation. For water, expenses managed by network providers in 2015 amounted to
       USD 308 million, increasing from USD 263 million – a growth of 17 per cent in nominal terms.
       This means that SONEDE, the main water service provider, managed 66% of total expenditure
       for water, whereas the GDAs, which provide services on behalf of the Ministry of Agriculture
       services, managed approximately 13% of total expenditure. SONEDE was also responsible for
       managing 73% of investments in the sector. For sanitation, expenditure managed by ONAS, the
       only network corporate provider in the sector accounts for 94% of total expenditure in the
       sector. It remained almost constant, increasing by just 1 per cent from USD 158 million in 2013
       to USD 160 million in 2015.
      Most financial resources for both water and sanitation are spent on O&M, followed by
       investments. In 2013, O&M (including staff costs, fuel, and any other expenses required to keep
       services running) for water accounted for 65 per cent of total expenditure while for sanitation it
       accounted for 52 per cent. O&M excludes large capital maintenance costs (e.g. system renewal
       and rehabilitation), for which only 5 per cent of resources are allocated across both water and
       sanitation. However, while only 1 per cent of total expenditure in water was allocated to capital


                                                  31
          maintenance in 2015, around 16 per cent in sanitation was allocated for the same purpose – the
          latter is likely to be primarily for sewerage as this expense relates to urban areas.


Table 4-2          WASH Accounts Indicators19

                                                                                        2013       2014       2015
     Total WASH expenditure (USD million)                                              589.2      658.6      671.1
     Total WASH expenditure (% of GDP)                                                  1.3%       1.4%       1.5%

     Total WASH expenditure (% of total public expenditure)20                           3.6%       4.1%       4.9%

     Total WASH expenditure per capita (USD)                                            54.2       60.0       60.2

     Total water expenditure per      Urban                                             39.0       43.4       43.7
     capita (USD)                     Rural                                             28.5       34.4       37.1

     Total sanitation expenditure     Urban                                             22.5       23.3       22.0
     per capita (USD)                 Rural                                              0.9        1.2        1.0

                                      Government agencies                               2.6%       2.5%       2.8%

                                      Network corporate providers                      71.8%      70.9%      70.0%
     Total WASH expenditure by
     type of service provider (% of   Non-network corporate providers                  13.9%      14.4%      14.0%
     WASH expenditure)*
                                      NGOs and community-based organisations            6.3%       7.2%       8.6%

                                      Self-provided users                               5.4%       5.0%       4.5%

                                      Investment                                       22.2%      26.2%      30.7%

                                      O&M                                              64.0%      65.7%      62.3%
     Total WASH expenditure by
     type of cost (% of WASH          Large capital maintenance                         5.0%       5.0%       4.8%
     expenditure)
                                      Financial                                         2.9%       3.1%       2.1%

                                      Taxes                                             6.0%       6.2%       5.3%
*Network corporate providers include SONEDE and ONAS, while GDAs have been categorised as community-based organizations.
Non-network corporate providers include private companies selling bottled water or providing pit emptying services for
sanitation.

                                              Source: World Bank (2017).




19
   All reported expenditures are in nominal terms, i.e. do not account for inflation between 2013 and 2015. Values
have been converted to USD using the average annual exchange rate between Tunisian Dinars and USD as
reported by the Central Bank of Tunisia.
20
   Note that public WASH expenditure as a % of total public expenditure average 1.6% over the three-year period.

                                                            32
In order to simplify the data collection exercise, the TrackFin methodology is centred around the
collection of actual expenditure as the minimum set of data to be comprehensively collected and
reported, as opposed to attempting to compare budgeted versus actual expenditure to assess the
“efficiency” of government expenditure or estimate absorption rates. Data on budgeted expenditure
was not comprehensively collected to prepare the WASH accounts for Tunisia. However, some
information was collected for certain WASH actors. As reported in the WASH Accounts report, the
realization rate for SONEDE is low (50-60% of budgets are effectively realized, as cited in the WASH
accounts), whereas this ratio of realization is much higher for ONAS (95%). In the case of SONEDE, it
appears that one of the potential reasons for such a low realization rate is that budget forecasts are
overly optimistic / unrealistic, which means that they are challenging to achieve.

WASH expenditure has increased in recent years but disparities in resource allocation
remain between urban and rural areas and across governorates

Total WASH expenditure has increased between 2013 and 2015 from USD 589 million to USD 671
million, amounting to around 1.5% of GDP.21 Public WASH expenditure accounts for around 1.6% of
total public expenditure, as compared to 14% for health (World Development Indicators, 2016).

The distribution between urban and rural areas and across subsectors has remained relatively
constant for the period of analysis. Figure 4-1 below shows the distribution of total WASH expenditure
by type of service. The majority of funding has been allocated to urban water (48%), followed by urban
sanitation (25%) and rural water (20%). The expenditure for rural sanitation is almost negligible due to
the lack of defined roles and responsibilities for state actors and utilities in this sub-sector and also
limited data availability for household investments in self-supply (i.e. sanitation facilities and associated
services).22

                  Figure 4-1       Total WASH expenditure by type of service, 2013-15
                 100%

                   80%
                                 48.5%                  49.1%                   49.3%

                   60%

                   40%           17.1%                  18.5%                   19.8%

                   20%           28.0%                  26.3%                   24.8%

                    0%            5.9%                     5.5%                  5.6%
                                2013                    2014                      2015
                     Urban water Rural water      Urban sanitation     Rural sanitation   Other

                                          Source: World Bank (2017).


21
  Total government expenditure in 2015 was equal to USD 43,567 million.
22
  Estimations were made based on 2014 coverage figures reported by INS and unit costs of construction and
emptying of on-site sanitation facilities.

                                                      33
Total WASH expenditure per capita (which comprises both public and private expenditure), has
increased slightly from USD 51 in 2013 to USD 57 in 2015. However, wide disparities between urban
and rural areas, and governorates remain. For example, in 2015, total WASH expenditure per capita in
urban areas was around USD 66 as compared to just USD 38 in rural areas.23 Figure 4-2 further shows
that there is a negative correlation (-0.79) between the level of ‘rurality’ and total WASH expenditure
per capita, with areas in the Centre West and North West (also some of the poorest regions), having
lower expenditures than largely urban regions. Although the costs for the provision of services in rural
areas are likely to be higher – for example, SONEDE estimates that 1 cubic metre of water sold in rural
areas costs around 1.6 times more to deliver than the same volume sold in urban areas (SONEDE &
World Bank, 2016). The lower expenditure is partly explained by lower water consumption, low
expenditure on bottled water and lower O&M costs in rural areas, as compared to urban areas.

Figure 4-2        Correlation between total WASH expenditure per capita (average 2013-15) and
rurality level (2015) by governorate

                                       90.0

                                       80.0        Tun

                                       70.0                                  Man
       USD per capita (ave. 2013-15)




                                                                           Med         Nab
                                                           Ben
                                       60.0                            Sou           Gab
                                                   Mon         Ari                Toz             Sfa
                                                                                                        Jen       Zag
                                       50.0                                                 Biz            Keb   Mah
                                                                                Gaf                               Bej
                                       40.0
                                                                                                Tat
                                       30.0                                                                        Sil
                                                                                                                  Kas    Kai   Kef Sid

                                       20.0

                                       10.0

                                        0.0
                                              0%         10%         20%         30%            40%        50%    60%     70%            80%
                                                                                  Rurality level (2015)

                                                                             Source: World Bank (2017).

Inequality is even wider between governorates, with total WASH expenditure ranging between USD
30 per capita in Le Kef (one of the most vulnerable areas) and USD 109 in Tozeur in 2015. Figures 4-3
and 4-4 separately show the disparities in total WASH expenditure per capita between governorates for
water and sanitation. Total water expenditure per capita seems to be slightly more equitable than total
sanitation expenditure (excluding Tozeur in 2015, for which the level of expenditure dramatically
increased between 2013 and 2015 due to significant investments in desalination stations in this area).
Indeed, while Nabeul had a total expenditure per capita in sanitation of USD 31, Le Kef only spent USD 5
per capita in sanitation in 2015.



23
   This was calculated by (i) estimating total WASH expenditure in urban areas of each governorate, and estimating
a separate figure for rural areas, (ii) dividing those two figures by urban population and rural population of each
governorate.

                                                                                           34
Figure 4-3                           Total water expenditure per capita by governorate, 2013-15

                     90.0
                     80.0
                     70.0
                     60.0
USD per capita




                     50.0
                     40.0
                     30.0
                     20.0
                     10.0
                      0.0




                                                                                                                                                                                            Kasserine
                                                                                                                      Jendouba




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Tataouine
                                                                                                                                           Sousse




                                                                                                                                                                        Sfax




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Mednine
                                                                                                                                                                                Kairouan
                            Tunis




                                                                                   Zaghouan
                                                                                               Bizerte




                                                                                                                                 Siliana




                                                                                                                                                               Mahdia
                                                                         Nabeul




                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Gabès
                                     Ariana


                                                             Mannouba




                                                                                                         Beja




                                                                                                                                                                                                          Sidi Bouzid




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           Gafsa
                                               Ben Arous




                                                                                                                                                    Monastir




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Tozeur
                                                                                                                Kef




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Kebili
                                               2013                                2014                         2015                        Ave. national                                     Ave. urban                                                  Ave. rural

                                                                                                          Source: World Bank (2017).



Figure 4-4                           Total sanitation expenditure per capita by governorate, 2013-15

                     40.0
                     35.0
                     30.0
    USD per capita




                     25.0
                     20.0
                     15.0
                     10.0
                      5.0
                      0.0
                                                                                                                      Jendouba




                                                                                                                                                                               Kairouan




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Tataouine
                                                                                                                                           Sousse




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Mednine
                             Tunis




                                                                                                                                                                        Sfax
                                                                                                                                 Siliana
                                                                                               Bizerte




                                                                                                                                                                                           Kasserine
                                                                                    Zaghouan




                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Gabès
                                                                                                                                                               Mahdia
                                                              Mannouba
                                      Ariana
                                                 Ben Arous


                                                                          Nabeul




                                                                                                         Beja




                                                                                                                                                                                                        Sidi Bouzid




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Gafsa
                                                                                                                                                    Monastir
                                                                                                                Kef




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Tozeur
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Kebili




                              2013                                       2014                            2015                          Ave. national                                       Ave. urban                                                     Ave. rural

                                                                                                          Source: World Bank (2017).




                                                                                                                                   35
Public finance for water is well-targeted to reduce regional disparities24 but efforts are
needed to improve public finance allocation for sanitation

The majority of WASH expenditure comes from private expenditure provided by households,
including via tariffs and investments in self-supply, (Figures 4-5 and 4-6). On average for the years
2013-15, household finance (i.e. tariffs and self-supply) accounted for 75 per cent of total water
expenditure in water and 57 per cent of total sanitation expenditure. Private expenditure is particularly
high in governorates that are predominantly urban, such as Tunis, Ariana, Ben Arous and Monastir.

Figure 4-5                            Public and private water expenditure per capita by governorate, average 2013-15

                    60.0
     USD per capita (ave. 2013-




                    50.0
                    40.0
                    30.0
                15)




                    20.0
                    10.0
                          0.0




                                                                                                                                                                                     Kairouan




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Tataouine
                                                                                                    Bizerte



                                                                                                                           Jendouba


                                                                                                                                                Sousse




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Mednine
                                    Tunis




                                                                                                                                                                              Sfax
                                                                                                                                      Siliana
                                                                                        Zaghouan




                                                                                                                                                                     Mahdia



                                                                                                                                                                                                 Kasserine


                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Gabes
                                             Ariana


                                                                    Manouba




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Gafsa
                                                       Ben Arous




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Tozeur
                                                                                                                                                         Monastir




                                                                                                                                                                                                              Sidi Bouzid
                                                                               Nabeul




                                                                                                                     Kef




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                Kébili
                                                                                                              Beja




                                                                                                                           Private                             Public

                                                                                                              Source: World Bank (2017).


Figure 4-6                            Public and private sanitation expenditure per capita by governorate, average 2013-15

                       35.0
      USD per capital (ave. 2013-




                       30.0
                       25.0
                       20.0
                       15.0
                 15)




                       10.0
                        5.0
                        0.0
                                                                                         Zaghouan




                                                                                                                           Jendouba




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Tataouine
                                                                                                                                                Sousse




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    Mednine
                                     Tunis




                                                                                                                                                                                     Kairouan
                                                                                                                                                                              Sfax
                                                                     Manouba




                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Gabes
                                                                                                                                      Siliana



                                                                                                                                                                     Mahdia
                                                                                                    Bizerte




                                                                                                                                                                                                Kasserine
                                              Ariana




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                            Gafsa
                                                        Ben Arous




                                                                                                                                                         Monastir




                                                                                                                                                                                                             Sidi Bouzid




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Tozeur
                                                                               Nabeul




                                                                                                                     Kef




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Kébili
                                                                                                              Beja




                                                                                                                            Private                                 Public
                                                                                                              Source: World Bank (2017).



24
  The 2016-2020 Plan is composed by 5 different pillars: (1) Good governance, reform and fight against corruption;
(2) Transition from a low-cost economy to an economic hub; (3) Human development and social inclusion; (4)
Achievement of regional objectives; and (5) Green economy as a basis for sustainable development. More
information can be found at http://www.tunisia2020.com/plan-2016-2020/

                                                                                                                                        36
Public water expenditure does not appear to be clearly linked to the number of people needing access
to formal water services. In the left hand map in Figure below, the governorates are coloured by their
level of public water expenditure per capita, while the size of the green circles shows the number of
people not formally served (i.e. without access to a SONEDE or GDA supply). Areas with high numbers of
people unserved by formal water providers, such as Kairouan, are not receiving significantly higher
levels of public resources per capita (see Annex for a map with names of governorates indicated).
Overall there is a correlation coefficient of 0.19 between public expenditure and the number of people
who are unserved, which is a weak positive correlation. Ideally this would be strongly positive.

Public sanitation expenditure is similarly not clearly linked to numbers of people without sanitation.
The right-hand map takes a similar logic to the water map, where the size of the circles is based on
numbers of people using unimproved sanitation. Governorates are coloured by their per capita public
sanitation expenditure. Kairouan and Sidi Bouzid have high numbers of people using unimproved
sanitation but are not receiving high levels of public sanitation expenditure per capita. Overall there is a
correlation coefficient of -0.18 between these two variables, which is a weak negative correlation.
Again, this would ideally be strongly positive.
Figure 4-7      Public expenditure per capita (average 2013-15) and numbers of people without
services by governorate (2015)

     a.   Water                                             b.   Sanitation




                                    Source: data from World Bank (2017).




                                                     37
Public water expenditure and public sanitation expenditure are better correlated to poverty levels in
the governorate. Figure shows that total water expenditure per capita is negatively correlated to
poverty (-0.64). This is unsurprising because total water expenditure includes all sources, and poor
people generally spend less on water (as shown in Figure in the previous section). However, public
water expenditure per capita is positively correlated with poverty rates at the governorate level. This
means that there is some poverty targeting in public water expenditure, with a correlation coefficient of
0.32. This is far higher than the 0.19 which is the case for the left-hand graph in Figure 4-7. In short,
public water expenditure is better correlated with poverty levels in the governorate than it is with the
number of unserved people in the governorate.

Figure 4-8      Water - correlations by governorate between each of (a) total water expenditure per
capita and (b) public water expenditure per capita (average 2013-15) with poverty rates (2015)

                                   a.     Total water expenditure                                                                          b.      Public water expenditure
                                  60.0                                                                                                     30.0
                                               Tun
                                                                           Med



                                                                                                           USD per capita (ave. 2013-15)
                                  50.0                                                                                                     25.0
                                               Ben        Man                                                                                                        Toz
                                                            Toz Gab
                                                          Zag
  USD per capita (ave. 2013-15)




                                                 Sfa                     Jen
                                                                                                                                           20.0                                    Jen
                                  40.0                          Sou
                                                                  Biz                                                                                               Zag
                                                 Ari Nab
                                                      Mon           Keb Mah
                                                                                          Bej                                                                                Keb Med
                                  30.0                           Tat Gaf                                                                   15.0                             Biz                 Bej
                                                                                                                                                          Sfa
                                                                             Sid           Kas
                                                                                             Kef
                                                                                    Sil       Kai                                                                                                  Kef
                                                                                                                                                                                 Sid             KasKai
                                  20.0                                                                                                     10.0                                           Sil
                                                                                                                                                                        GabGaf
                                                                                                                                                            Nab        Tat     Mah
                                                                                                                                            5.0                     Man Sou
                                  10.0
                                                                                                                                                          Ari Mon
                                                                                                                                                         Ben
                                                                                                                                                        Tun

                                   0.0                                                                                                      0.0
                                         0%          10%            20%            30%          40%                                               0%       10%             20%           30%          40%
                                                           Poverty rate (2015)                                                                                    Poverty rate (2015)



                                                                                      Source: World Bank (2017).



For sanitation it is a different story, with public sanitation expenditure being poorly targeted by any
measure. There is a negative correlation between total sanitation expenditure and poverty (see left-
hand chart in Figure 4-9), which again is not surprising. However, there is also a negative correlation
between public sanitation expenditure on sanitation and poverty levels (-0.51), which is the opposite of
what we would want to see. This is partly explained by the lack of a clear responsibility for service
provision in rural areas, which is also where poverty is concentrated. While ONAS has a mandate to
serve urban areas, the sanitation service delivery arrangements for rural areas have only recently been
clarified and have not been translated into an effective legal framework with associated financial
resources. Thus, although there seems to be a need for a shift of focus in the distribution of public
resources for sanitation, especially in poor and rural areas, operationalising the arrangements for
sanitation service provision will need to precede public resource re-allocation.




                                                                                                      38
Figure 4-9      Sanitation - correlations by governorate between each of (a) total sanitation
expenditure per capita and (b) public sanitation expenditure per capita (average 2013-15) with
poverty rates (2015)

                                  a.      Total sanitation expenditure                                                                   b.      Public sanitation expenditure
                                  35.0                                                                                                   25.0
                                                     Nab
                                  30.0




                                                                                                         USD per capita (ave. 2013-15)
  USD per capita (ave. 2013-15)




                                               Tun                                                                                       20.0                 Nab
                                  25.0
                                                            Man
                                  20.0                                                                                                   15.0                        Man
                                                                   Sou
                                                 Ari Mon
                                                Ben
                                                                           Med
                                  15.0                                                                                                                Tun
                                                                  Gab
                                                                    Gaf                                                                  10.0
                                                  Sfa                                                                                                   Ari                  Gaf
                                  10.0                              Biz   Jen                                                                                  Mon         Sou
                                                              Toz    Keb Mah            Bej
                                                            Zag Tat               Sil
                                                                                           Kef
                                                                                            Kai                                           5.0            Sfa                       Jen     Sil
                                   5.0                                                                                                                 Ben                    Keb Med               Kef
                                                                           Sid           Kas                                                                         Zag Gab Biz
                                                                                                                                                                         Tat     MahSid          Bej Kai
                                                                                                                                                                       Toz                        Kas
                                   0.0                                                                                                    0.0
                                         0%          10%           20%           30%          40%                                               0%          10%           20%              30%         40%
                                                           Poverty rate (2015)                                                                                         Poverty rate (2015)



                                                                                    Source: World Bank (2017).

The overall message of this analysis is that public water expenditure is fairly well targeted at
governorates with high poverty levels, but could be better targeted at governorates with large
numbers of people not formally served as well. Achieving both objectives should be possible. For
sanitation, public sanitation expenditure is not at all well-targeted, and addressing the rural sanitation
challenge should be a high priority.

Raising tariffs would lower SONEDE and ONAS financing gaps and not hurt the poor

One immediate way of reallocating funding to the sector would be through reforming tariffs set by
service providers, so as to encourage equity. The phase 1 WASH Poverty Diagnostics report had noted
that, given that richer people consume more water, they capture far more of the implicit government
subsidy to SONEDE and of the explicitly subsidy to ONAS (World Bank, 2016b). The incidence of existing
subsidies and the potential impact of tariff reforms were estimated using the methodology set out in
Box 4-2 below.

Box 4-2 – Phase 1 report - Method for estimating the effects of tariff changes

 Phase 1 of this study applied a methodology for estimating the effect of the elimination of the implicit
 government subsidies by raising water tariffs (World Bank, 2016b). This approach is an innovative and robust
 way to explore the fiscal and distributive implications of price and subsidy policies.

 The analysis was based on data from the National Budget, Consumption and Living Standard Survey (NSBCL)
 conducted by INS in 2010, as this analysis was carried out before NSBCL 2015 became available. Households
 were asked to report their quarterly expenses, with annual water expenditure estimated by extrapolating from
 the quarterly expense on water, assuming constant consumption throughout the year. Based on the tariff
 structure of SONEDE in 2010, authors estimated the amount of water consumed by solving an unknown “q”


                                                                                                    39
 (consumed quantity) from the water bills paid in 2010. A uniform price elasticity of consumption of 0.4 was
 assumed for all quintiles of households. After eliminating the households not connected to the SONEDE network
 and the missing observations, the exercise used a sample of 9,167 households. In order to provide an estimate
 for 2014, assumptions were made about population growth and economic growth. This has its limitations, but
 the authors view is that these are unlikely to impact key messages.

 The study also analysed sanitation tariffs of ONAS, following a similar methodology . In this case, the unit
 subsidy was defined as the difference between the sale price of managing a cubic meter of wastewater by ONAS
 and the actual cost of managing that wastewater (as estimated by ONAS staff). Simulations for the increase in
 sanitation prices or the complete elimination of sanitation subsidies were not conducted due to the very limited
 share of sanitation expenditures on household’s total expenditures. In other words, very marginal poverty and
 distributive effects should be expected from sanitation subsidy removal.


SONEDE tariffs are consumption-based and use an increasing-block tariff structure: as such, they are
theoretically progressive with the highest block of consumption charged at 8 times the price than the
lower block. The analysis was carried out based on SONEDE tariff structure as of 31 st December 2013,
when the first block of consumption (from 0 to 20 m3) was charged at TND 155 millimes (TND 0.155)
whereas the highest consumption block (above 501 m3) was charged TND 1.190.

In practice, Phase 1 analysis found that the richest 20 percent of households connected to SONEDE
services capture far more of the implicit subsidy, which means that the current tariff regime is in fact
regressive. This finding was drawn from several observations and strands of analysis.

First, consumers in the fifth quintile (i.e. the richest quintile) consume four times more water than the
poorest 20 percent of consumers. Based on results of the NSBCL 2010, the study found that SONEDE
consumers in the richest quintile consumed on average 135 litres of water per capita per day (which is
below consumption levels in European countries), whereas households in the poorest quintile
consumed on average 60 litres per capita per day. Given these higher levels of consumption, it was
estimated that consumers in the fifth quintile consumed approximately one third of the water volumes
produced by SONEDE, whereas consumers in the fourth and fifth quintile accounted for about half of
SONEDE’s customer base and consumed half of SONEDE’s water production.

Second, households in the fifth quintile tend to be smaller, which means that many of them consume
water in the cheapest block. Phase 1 analysis estimated that the average household size in the lowest
quintile includes 5.4 members, which is 2 more than for the richest quintile which includes
approximately 3.3. members. Given the smaller household size for richer households, as shown only 28
per cent of households consuming in the lowest block belong to the first quintile, which means that 72
per cent of households consuming within this block are not the poorest households.




                                                       40
Figure 4-10 - Water consumption by income quintile

                                     100
   % of total water consumption by

                                     90
      customers in each quintile


                                     80
                                     70
                                     60
                                     50
                                     40
                                     30
                                     20
                                     10
                                      0
                                           B1: 0–20 m3 B2: 20–40        B3: 40–70 B4: 70–100   B5: 100– B6: 150–500
                                                          m3               m3         m3        150m3        m3

                                                                 Q1    Q2      Q3   Q4   Q5


Phase 1 study assessed that SONEDE falls short of cost recovery, with an estimated financial gap of
around TND 107 million in 2012, which was calculated based on the difference between the unit
operating cost and the unit sale price and corresponded at the time to approximately 40% of total
revenues. Subsequent analysis of SONEDE’s financial position confirmed the need for SONEDE to move
closer to cost-recovery levels in order to strengthen its financial position.

Phase 1 analysis found that, due to the factors outlined above, the richest quintile captured a greater
share of the total subsidy (31 percent) as opposed to the poorest quintile which captured only 11
percent. In total, the first two quintiles captured less than a third of the total subsidy, as shown on
Figure 4-11 below. This was nevertheless found to be more equitable than the distribution of energy
subsidies.

Figure 4-11 - Share of SONEDE implicit subsidy captured by income groups (by quintiles)



                                             27%       11%
                                                                  18%


                                           24%                   20%




                                       Quintile 1   Quintile 2    Quintile 3
                                       Quintile 4   Quintile 5


Modelling of tariff reforms in Phase 1 found that reducing or eliminating government subsidies would
not hurt the poor in a significant way , i.e. that poverty rates would not substantially increase as shown
on Table 4- 3 below. The modelling of reforms was done for various scenarios, ranging from a 7 percent

                                                                                         41
tariff increase (which was realised in subsequent years) to the elimination of full subsidies. Given the
assumed elasticity of demand, it was estimated that per capita private expenditure on water would go
down. However, it was found that the impact on poverty rates would be negligible (ranging from 0.06
percent to 0.22 percent) due to the fact that water bills account for only a small part of total household
expenditure.
Table 4-3        Estimations on the effect of the elimination of government subsidies

                                                    7% tariff       15% tariff     25% tariff    Full elimination
                                                    increase         increase       increase       of subsidies
 On total per capita expenditure (TND)                -1.7             -3.5           -5.6             -10.7
 On SONEDE revenues (TND million)                     13.1             27.0           42.7             149.5
 On poverty rates (percentage points)                 0.06             0.09           0.12              0.22
 On inequality Gini (0-100 scale)                     0.01             0.02           0.03              0.10

            Source: (World Bank 2016b). World Bank estimates based on INS (2010) and SONEDE data.25

Similar analysis was carried out for sanitation subsidies, with the finding that subsidies to ONAS are
pro-rich and regressive. According to Phase 1 analysis, a third of implicit subsidies to ONAS are captured
by households in the richest quintile, with only 10 percent of subsidies going to the poorest quintile. This
occurs for several reasons. Firstly, 25% of ONAS customers are in the top consumption quintile, with
only 13% in the poorest quintile. Secondly, the volume of wastewater managed for households in the
richest quintile is about nine times higher than wastewater from consumers in the poorest quintile.
Therefore, expenditures on sanitation services follow a marked pro-rich pattern. About three-quarters
of total spending on wastewater managed by ONAS is incurred by the two richest quintiles. It is a similar
effect as for water, but more stark.

Overall, analysis presented in this section found that, whereas Tunisia has been dedicating a growing
share of its GDP to supporting the water sector (including through public subsidies), the distribution of
such subsidies could be greatly improved through better targeting, in order to ensure that the poorest
consumers truly benefit. This would require a reallocation of subsidies from the urban sub-sectors to
the rural sub-sectors; and within the urban sub-sectors, from comparatively richer to the poorest.




25
  As for Figure 10, this estimate was made before NSBCL 2015 results were available in late 2016, but the result is
unlikely to have changed much in such a short period of time.

                                                        42
    5. Policy recommendations

This section formulates policy recommendations that build on the summary analysis presented above,
complemented by other findings. Tunisia has achieved remarkable progress towards universal access,
although substantial disparities in access to reliable services are observed and appear to be correlated
with poverty. Reaching the last mile is doable but will require specific focus, as the unserved are harder
to reach and will require better targeting of financial resources.

Given the magnitude of progress already achieved, reaching the water SDG is a realistic prospect for
Tunisia and should be adopted as a clear sector goal to catalyze efforts from all stakeholders in the
water sector and beyond.

These recommendations have been grouped in five main areas:

       Recommendation 1 – Conduct Strategic Financial Planning for the WASH sector in Tunisia
       Recommendation 2 – Bring tariffs closer to cost-recovery levels whilst preserving affordability
       Recommendation 3 – Mobilize and target public WASH sector funding more strategically
       Recommendation 4 – Prioritize rural sanitation
        Recommendation 5 – Improve sector monitoring to track progress towards the SDGs

Recommendation 1- Conduct Strategic Financial Planning for the WASH sector in Tunisia

At present, there is no long-term strategic financial plan for the WASH sector or no assessment of how
much will be needed to achieve the water SDG in Tunisia. What exists at this stage is a five-year
investment plan (2016-2020) for the sector (prepared by DGFIOP), which is focused on the next five
years, does not make a specific attempt to link investment requirements to achieving the SDGs and has
not evaluated how much operations and maintenance spending will be required to ensure the
sustainability of the WASH services provided, and how such financing requirements will be covered, i.e.
by who and by what means the funding will be provided. In addition, the required investments in the
water and sanitation sector in the next five years had to be significantly adjusted to take account of
available financing sources.

The five-year plan has estimated that investments required for sanitation during the plan period would
be in TND 1000 million (USD 620 million) or TND 200 million per year (USD 124 million). When
comparing such amounts to the amounts that have been recently invested in sanitation (estimated at
TND 100 million per year in 2015), it rapidly becomes obvious that there is a significant difference
between investment needs and current levels of investment in sanitation and that additional funding
and financing sources will need to be identified.

. With respect to water, the five-year plan includes investments that are planned by the Ministry of
Agriculture, for rural water services as well as irrigation, dams, etc. These amount to TND 2,554 million
(USD 1.5 billion) over the period, although these do not include SONEDE investments. These include TND
1,127 million in investments in national projects for water and irrigation infrastructure, and TND 1,424
million in regional projects, although it was difficult to assess the specific share of investments that
would be dedicated to drinking water projects in rural areas.

                                                   43
Failing a comprehensive assessment of what it will take for Tunisia to achieve the SDGs, one can only
resort to crude estimates to assess the extent to which investment efforts will need to be significantly
increased to reach the SDGs. Hutton and Varughese (2016) estimated that capital financing to extend
safely managed water supply and sanitation services to the unserved would be approximately 0.49
percent of GDP per year. For Tunisia, this would translate into a requirement to increase capital
investments, as this has been found to be in the region of 0.44 points of GDP in 2015. Such a broad
estimate is based on the finding from the WASH Accounts that total WASH expenditure was about 1.5
percent of GDP for Tunisia in 2015, combined with the fact that capital investment expenditure
accounted for about 29 percent of the total. The share of capital investment expenditure has been
growing over time (from 22 percent of total WASH expenditure in 2013 to 29 percent in 2015).

This, combined with the allocations made under the 5-year plan, points to the fact that capital
investments will need to be increased to meet the SDGs, although the exact magnitude and nature of
required investments to meet the SDGs are still unclear. The SDG baseline will be made available in July
2017 by the WHO and UNICEF Joint Monitoring Program. This will, for the first time since the SDGs came
into force in January 2016, present a comprehensive baseline of what service improvements are needed
in order to increase access in line with the additional SDG requirements.

To address this gap in understanding and provide the basis for defining a WASH sector investment and
improvement strategy, we recommend that a Strategic Financial Planning analysis be conducted for
Tunisia in the coming year. The Box below provides additional information on the nature and
objectives of Strategic Financial Planning (SFP) for the water sector.

Box 5-1 – Strategic Financial Planning: what is it for and where has it been applied

 The OECD first coined the term “Strategic Financial Planning” in the context of the water sector. According to
 (OECD, 2009), this is defined as “taking a long term perspective of the financial needs of the sector, the factors
 affecting them, the main sources of funds and the balance between them, and how needs can be reconciled with
 potential resources”. The OECD observed that policy decisions in the sector are rarely based on such
 comprehensive long-term analyses, which can result in the setting of unrealistic sector objectives.

 Key SFP objectives are to evaluate how to make the most of existing financial resources, by extracting all
 potential efficiency gains, define realistic targets within realistic timeframes and identify the need for and
 potential sources of additional financing. Strategic Financial Planning (SFP) differs from business planning for
 specific utilities in the sense that it takes an overall sector view. A number of tools have been developed to
 facilitate SFP exercises, including the FEASIBLE model developed by the OECD; although it is often preferable to
 develop country-specific financial modelling tools based on first principles. In countries that will face difficulties
 meeting the SDGs because of financial constraints, SFP can be used to define the way in which SDG targets can
 be progressively realized, with particular emphasis on defining whether it would be more beneficial to extend
 access to basic services to all as soon as possible (what was referred to as “improved services” in the MDG era)
 and then gradually move towards safely managed services or to adopt a different improvement path;

 SFP exercises have been conducted in a growing number of countries. The FEASIBLE tool was first applied
 under the OECD overall lead in former Soviet Union countries, then in Sub-Saharan Africa (particularly in
 Lesotho) or in South East Asia (in Cambodia). More recently, in 2016, the World Bank has supervised the
 preparation of an SFP in Albania, with financial support from the European Union. This allowed Albania to
 define a realistic and balanced package of investments up to 2030 to expand services in line with what the
 country could afford, referred to as the Water for People plan. However, based on what the country can afford,
 it seems that achieving the SDGs by 2030 is unrealistic unless the requirement of extending sewerage services
 to all (in line with EU directives, with the exception of small and isolated rural settlements) is waived. Based on

                                                           44
 the modelling exercise, Albania could expect reaching piped sewerage coverage in urban areas of 70 percent
 and of 25 percent in rural areas by 2027, and 80 and 50 percent respectively by 2040.

In Tunisia, Strategic Financial Planning could be conducted in order to assist with:

       Evaluating the financing needed to achieve the water SDG and government objectives up to
        2030, including for new investments, operations and crucially, for large maintenance;
       The potential for freeing up resources via generating efficiency gains at the level of service
        providers;
       How resources can be mobilized to meet spending requirements, e.g. from public sources via
        taxation and concessionary finance or via domestic commercial financing.

Evaluating the financing needed to achieve the water SDGs and government objectives up to 2030.
The WASH Accounts have provided a strong basis for such an exercise by estimating with a much greater
degree of confidence and precision current expenditure in the sector. A Strategic Financial Planning
exercise could compare current spending trends with future spending needs, not only to assess how
much additional financing is required, but also to provide a basis for allocating available resources in a
better way to reduce regional and socioeconomic disparities.

Most likely, it will be necessary to continue to invest, and most likely increase investments, in the most
disadvantaged governorates, with a particular focus on reducing the service gap in governorates in the
Centre West regions. Meanwhile, it will be necessary to continue investing everywhere to stem
deterioration in service quality / reap efficiency gains. In particular, it will be important to step up
investments in large capital maintenance which is being neglected at present according to findings from
the WASH Accounts, particularly in the urban water sector where investments in large capital
maintenance (including repair of leaks and water meter) only accounts for 1 per cent of total
expenditure. A Strategic Financial Planning exercise could provide a more robust basis for estimating
how much will need to be invested in capital maintenance in future.

Identifying the potential for freeing up financial resources . An added benefit of the SFP exercise (as
opposed to straight investment planning) is that it allows linking efficiency gains projections with
financial mobilization. For example, reducing non-revenue water, as well as saving water, can generate
substantial financial benefits, by reducing the volumes of water that need to be treated and by
increasing revenues from water sold. In turn, these financial resources can generate revenues for the
utility which it can use to invest in capital investments. The potential for such savings can be captured in
utility-level financial modelling (and this is indeed what has been done in case of SONEDE or ONAS) but
SFP allows adding up all such potential efficiency gains across the sector.

Identifying what additional financial resources can be mobilized for the sector. Additional financial
resources can come from several sources: two of them are sources of non-repayable revenues for the
sector, including tariffs (see recommendation 2 on increasing revenues from tariffs) and public resources
(see recommendation 3 on mobilizing public financing for WASH more strategic); in addition, repayable
revenues can be obtained from commercial sources (the focus of the present recommendation). At first
sight, commercial finance may seem more expensive than development financing provided for free or at
very concessional rates. However, there are many advantages that can counteract higher financing costs


                                                      45
over time. In countries with a relatively high currency risk and significant inflation (as in Tunisia),
borrowing in domestic currency can eliminate foreign exchange risk. It also allows tapping into pools of
domestic financial resources that have so far been largely ignored, such as pension funds, institutional
or social impact investors, when the latter may be looking for low-risk, low financial return investments
with high social benefits. In addition, using commercial finance can help public utilities introduce robust
commercial principles in their operation and management and boost transparency in the sector.

Both SONEDE and ONAS will need to introduce substantial internal reforms before becoming fully
credit worthy. During an interim period, they could explore tapping into commercial finance for specific
projects that can generate revenues (for example, for investments to reduce NRW in the case of
SONEDE or for investments in the framework of PPP contracts to improve the efficiency of sewage
management in the case of ONAS). If utilities that are in a position to borrow commercially do so instead
of borrowing from concessional financing sources, this would free up borrowing capacity and public
funds so as to reallocate public transfers to those sectors that need it most (such as rural sanitation, as
per recommendation 4 below). To do so, utilities will need to commit to a tariff increase path (as
detailed below) that provides confidence to commercial lenders that financing can be repaid. This will
most likely require initial public funding as well, to support blended finance strategies whereby public
funds are used in a more catalytic manner than currently (for example, via the provision of guarantees).

Recommendation 2 – Bring tariffs closer to cost-recovery levels whilst preserving
affordability

The analysis conducted for this study has identified that current private expenditure on WASH
services is affordable by the majority of the population, including the poor. Service providers receive
public funding and the share of public transfers to the sector as a whole has been growing, going from
18% of total sector expenditure in 2013 to 21% in 2015, for all sub-sectors combined. Meanwhile, the
share of tariffs in total sector expenditure went from 68% in 2013 to 60% in 2015. This is explained by
the fact that the increase in sector spending has not been accompanied by a simultaneous increase in
tariffs. Such an evolution has been particularly significant in the water sector, which went from 81% of
water sector costs being funded via tariffs in 2013 to 69%: reversing this trend is essential for the sector
to move towards financial sustainability.

In line with recommendations that have been formulated in the SONEDE audit report (Nodalis, Aspa,
Scet 2016) and in the report for the first phase of the WASH Poverty Diagnostics (World Bank, 2016b),
it would be possible to reform water tariffs whilst not significantly affecting poor customers. The
financial and operational diagnostic modelled a number of scenarios which projected that, whilst
increasing SONEDE coverage in rural areas to 75% and improving performance in terms of staff
utilisation and non-revenue water), SONEDE may reach its financial equilibrium by 2021 (with 4 tariff
increases of 11% between 2017-21).

(World Bank 2016b) assessed that current water tariff subsidies could be eliminated without impacting
the poor significantly, given that comparatively richer consumers currently benefit the most from
subsidies, as they usually consume more. Removing SONEDE tariff subsidies would help strengthening
the company’s financial viability and credit-worthiness, whilst freeing up scarce public resources for



                                                     46
being allocated to other sub-sectors (such as rural sanitation) where public funding is critically required
and it would be harder to mobilize commercial financing.

Reforming tariffs would require conducting a tariff study that examines how to rebalance the existing
increasing-block tariffs in order to reduce the leaking of subsidies to comparatively richer households.
Potential tariff structure that can be explored are lifeline tariffs (whereby the cheapest tariff block is
only available to those who consume below a certain volume of water) or targeted tariff subsidies
(whereby only customers who meet a certain number of socio-economic criteria can obtain water at a
subsidized rate). The feasibility of such targeted tariff subsidies should be explore in light of other social
safety net regimes in Tunisia.

Recommendation 3 – Mobilize and target public WASH sector funding more strategically

The financial flow analysis, based on the WASH Account methodology, has found that public funding
for water is fairly well targeted at the poorest governorates, just not necessarily those with the largest
numbers of unserved people. By contrast, there is a negative correlation between public expenditure
for sanitation and poverty levels (-0.51). This is partly explained by the lack of a clear allocation of
responsibilities for urban service provision in rural areas, which is also where poverty is concentrated.
While ONAS has a mandate to serve urban areas, the sanitation service delivery arrangements for rural
areas are not clear. Thus, although there seems to be a need for a shift of focus in the distribution of
public resources for sanitation, especially in poor and rural areas, a clear definition of responsibilities for
service provision will need to precede public resource re-allocation, as discussed in the next
recommendation on the need to prioritize sanitation.

Going forward, public expenditure for water and sanitation will need to be allocated to the areas that
need it the most – that is, the governorates that have lower levels of coverage and limited capacity to
generate their own resources, i.e. mainly governorates in North West and Centre West of the country
and rural areas, and where malnutrition is more acute. WASH is a necessary but insufficient intervention
to combat stunting. As Tunisia gets closer to achieving the SDGs, reaching the harder to reach will likely
cost more and beneficiaries may have less ability to generate private financing. At present, funding
allocations are decided centrally by the MDICI based on formulas that take account of poverty levels and
access to service levels in some way but which are not made public.

To ensure fairness in the distribution of public funds to the WASH sector, it would be advised to
define and make publicly available a formula for allocating sector funds to the regions that need it
most. It results from the above that focused investments in the most deprived regions will be needed to
correct current inequities, with a view to positively discriminate in favour of such regions. Countries
such as South Africa have defined such transparent fund allocation formulas, with different formulas for
the allocation of both operating subsidies and capital investment subsidies. Such a mechanism could
provide inspiration for Tunisia in the context of communalisation and decentralization, which will create
the need for more transparent formulas for public funding transfers as part of broader public funding
reforms.




                                                      47
Box 5-2 – Transparent public transfer mechanisms in South Africa

 The end of apartheid and democratic transition in South Africa brought forth the need to serve all citizens. The
 1996 constitution ensured water as a human right, and guaranteed that everyone has right to basic services. For
 water and sanitation, basic services are defined as a standpipe within 200 meters of the house and a VIP toilet. In
 1998, South Africa introduced the Equitable Share, a system based on transparent formulas to provide operational
 subsidies from national to local governments based on transparent formulas to fill the funding deficit and
 eliminate the backlog in infrastructure provision in previously disadvantaged areas.

 In 2001, South Africa adopted the Free Basic Water (FBW) to guarantee the constitutional rights, following early
 experimentation by eThekwini municipality. This policy provides basic levels of water and sanitation services to
 poor citizens (including 6kL of free water per month). In 2004, South Africa adopted the Municipal Infrastructure
 Grant (MIG) which provides capital investment subsidies for basic services. It is a conditional grant intended to
 cover capital costs: it is aimed at providing infrastructure for a basic level of service for the poor.

 Key Distinguishing Features of the Equitable Share - The Equitable Share is a transparent and predictable
 government transfer that redistributes tax revenue from national government to provinces and municipalities.
 The Equitable Share transfers are non-conditional transfers to cover operating costs. It is specifically designed to
 support rapid expansion and improved quality of basic services for the poor. The Equitable Share has several
 features of well-designed national subsidy programs: it is transparent, targeted, predictable and reliable.

 Transparent: The Equitable Share is established through a clear formula based on the number of poor people
 according to the census (this can result in some misallocations if the census data is not up to date). The formula
 used to determine allocations is made up of components that are based on the particular functions and
 characteristics of municipalities. The formula used to calculate Equitable Shares has been revised a number of
 times following in depth discussions. A review of the local government Equitable Share was completed in 2012
 and a new formula is being phased in through 2018. The formula for disbursement of the funds provides higher
 amounts to municipalities with a higher number of poor people. A portion of the ES subsidy is also allocated to
 fund local institutional development. The basic services component (which includes water and sanitation)
 accounts for over 90 percent of the local government Equitable Share. The purpose of this component is to assist
 municipalities in providing free basic services to poor households and funding municipal health services. The Free
 Basic Services package has been estimated at US$ 265 per household and the underlying breakdown is based on
 the following assumed distribution between basic services: water 31%, sanitation 26%, refuse removal 22%,
 energy 21%. Yet, LGES grants are “unconditional”, meaning that municipalities can spend the amount as they
 choose.26

 Targeted: The Equitable Share subsidies are specifically introduced to provide services to the poorest residents.
 The allocations assume that municipalities provide poor households with a quantity of free basic services in line
 with national policy norms. If local governments choose to provide a more generous subsidy, then it is up to them
 to fund those additional levels of service.

 Predictable: The national government sets out three-year indicative allocations for the Equitable Shares and
 updates them on a rolling basis. Departures from the indicative amounts are always marginal.

 Reliable: The Constitution provides that each sphere of government - national, provincial and local - is entitled to
 an Equitable Share of revenue raised nationally to enable it to provide basic services and perform the functions
 allocated to it.




26
  Llano-Arias V & Norman G (2015). South Africa’s Equitable Share formula: a useful model for WASH financing?
Finance Brief 5, Public Finance for WASH, www.publicfinanceforwash.org

                                                         48
 In conclusion: The Equitable Share subsidy is a bedrock of South African democracy and revenue redistribution.
 It has not been questioned even when there have been changes in political leadership. In 2016/17, the Equitable
 Shares to local government was approximately USD 4 billion, of which approximately 40 percent was for water
 and sanitation. The Municipal Infrastructure Grant (MIG), which is a direct conditional grant, was approximately
 USD 1.1 billion, of which water and sanitation accounted for 49 percent. These subsidy mechanisms were amongst
 the components that led to remarkable progress in terms of water and sanitation coverage in South Africa, which
 went from 59 percent in 1994 to 93 percent in 2010 for water, and 48 percent in 1994 to 79 in 2010 for
 sanitation.27


Mobilizing public finance for WASH will call for the identification of new sources of public funds and
cross-subsidies. The analysis has identified the need to allocate funding to rural areas to address the
outstanding service gap. Given that water tariffs are low as a percentage of income, this could include,
in the context of well-designed tariff reforms, the introduction of a “WASH service solidarity levy”, to be
applied to SONEDE customers for the benefit of users who are either served by GDAs or self-providing
the service. Such a cross-subsidy scheme would be easier to administer if SONEDE were to increase its
service area and absorb service areas currently served by GDAs. However, this might not be either
operationally feasible nor desirable, particularly for isolated service centres. An alternative would be to
establish a fund for rural WASH services solidarity, as was done in 1954 in France with the establishment
of the Fonds National pour le Développement des Adductions d’Eau Potable (FNDAE), which is managed
by the French Ministry of Agriculture. When first created, the fund was a special Treasury account to
finance water and sewerage network extensions, partly with the proceeds of the revenues from betting
around horse races (PMU – Pari Mutuel Urbain). Since 1997 it has extended its support to covering
investments in depollution relative to agriculture. In 2000, it became a sub-group within the newly set
up Fonds National de Solidarité pour l’Eau (FNSE), and has subsequently been remodelled.

Where public investments are required, the efficiency of these investments could be improved if
financing was linked to the achievement of pre-agreed results. An increased focus on results could be
fostered through channelling all concessional and public funding based on results, with the incentives
for results being transferred from external funders to public recipients to service providers. Experience
with results-based financing modalities has rapidly expanded overtime, starting with Output-Based Aid
models (that link payment of subsidies to service providers to the delivery of specific outputs) to the
application of such models to World Bank lending, with the Payment for Results (PforR) lending
instrument, which ties fund transfers to the achievement of specific performance indicators, some of
which can be defined in terms of the delivery of specific reforms. Such a PforR has been considered for
further World Bank financial support to SONEDE.

Recommendation 4 – Prioritize rural sanitation
Rural sanitation needs to be prioritised, as neither ONAS nor GDAs have made significant investments
to improve service delivery in rural areas. According to the WASH Accounts, rural sanitation accounted
for a mere 0.5 per cent of expenditure between 2013 and 2015 and public expenditure on rural
sanitation services was very minimal. Households are expected to be the main and only investor in the
rural sanitation sector, but they lack formal guidance and stimulus to do so in a structured manner. This
largely reflects the fact that there is not a clear allocation of roles for rural sanitation, including for


27
     https://wsp.org/sites/wsp.org/files/publications/CSO-SouthAfrica.pdf

                                                         49
important functions such as policy-making, standard-setting, demand promotion, technical assistance
with design and construction, enforcement and monitoring and evaluation. This is an issue because rural
sanitation was found to be the most lagging sub-sector, with 900,000 people in Tunisia lacking access to
improved sanitation services, most of which live in rural areas.

To reverse this current state of affairs, public investments will be needed in a number of critical areas.
For example, support will be required for demand promotion activities, to deliver supply-side support
(i.e. to train and strengthen sanitation entrepreneurs in rural areas) and to invest in shared facilities
(such as faecal sludge treatment plants or decentralised wastewater treatment plants). In addition,
stronger public enforcement as well as monitoring and evaluation will be needed, which will require
public resources. Household investment in more durable sanitation solutions will need to be facilitated
by providing access to finance, which may include microfinance, possibly combined with government
subsidies. Facilitating access to finance for rural sanitation would likely require public investment in the
first place, however, to encourage the limited number of existing microfinance institutions to explore
this market and develop financial products. The costs of such activities will need to be estimated and
factored in future financial plans for the sector, something that can be done as part of the Strategic
Financial Planning exercise that is recommended (see Recommendation 1).

Overall, for public financing for rural sanitation to be channelled effectively, it will be necessary to
identify who is responsible for what, how funding can be mobilized and channelled. ONAS has
developed a strategy for scaling up rural sanitation: it would be important that such a strategy be
implemented with clear institutional models in place and an estimate of the costs of the different
activities that need to be undertaken in order to reach SDG standards for rural sanitation. For the rural
localities with less 3000 inhabitants, that are not supposed to be served by ONAS, it will be important to
define locally-based support structures that can perform some of the needed activities to support
household investment. Given that the needs are on a manageable scale, it may be possible to delegate
these responsibilities to the private sector with clear targets for increasing access to improved sanitation
and financing based on results in terms of achieving such targets. This will be done in the context of a
clear policy framework, which will need to define what are acceptable standards for on-site sanitation
and faecal sludge management, and would ideally be combined with a robust communication campaign
in order to highlight the benefits of investing in improved sanitation services to households.

Recommendation 5 - Improve sector monitoring to track progress towards the SDGs
The present study has identified several areas where sector monitoring could be significantly
improved in order to improve tracking of SDG implementation. With a view to track progress with the
implementation of SDG6, such monitoring should particularly focus on equity in access, including in
terms of service levels and affordability.

Refinements to Tunisia’s WASH monitoring framework will be required to measure progress on the
SDGs. While significant progress has been made, the SDGs raise the bar significantly in terms of higher
levels of service and universal access. Existing data availability on levels of service for WASH in Tunisia
(for example on water quality, and service intermittency) are not sufficient to monitor the SDGs. The
WHO/UNICEF Joint Monitoring Programme’s SDG baseline summary will be available in July 2017 and
will be an additional insight to clarify efforts needed to meet the SDGs.



                                                     50
In line with SDG objectives, water quality monitoring will need to be improved, particularly for GDAs
and self-supply. This calls for strengthening water quality monitoring authorities, as well as for
transitioning to more formal service delivery arrangements for rural areas that can deliver services in
line with SDG requirements (including at-home water supply and full management of fecal sludge
including downstream treatment or re-use). For water quality monitoring, faecal matter, fluoride and
arsenic have been identified as the highest priority parameters for the SDGs (WHO/UNICEF, 2016). The
measure recommended for assessing faecal contamination is the presence of indicator bacteria such as
E.coli or total thermotolerant coliforms (TTC) in a 100ml water sample.

The lack of robust data on service levels is a serious barrier to targeting investments to improve
services. This for example hinders improving the allocative efficiency of public funds by targeting
identified problem areas, where service levels may be lower than in areas served by SONEDE but where
no robust data is available. Improving the availability of information on service levels, e.g. by
benchmarking at the governorate level, should be a priority in the SDG era. This will allow comparing the
service levels delivered by service users of the two main providers (SONEDE and ONAS) with those
delivered by smaller providers (GDAs) or by households themselves via self-supply.

Information on service levels should be collected around key performance indicators, including data
on water quality, continuity of service, consumer service indicators (such as the time needed for
repairs) tariffs, consumed water quantities, and prices paid . In order to address inequity issues, better
data is needed for non-networked households (usually the poor), not only about WASH service
provision, but also about other socio-economic characteristics that are affected by inadequate WASH
services, such as water-borne diseases, on which no specific data could be located so as to explore
linkages between inadequate WASH services and diseases.
Improved financial sector monitoring will also be needed, to ensure appropriate targeting of public
funding for WASH services and to support advocacy efforts for the sector. Sector financial monitoring
could be supported by the preparation of WASH Accounts on a regular basis in order to track the
allocation of financial resources. The WASH accounts that were prepared for the purpose of this study
encompass the period 2013-15. They have provided a complete view on how much is spent on WASH
services, by whom and for what. Disaggregation of expenditure data by governorate has allowed
identifying those governorates that receive comparatively less funding and compare this with poverty
data. Such an exercise provides a solid initial snapshot of WASH sector financial flows but would need to
be complemented by deeper analysis of the costs of service provision to the different population
segments and of the potential for reaping efficiency gains in the sector. This would require conducting
strategic financial planning to estimate the sector’s future financial needs and the potential for
reassigning public funds to the sub-sectors that need it most, whilst leveraging commercial finance for
the sectors that are able to do so over time (such as urban water and sanitation).
The ability to track financial flows to WASH will only become reality if the WASH accounts are
prepared on a periodic basis, so as to be in a position to track evolutions, such as any potential
improvements in the targeting of public funds. A second exercise should ideally be carried out in 2019
to cover the period 2016-2018. To improve the next exercise of preparing WASH accounts, work on
improving data sources should be undertaken in the intermediary period, as follows:
       A better definition of the expenditure categories “sector support and water resources
        management” needs to be developed by sector stakeholders so as to be able to clearly identify
        associated expenses with these critical support functions for the sector;

                                                    51
      A better database of the rural areas covered by the GDAs should be prepared, and the reliability
       of the information collected for the GDAs should be strengthened;
      Additional WASH-related questions should be included in the standard household surveys
       (particularly NSBCL) to better estimate household expenditure on self-supply;
      A specific survey should be carried out to estimate non-domestic non-networked WASH
       expenditures – i.e. by institutions, industries or commercial establishments.

In order for the WASH Accounts to be prepared in 2 or 3 years and to include improved financial data,
it will be necessary to promptly identify the institution that will be tasked with supervising the
preparation of WASH Accounts and for ensuring that the above recommendations on data
improvements are duly followed through. As for the first exercise, the MDICI could take on this
responsibility but would need to identify financial and human resources in order to do so.




                                                  52
References

Cuesta, J., El-Lahga, A. and Lara Ibarra, G. (2015). The Socioeconomic Impacts of Energy Reform in
Tunisia: A Simulation Approach. Policy Research Working Paper 7312, World Bank, Washington D.C.
DFID (2013) Water, Sanitation and Hygiene: Evidence paper
Hutton, G. (2012). Global costs and benefits of drinking-water supply and sanitation interventions to
reach the MDG target and universal coverage. WHO/HSE/WSH/12.01. Geneva: World Health
Organization.
INS (2016) Flash: Consommation et niveau de vie, no.1, December 2016
INS (2010) Enquête Nationale sur le Budget, la Consommation et le Niveau de vie des ménages

INS (Institut National de la Statistique), ADB (African Development Bank), and World Bank (2012)
Mesure de la pauvreté, des inégalités et de la polarisation en Tunisie 2000–2010
MDICI, INS and UNICEF (2013), Suivi de la situation des enfants et des femmes en Tunisie- Enquête par
grappes à indicateurs multiples 2011-2012, Rapport Final
Nodalis, ASPA, SCET Tunisie (2016), Etude sur l’équilibre financier de la SONEDE, Synthèse générale,
September 2016.

OECD (2009), Strategic Financial Planning for Water Supply and Sanitation. A report from the OECD Task
Team on Sustainable Financing to Ensure Affordable Access to Water Supply and Sanitation. Paris, OECD.

OPHI (2016) Oxford Poverty and Human Development Initiative: Country Briefing December 2016:
Tunisia

Skoufias, E. and others 2015. “Synergies in Child Nutrition: Interactions of Food Security, Health and
Environment, and Child Care.” Washington, DC, The World Bank.

UNDP (2017) Human Development Report 2016: Human Development for Everyone
UNICEF (United Nations Children’s Fund). 1990. Strategy for Improved Nutrition of Children and Women
in Developing Countries. New York.
World Bank (2016a) Tunisia Poverty Assessment 2015
World Bank (2016b) Tunisia WASH Poverty Diagnostic – Phase 1 report
World Bank (2016c) Country Partnership Framework for the republic of Tunisia for the period 2016-2020
World Bank (2017) Rapport des Comptes WASH
World Development Indicators (2017) World Development Indicators 2017, Washington, DC, World
Bank.
WHO/UNICEF (2015). Progress on drinking water and sanitation: 2015 update and MDG assessment.
Joint Monitoring Programme. Geneva: World Health Organization, and New York: UNICEF



                                                    53
WHO (2016) UN-Water GLAAS TrackFin Initiative - Tracking financing to sanitation, hygiene and water at
national level: Guidance Document
WHO/UNICEF (2016) Thematic Report on Safely Managed Drinking Water Services
WHO (2017) Guidelines for drinking-water quality: fourth edition incorporating the first addendum.
Zahar & Laborde (2007) Modélisation statistique et synthèse cartographique des précipitations
journalières extrêmes de Tunisie, Revue des sciences de l'eau Volume 20, numéro 4, 2007, p. 325-424




                                                  54
Annex 1 – Governorates and regions in Tunisia




                                  55
