  Report No: ACS22455



  Arab Republic of Egypt
  Egypt Youth Engagement
  Summary Note


  June 2017




  GSU05
  MIDDLE EAST AND NORTH AFRICA




Document of the World Bank
Standard Disclaimer:


This volume is a product of the staff of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The World Bank. The findings,
interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper do not necessarily reflect the views of the Executive Directors of The World
Bank or the governments they represent. The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The
boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the part of The
World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.


Copyright Statement:


The material in this publication is copyrighted. Copying and/or transmitting portions or all of this work without permission may be a
violation of applicable law. The International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/ The World Bank encourages dissemination of
its work and will normally grant permission to reproduce portions of the work promptly.

For permission to photocopy or reprint any part of this work, please send a request with complete information to the Copyright
Clearance Center, Inc., 222 Rosewood Drive, Danvers, MA 01923, USA, telephone 978-750-8400, fax 978-750-4470,
http://www.copyright.com/.

All other queries on rights and licenses, including subsidiary rights, should be addressed to the Office of the Publisher, The World Bank,
1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA, fax 202-522-2422, e-mail pubrights@worldbank.org.
                                 Summary Note


                        Egypt: Youth Engagement (P158641)


                                   June 2017




Document of the World Bank
Acronyms and Abbreviations
AF    Additional Financing
DLI   Disbursement-Linked Indicator
GoE Government of Egypt
ICR   Implementation Completion Report
MoIC Ministry of Investment and International Cooperation
M&E Monitoring and Evaluation
NGO Non-Governmental Organization
O&M Operations and Maintenance
PforR Programs for Result
TPM Third Party Monitoring




                                         4
Contents
Acronyms and Abbreviations ......................................................................................................... 4
Executive Summary ........................................................................................................................ 6
1.     Introduction ............................................................................................................................. 9
1.1.      Context ................................................................................................................................. 9
1.2.      Relevance ........................................................................................................................... 10
2.     Project Objectives and Description ....................................................................................... 10
2.1.      Project Development Objectives........................................................................................ 10
2.2.      Project Activities ................................................................................................................ 11
2.3.      Other Significant Changes in Project Design .................................................................... 12
3.     Youth Mainstreaming Methodology ..................................................................................... 12
3.1.      What is Youth Mainstreaming? ......................................................................................... 12
3.2.      Instruments for Youth Mainstreaming ............................................................................... 13
3.3.      Portfolio Review ................................................................................................................ 14
4.     Results ................................................................................................................................... 15
4.1.      Pillar 1: Youth Mainstreaming........................................................................................... 15
4.2.      Pillar 2: Youth M&E .......................................................................................................... 18
4.3.      Pillar 3: Outreach, Communication and Entrepreneurship ................................................ 19
4.4.      Key Factors Affecting Implementation and Outcomes ..................................................... 23
5.     Conclusion ............................................................................................................................. 24
5.1.      Progress ............................................................................................................................ 24
5.2.      Lessons learned .................................................................................................................. 25
5.3.      Next steps ........................................................................................................................... 26
Annex: Activity Overview ............................................................................................................ 28




                                                                         5
Executive Summary
More than half of Egypt’s 91 million citizen are considered youth under 30 years old, and they
were decisive in bringing about the political changes since 2011.1 Despite a number of serious
efforts by the Government of Egypt (GoE) in recent years to develop more inclusive youth policies
to address unemployment, social exclusion and governance, core grievances voiced during the
2011 protests remain unaddressed.2 Contrary to the expectations of young Egyptians, personal
liberties such as freedom of expression and assembly have been further restricted since 2014, and
many young people have been arrested. As a result, many young people feel that mistakes of the
past are being repeated, since very few channels remain available for Egyptians to peacefully voice
dissent or to initiate positive change in their communities, with an ever increasing risk of youth
radicalization and violent response.3
Nevertheless, the resourcefulness and resilience of young people is immense, despite persisting
barriers to economic, social and political inclusion. Throughout the post-2011 period, young
people in Egypt have demonstrated their strife for creating a better future for their families and
communities. Despite many disappointing experiences since the Arab Spring, many youth remain
committed to working towards a modern and inclusive Egypt, governed by accountable
politicians, without corruption and poverty, where all people can live a decent life.4 Young people
are connected globally, and are striving to build an integrated economy that creates jobs and
economic growth, while supporting the social fabric and protecting cultural roots. This openness
allowed the Youth Engagement Initiative to connect and work with young people on a variety of
topics and sectors, including World Bank financed projects and programs, youth-led
entrepreneurship and social innovation programs, and strategic policy issues such as the youth
unemployment challenge and education.
In this context, the Egypt Youth Engagement Project (P158641) has piloted new instruments and
approaches to support inclusion and participation through mainstreaming youth in Bank financed
operations. Mainstreaming across the Bank portfolio denotes the process of a meaningful
engagement and broad integration of young people into structures and activities of
projects. This process aims to strengthen the participation and inclusion of young people in
development projects, and to enhance the benefits that youth can derive from such investments.
Youth Mainstreaming aims at putting young people at the heart of policy making and
planning. Activities ranged from technical support during project preparation and appraisal, to
developing a youth-led third party project monitoring and evaluation mechanism. Mainstreaming
has been applied across sectors and across the project cycle, including Entrepreneurship, Social
Development, Regional Development, Agriculture, Health, Energy, etc. The project work was
complemented by a series of analytical pieces, covering unemployment and inactivity, a mapping
1
  For operational purposes, youth can be broadly defined as the age cohort between 15-30 years of age.
2
  See for example, Fawzy (2012). Accumulative Bad Governance. IDS Bulletin Volume 43 Number 1, London.
3
  See for example, Wardany (2011). The Mubarak Regime’s Failed Youth Policies and the January Uprising. IDS
Bulletin Volume 43 Number 1, London.
4
  Chatham House (2017) Why Aren't More Muslim Brothers Turning to Violence? Blog.


                                                      6
of the social entrepreneurship ecosystem in Egypt, and several guidance notes on (i)
youth-inclusive education sector reform, (ii) Conducting effective consultations with youth, and
(iii) Toolkit on Third Party Monitoring and Evaluation with youth.
In addition, the Project leveraged a variety of youth-led initiatives with a focus on
Entrepreneurship and Social Innovation, thereby directly supporting youth and establishing the
Bank as development partner committed to the next generation. These included the RiseUp
Innovation Summit in Cairo (the largest start-up event in the Middle East); support to the Gesr
Social Entrepreneurship Summit in Cairo (the leading social innovation and incubation event in
Egypt); support to the YouThinkGreen incubator (a new hub for environmental and eco-friendly
entrepreneurs); and the launch of the Arab Creativity Bank (the first crowdfunding platform in the
Middle East for youth-led initiatives financing innovation, arts and culture, and social impact).
To support the overall program, the Project organized a direct outreach campaign to reach
Egypt’s youth. Complementing the programmatic activities, the outreach activities consisted of a
social media campaign for youth, implemented in close cooperation with the Ministry of
International Cooperation (MoIC). The online momentum was supported by offline events, and
the TA made of a series of contributions at youth conferences across Egypt (e.g. Arab Youth
Forum in March 2016; Social Enterprise Week in May 2017). The momentum of all activities of
the platform cumulated in a series of Youth Essay Competitions focusing on Youth Employment
Policies, and Youth Entrepreneurship, which enabled young Egyptians to develop new solutions
and present their ideas to policy makers and development partners. The essay model was highly
effective, and replicated by other development partners such as UNIDO.
Overall, the World Bank through its Egypt Youth Engagement Project (P158641) directly
contributed to providing youth with voice and agency, and impact for young people. The Project
helped to create partnerships and new opportunities, and helped to increase the impact and
participation of Egypt’s youth in World Bank-financed projects and programs in Egypt. A strong
business case for investing in such activities exists, since youth is the largest demographic group of
Egypt’s population and represents the future of the country. The Project has also helped to better
communicate the World Bank mission and its approach to inclusive development, while
supporting the social contract. In addition, support to youth inclusion through mainstreaming can
be pivotal in strengthening the impact of new and ongoing World Bank supported projects.
Looking forward, youth inclusion can only be reached slowly and has to be carefully built from a
bottom up approach, given the challenging context in Egypt and many other MENA countries. In
the current context, the World Bank should continue to build on the tested mainstreaming
approaches and foster internal collaboration to ensure Youth Development can be further
promoted in a cross-sectoral manner and build into a wide range of sectoral interventions. In
addition, future engagement should build on the partnerships developed on the ground in particular
with the Entrepreneurship Ecosystem, which enables youth to engage in innovative ways and
empowers them to find solutions for the most pressing development challenges in their
community.


                                                  7
8
1.      Introduction

1.1. Context
Egypt is a country of mostly young people, many of which were decisive in bringing about political
change in recent years. As a country of 90 million, with half the population under 25 years of age,
Egypt is home to the largest youth population in the Middle East and North Africa (MENA)
region. While young people took to the streets in 2011 chanting “Bread, Freedom and Social
Justice?, the protests did not help to generate solutions to these demands. Youth who had the
ambition to re-build the country were faced by quickly deteriorating labor market conditions and
increasing political instability, while prices soared.
Despite a number of serious efforts by the Government of Egypt (GoE) to develop more inclusive
youth policies, core grievances remain unaddressed. The GoE has implemented a number of labor
market reforms to improve the job situation for young people, although the impact of these
programs is not yet being felt. The GoE also tried to provide more voice and agency to youth, for
example through a new election law that allocates 16 parliament seats for youth. While these are
positive developments, the security concerns have led to mass arrests and civil society has been
effectively paralyzed, just as basic democratic principles such as free and fair elections have been
undermined. As a result, very few channels remain available to young Egyptians to peacefully
voice dissent or to initiate positive change in their communities, with an ever increasing risk of
radicalization and violent response.
Box: What is Youth Inclusion?
The World Bank support to youth combines the ‘lifecycle approach’ to youth, as defined by the
WDR 2007 on Youth in Development as ‘the period of time during which a young person goes
through a formative transition into adulthood’. For operational purposes, the Bank mostly
considers the 15-30 age range during the transition from adolescence to adulthood. For analytical
and operational work, different definitions are sometimes used, depending on context and
objectives.
Taking a lifecycle approach provides a holistic and integrated methodology that connects and
reinforces the various policy support measures in a coherent manner. Research shows that risky
behaviors of youth are frequently inter-related and can have similar origins. Focusing on these
common causes rather than the problems themselves is likely to have a deeper, lasting impact and
help address multiple challenges at the same time.
Youth need challenging experiences that are appropriate, diverse and sufficiently intense. All
young people, whether in school, employment or without work, whether low-income or affluent,
need a mix of services, support and opportunities to stay engaged. They need relevant and reliable
information to make informed decisions and to understand how the choices they make will affect


                                                 9
their lives. They need opportunities for real participation and involvement in a range of community
life.
Positive outcomes require an understanding lives and young people, including their social
environment, relationships and opportunities. Giving greater attention to the care, empowerment
and protection of youth is the soundest way to break the intergenerational transmission of poverty
and risky behavior, and to reduce vulnerability to extremism, while empowering young people and
giving them the knowledge, skills and confidence to meet the global challenges of our times.



1.2. Relevance
The approach of the Egypt Youth Engagement Initiative and its support to (a) Economic
Opportunities; (b) Social Inclusion, and (c) Participation for young people remained fully aligned
with the higher-level regional development objectives of the MENA Regional Strategy. In
particular, the Project is aligned with Pillar 1 of the Regional Strategy, Renewing the Social
Contract, as the TA promotes an inclusive approach towards building trust between citizens and
institutions and supports the strong participation of beneficiaries. It is also well aligned with pillars
2 and 3 of the World Bank’s Country Partnership Framework (CPF) for Egypt.

2.       Project Objectives and Description

2.1. Project Development Objectives
The development objective of the Egypt Youth Engagement Project is to promote and
mainstream youth inclusion in Egypt through the World Bank portfolio. The Project aimed to
support agency, voice and participation of youth (ages 15-30) and strengthen the relationship
with young citizens by providing opportunities for young people in Egypt.
Expected Results. The activities under Project are designed to enable short-term and long-term
impacts along the key dimensions for Youth Inclusion in line with: (a) Economic Opportunities;
(b) Social Inclusion; and (b) Participation. While the mainstreaming will directly contribute to
youth development opportunities and youth inclusion, Youth Third Party Monitoring will give
voice and agency to young people while strengthening project results and accountability. The
support to Entrepreneurship and Social Entrepreneurship will set positive examples and show-case
new opportunities of youth empowerment for young Egyptians, while fostering entrepreneurship
and social inclusion. In the medium term, the combined Youth Engagement is expected to
contribute to a more constructive dialog between youth organizations and public institutions.




                                                   10
2.2. Project Activities
The initiative aimed to reach its objective through three key components: (i) Mainstreaming
Youth Inclusion, (ii) Youth Monitoring and Evaluation, and (iii) Entrepreneurship, Outreach and
Communication.
Pillar 1: Mainstreaming Youth Inclusion focusses on increasing the participation of youth in
development projects and the impact of such projects on young people, by leveraging existing
and new World Bank financed projects and programs in Egypt. Mainstreaming is being targeted
to ensure meaningful impacts for youth beneficiaries, and will take different shapes within each
project. The emphasis is on youth participation and employment creation, for example by setting
specific youth targets in employment and investment programs, or by creating a space for youth
groups as part of a project’s implementation arrangements. Mainstreaming will make small
changes to project designs and implementation arrangements and will be complemented by
consultation workshops and communications activities via: (a) a participatory study to inform
Bank staff about priorities of young people; and (b) holding workshops for pipeline projects to
include youth priorities in design. In addition, an outreach campaign will also allow youth to
better understand development efforts and their impacts.
Pillar 2: Youth-Led Monitoring & Evaluation:5 The Youth Engagement initiative aimed to
support a selected group of World Bank projects which are ongoing and introduce Third Party
Monitoring (TPM) activities by engaging youth associations from universities and civil society
organizations. For each project, the Youth Monitoring & Evaluation activities aim to follow the
World Bank TPM guidelines by: (i) identifying project monitoring needs that would benefit from
monitoring by a TMP mechanism; (ii) assessing the local project context; (iii) selecting the
monitoring methodology or approach most suitable to the context; (iv) designing the
implementation modalities for TMP and drafting relevant Terms of Reference; (v) selecting and
training dedicated youth who will support TMP through youth associations; (vi) implementing
monitoring by trained youth associations; and (vii) continuously monitoring results and assessing
project effectiveness.
Under Pillar II of the TA, the Youth Engagement Initiative further collaborated with the Ministry
of International Cooperation in Egypt (MoIC) in capacity building activities related to M&E. In a
first step the Ministry together with the World Bank conducted a needs assessment to identify
areas of support, which included an M&E Technical Training on Performance Measurement and
Management and Third Party Monitoring training series in Egypt. Both activities were
implemented with the support of an external partner selected through a competitive bidding
process. The Performance Measurement and Management training included a two-day workshop
while the Third Party Monitoring course was implemented over a series of workshops and other
training activities.

5
  Pillar was initially called: Youth Third Party Monitoring (YTPM) and was broadened to support the full M&E
spectrum.


                                                      11
Pillar 3: Outreach, Communication & Entrepreneurship 6 supports youth-led
entrepreneurship and social-entrepreneurship activities, including ideation and incubator events,
as well as an essay competition, and active outreach and communication with youth. The activities
support youth-oriented entrepreneurship and provide exciting new opportunities to develop
innovative ideas to create positive change. The supported grant challenge and incubation events
leverage existing activities with internal and external partners in Egypt, and will be targeted at
youth and in particular young women with a focus on social entrepreneurship.

2.3. Other Significant Changes in Project Design
Following modest delays due to new legislation requiring security clearance for each activity, the
Project closing date was extended from April 30, 2017 to June 30, 2017 to facilitate an orderly
completion of the planned and ongoing activities. The Project was not restructured. However, the
scope of pillars 2 and 3 was somewhat expanded to support innovating through new approaches for
youth engagement.

3.        Youth Mainstreaming Methodology

3.1. What is Youth Mainstreaming?
Definition: Youth mainstreaming denotes a process for a meaningful engagement and broad
integration of young people into structures and activities of development projects to strengthen
the participation and inclusion of young people in development projects, and to enhance the
benefits that youth can derive from such investments. Mainstreaming can take various forms,
which can substantially differ by sector and stage of the project cycle, and is critically dependent
on available resources, capacity and commitment for working with young people. Within the
World Bank country portfolio, youth mainstreaming is an effective mechanism to support voice
and agency, based on the recognition that young people are equal and valuable partners for
development.
Youth Development is cross-sectoral in nature and lends itself to mainstreaming across the Bank
portfolio. When approaching youth through the transition framework from adolescence to
adulthood, it becomes clear that all sectors are related to the lives of young people, with varying
degrees of intensity. For example, the most relevant sectors include education and skills, social
protection and labor, social development, urban and rural development, governance, as well as
poverty, health, environment, ICT, transport, and others. While specialized youth projects have
been implemented in these sectors, the cross-sectoral nature of youth development allows
supporting youth through regular programs in the different sectors by complementing the existing
project design, activities and frameworks.


6
 Pillar was initially called: Entrepreneurship Grant Challenge, and was broadened to support a wider variety of
youth-led initiatives, including social entrepreneurship and an essay competition.


                                                        12
Youth Mainstreaming works through the project cycle approach to support impact, participation
and engagement for young people. Mainstreaming puts young people at the heart of development
and can be applied at any stage of the project cycle, broadly defined as design stage, i.e.
identification, preparation and appraisal; which is followed by implementation, and completion.
Since the implementation phase is typically the longest, it can be further divided into (i)
effectiveness and starting phase; (ii) mid-term of implementation; and (iii) additional financing
(AF) and project extension, where applicable, and is supported by (iv) monitoring of progress.
During the completion phase, projects focus on evaluations, conduct Implementation Completion
Reports (ICRs), and ensure effective mechanisms for Operations and Maintenance (O&M) of
provided infrastructure, when applicable. Available entry points for mainstreaming differ
substantially depending on the project stage, and are typically most meaningful for early-stage
engagement. The other main constraints for effective youth mainstreaming are the available
resources and capacity to absorb and implement of implementing partners.

3.2. Instruments for Youth Mainstreaming
Three categories of mainstreaming instruments exist: Inclusion, Participation and Benefit. The
available instruments can be easily combined and tend to be complementary.
    1. Inclusion refers to introducing the needs and priorities of young people into the
       conceptualization of project activities and is most applicable for the design stage of the
       project cycle (preparation, appraisal) and project extensions. Available inclusion
       instruments include youth consultations, design thinking workshops7, nudging8 and other
       behavioral approaches, outreach campaigns, and other initiatives that can ensure projects
       are youth-informed.
    2. Participation describes the active participation of young people to support project
       implementation, for example as community mobilizers; trainers, coaches and peers;
       enumerators in third party monitoring and other data collection; through participation in
       project steering committees; and as engaged citizens to strengthen accountability and
       safeguards at the local level. Participation can be applied during the implementation and
       completion phase.
    3. Benefit refers to direct and indirect youth beneficiaries of a project. For example, benefit
       can be increased by adjusting the Results Framework or existing targeting mechanisms; by
       revising selected project activities or their implementation; by amending the project
       operations manual; or in selected cases by a restructuring a project. Overall, the impact of
       youth mainstreaming can be very high when applying Benefit instruments, however, these
       instruments can also require substantial transaction costs for the Bank and clients.9

7
  Design thinking is a human-centered approach to innovation that draws from the available instruments to integrate
the needs of people, the possibilities of technology, and the requirements for project success.
8
  Is a concept from the behavioral economics, and can be defined as coaxing or gently encouraging someone to do
something without restricting any options or changing the overall incentive structure.
9
  For example, changes in loan agreements and restructuring are require substantial resources and time and need.


                                                        13
Table 1: Youth Mainstreaming Methodology

                                            Categories of Youth Mainstreaming Instruments

          Project Cycle Stage                 Inclusion      Participation       Benefit

                   Identification                ✔

     Design        Preparation                   ✔

                   Appraisal                     ✔

                   Effectiveness                 ✔                ✔                ✔

                   Mid-term                      ✔                ✔                ✔
Implementation
                   Project extension / AF        ✔                ✔                ✔

                   Monitoring                                     ✔

                   Evaluation                                     ✔

 Completion &
                   ICR                                            ✔
 Sustainability

                   O&M                                            ✔
Source: Egypt Youth Engagement (P158641)




3.3. Portfolio Review
In addition to its other outputs, the Youth Engagement Initiative was instrumental in developing a
methodology for conducting a World Bank country portfolio review for youth mainstreaming. In
essence, the portfolio review is based on a classification of each project regarding project cycle
stage and sector. Portfolio activities that can be considered include grants, lending projects,
programs for results (PforRs), as well as analytical work and other technical assistance, all of
which are covered in the portfolio review carried out under this TA. To identify specific entry
points, the portfolio review is conducted through a deep-dive for each project, including an
analysis of the (i) development objectives, (ii) project components and activities, (iv)
implementation arrangements and partners, and (v) results framework. Potential constraints such
as budget, timeline, and capacity of implementing agencies are also considered. The methodology



                                                14
has been further developed and is currently being applied to the Bank portfolio in Jordan, and is
earmarked for becoming an integral part of the Youth Mainstreaming Toolkit of the MENA
Regional Youth Platform in FY17/18.



4.      Results

4.1. Pillar 1: Youth Mainstreaming
As described above, a comprehensive portfolio review of the World Bank’s Egypt portfolio was
conducted. The Egypt portfolio currently consists of 22 active projects and programs with a total
value of US$8.1 billion, supported by a large analytical and technical assistance program (around
US$200 million in grants). During the portfolio review, a deep-dive was conducted for each
project to establish the potential for youth mainstreaming and the appropriate entry points. The
deep-dive included an analysis of development objectives, components and activities,
implementation, and results framework, as well as progress in the project cycle. Together, these
indicators were the foundation for prioritizing a number of projects in close dialog with the CMU
to ensure strategic alignment. Together with the relevant Task Teams specific entry points and
options for youth mainstreaming support were then developed based on the project cycle approach
explained above. The following projects and specific categories of youth mainstreaming
instruments have been analyzed and/or benefitted from mainstreaming support during at different
project cycle stages.
Table 2: Egypt Youth Mainstreaming in FY16-17

                                          Categories of Youth Mainstreaming Instruments

              Project Cycle                  Inclusion      Participation       Benefit

                                            Education
                                            Program;
                   Identification          Cairo Urban
                                           Development
     Design                                 Program
                                            Agriculture
                   Preparation
                                             Program

                   Appraisal
                                           Upper Egypt
                                              Local                            Inclusive
                                           Development                         Housing
Implementation     Effectiveness              PforR               ✔             Finance
                                            (P157395)                          Program
                                                                              (P150993)


                                               15
                                                                             Cash Transfer
                                                                Energy        Programs:
                  Mid-term                       ✔
                                                               Program        Takaful and
                                                                               Karama

                  Project extension / AF         ✔                ✔                ✔

                  Monitoring                                 Health Care
                                                               Quality
                  Evaluation                                 Improvement
                                                                Project
 Completion &                                                 (P080228)
                  ICR
 Sustainability

                  O&M                                             ✔

                  Youth Unemployment
                  Assessment; Social
                  Entrepreneurship
Analytical Work
                  Mapping;
                  Vulnerability to Youth
                  Radicalization


Despite a challenging operational environment and increasing security restrictions during the
project duration, several mainstreaming activities could be successfully developed, tested and
implemented. While not all of the above listed projects fully benefited from youth mainstreaming
due to the rapidly changing political and security environment, the Youth Engagement TA was
nevertheless able to develop and test new instruments for all three categories of mainstreaming
instruments. The most important mainstreaming interventions are described in more detail below.
Identification: Support to the Education Quality Improvement Program (pipeline) during the
identification stage helped to lay the ground for a stakeholder engagement supporting the
education reform process. Activities included technical aspects of a high-level national education
event with GoE counterparts. The focus of the Mainstreaming contribution was a presentation
based on best-practices regarding participatory approaches, with an emphasis on how youth
engagement can effectively be applied during education sector reform. Mainstreaming Progress:
The Education Program is moving relatively slowly within a challenging sector context and
remains at pipeline stage, which did not enable the Youth Engagement project to provide
additional technical assistance.
Preparation: Upon request from the task team of the Inclusive Agricultural Development
Program in Upper Egypt (P158293), several entry points for youth mainstreaming were
explored. Since the program aimed to directly benefit young people in rural areas, the
Agriculture program has high potential for meaningful youth mainstreaming. The Youth
Engagement Initiative participated in the preparation mission to support voice and agency of


                                               16
young people, and supported the consultation process in order to ensure that the priorities and
needs of young Egyptians will be considered and taken into account at the early stage of project
design. Mainstreaming Progress: Due to a series of considerations by GoE and the Bank, the
Agricultural Development Program is currently on hold.
Appraisal & Effectiveness: Considered as high-priority flagship program by GoE, the Upper
Egypt Local Development PforR (P157395) has benefited from a fast-tracked preparation and
appraisal. In this context, the Youth Engagement Initiative supported critical design elements of
the PforR. These include youth informed Disbursement-linked indicator (DLIs), as well as a
menu of options for youth entrepreneurship training for the Project Appraisal Document and the
Operations Manual. Following the successful Program appraisal, the Youth Engagement
Initiative has provided continuous support to the PforR and offered inputs to the Operation
Manual and Terms of References of local sub-activities to further strengthen entry points for
youth engagement in the implementation process. Mainstreaming Progress: The PforR is
effective and is considered as a complex operation in a low-capacity context in Upper Egypt, and
would benefit from continuous additional mainstreaming support.
Monitoring and Evaluation: To increase participation of young people during project
implementation, the Youth Engagement Initiative developed the conceptual foundations for a
Youth Third Party Monitoring (TPM) system in the context of the Health Care Quality
Improvement Project (P080228) in Upper Egypt. The objective of the youth-led TPM was to
collect critical monitoring and evaluation data to assess the outcomes, efficiency and efficacy of
the health project, with data directly contributing to the results framework, project evaluation and
ICR. Mainstreaming Progress: The Youth Engagement Initiative developed the operating model,
and contracted an implementing civil society organization to coordinate the various stakeholders,
train youth monitors and ensure rigor in data collection and report writing. The launch of the
TPM was put on hold in late FY16 upon request of GoE due to an intervention by the security
services. However, the TPM model has subsequently been further advanced to support Bank
activities in Jordan and potentially Tunisia.
In addition, the Youth Engagement Initiative consulted with a wide range of Task Teams in
virtually all sectors, and coordinated closely with the Program Leaders supporting the Egypt
portfolio. The TA was successful in presenting the value proposition of youth mainstreaming and
collaborate with the various Task Teams. However, in many instances entry points were limited
due to either the nature of the project, or other external reasons. For most active projects in the
portfolio, critical project stages for mainstreaming had already been passed.
In conclusion, effectiveness of youth mainstreaming increases when the following conditions are
fulfilled:
      Mainstreaming is applied during early stage of project cycle (design or early
       implementation)
      Continuous support to projects is provided


                                                17
      It is possible to openly engage with youth and conduct data collection



4.2. Pillar 2: Youth M&E
Participatory methods such as Youth M&E require stakeholder engagement. The Youth
Engagement Initiative aimed to develop and test youth-led M&E methods within selected Bank
financed operations. Since such participatory methods include new external stakeholders in the
form of youth and civil society, it is critical to engage in a dialog with all relevant government
authorities concerned with each project. In addition, overall capacity on M&E methods and on
TPM solutions are essential for key counterparts to ensure effective implementation, with MoIC
taking a pivotal role in the oversight and monitoring process. To that end, and based on an
in-depth need assessment, the Youth Engagement Initiative conducted a series of highly
technical training workshops with MoIC on M&E methods, with a focus on results-based
approaches and youth-led TPM.
   1. TPM Capacity Building (Part 1): Youth Monitoring - Principles and Field Experiences for
      Third Party Monitoring (February 2016). The capacity building exercise provided an
      overview of global best-practice to technical and managerial staff at MoIC to jointly
      explore options for supporting TPM work in Egypt with and through MoIC. Results: The
      workshop was successful in obtaining a clear commitment by MoIC to support and test
      TPM approaches in Bank financed operations, and to identify projects with other
      development partners which could be suitable for TPM.
   2. TPM Capacity Building (Part 2 and 3): Youth Monitoring - Principles and Field
      Experiences for Third Party Monitoring (April and May 2017). The workshops were
      structured as short series, comprising an orientation and a following deep-dive session,
      both targeting technical M&E staff at MoIC. The orientation workshop introduced the
      concept of Social Accountability as critical tool for strengthening citizen engagement in
      service delivery, exploring solid applications through the Third Party Monitoring process
      and aimed to raise awareness about Social Accountability (SA) tools at both the local and
      Governmental levels. The deep-dive workshop focused on Social Accountability and
      participatory methods in practice by highlighting lessons learned from the application of
      Third Party Monitoring in projects, with external stakeholders sharing their
      implementation practices with MoIC staff.
       The Egypt Youth Imitative partnered with an experienced NGO (CARE Egypt) to
       provide orientation workshops on tested Third Party Monitoring methods and toolkits,
       which have involved youth and the civil society groups. Results: The workshops: (a)
       raised the participants’ awareness about the SA tools, and emphasized the importance of
       citizen engagement in M&E; (b) showcased practical examples and applications of SA in
       Egypt, highlighting the experiences of youth monitors; and (c) provided an avenue for



                                               18
       CSOs and youth groups to directly interface with the Government officials, allowing
       them to collaborate by identifying entry points to increase citizen engagement in order
       to improve of projects, through project design, implementation and evaluation. The
       workshops were attended by a delegation from Ministry of Investment and International
       Cooperation (MIIC) M&E unit, Youth representatives, Social Fund for Development
       (SFD), CARE Egypt and the World Bank. The workshops were interactive and sustained
       the interest of the stakeholders involved. As a direct result, it was agreed that MoIC
       would arrange a smaller workshop to tailor the TPM model to the Ministry’s M&E
       Agenda to ensure aid effectiveness and citizen satisfaction.
   3. Results-Based M&E Workshop (March 2017). The training aimed to establish capacities
      for Performance Measurement and Management (PMM) among high-level staff from
      MoIC. In particular, the training enabled the workshop participants to apply the
      instruments and methods which are used for PMM in line with best practice. The training
      was case-study based and followed a four-step approach, consisting of:
       an initial expert input in order to provide the participants with the methodological and
          theoretical knowledge for the further discussion,
       an input (case study) from the participants relating to the current status of the
          instruments/methods/approaches to be developed further,
       a guided group work for developing further the existing instruments, methods and
          approaches,
       A plenary discussion, assessment and finalization of the improved instruments.
       During the training focus was on the following topics, which had been prepared and
       customized with regards to the needs and priorities of participants:
          Performance measurement and management
          Results chains and results models
          Development and application of performance indicators
          Project and program risk assessment
          Performance rating
          Results-based monitoring and evaluation


4.3. Pillar 3: Outreach, Communication and Entrepreneurship
Overall, the activities under Pillar 3 were effectively implemented and generated substantial
outreach and visibility. The Youth Engagement Initiative was able to increase knowledge
exchange and promote youth inclusion activities within and outside the World Bank in Egypt.
Through the analytical work, the Youth Engagement Initiative was able to shed light on youth
related risk factors (e.g. Unemployment Brief), and inform policy makers (e.g. through a
complimentary note on Education), which draws on global practices whilst highlighting successful



                                              19
implementation mechanisms. By leveraging selected high-level youth events as described below,
the Youth Engagement Initiative was able to exchange knowledge with a variety of stakeholders
and promote the World Bank’s youth inclusion agenda. In addition, such exposure allowed the
Youth Engagement Initiative to identify and test further avenues for the youth engagement, which
can be capitalized on by future youth engagement efforts.
Rebuilding the social contract requires addressing existing barriers and building trust between
citizens and the state. Engaging with youth can help to accomplish these objectives by directly
supporting voice and agency among young people, while also highlighting positive role models
and the potential of participatory youth inclusion with public authorities. The activities
implemented under this pillar directly support and reinforce the MENA Regional Strategy and
Egypt’s Country Partnership Framework (CPF), by (i) actively engaging youth, (ii) showcasing
youth leaders and role models among peers, (iii) highlighting the resourcefulness and innovative
solutions developed by youth, and (iv) showcasing new opportunities for youth inclusion to public
authorities and development partners by leveraging the convening role of the Bank.


a.     Outreach & Communication
Social Media Outreach
The Youth Engagement Initiative supported MoIC in implementing a Social Media Outreach on
selected development topics with relevance for youth. The social media outreach was supported by
infographics, project results and key figures to stimulate an active online debate and to promote
engagement of the Egyptian young people. The outreach resulted in valuable feedback and input
for MoIC and helped to shape its communication approach, thereby directly supporting the
strengthening of the social contract. The online debate also revealed some of the challenges public
institutions face when directly communicating with youth and it is recommended to work with
experienced online moderators.


Youth Essay Competition
The essay competitions were successful in generating creative ideas and solutions, attracting
several hundred submissions, of which the best contributions were rewarded. The essay
competition topics were very specific and aimed to provide solutions to concrete development
challenges related to employment and entrepreneurship.10 Together with the Economic Research
Forum Cairo (ERF), the Youth Engagement Initiative implemented two national competitions in
January 2017 and May 2017, and is collaborating with a regional essay competition with UNIDO
in Upper Egypt (June 2017). The competitions were open to all Egyptians up to the age 30, and
invited youth to submit an essay in Arabic or English. Finalists presented their essays at an
10
  (i) Youth Employment in Egypt, and (ii) Entrepreneurship: Tackling Social Challenges. The Youth Essay
Competitions was very popular among Egypt’s youth.



                                                  20
Award Ceremony in Cairo to a high-level audience of policy makers, sector specialists and youth
stakeholders. The winning essays received a financial reward and essays are published online.
Overall, the essay competition enabled young Egyptians to develop new solutions and present
their ideas to policy makers and development partners. Making use of their resourcefulness and
resilience allows young people to effectively strengthen voice and agency, while enabling the
Bank to engage directly with the youth community. The approach was highly effective as
engagement instrument and it has been rapidly replicated by other development partners such as
UNIDO.


b.       Entrepreneurship
The Youth Engagement TA partnered with international and local key actors to organize, support
and leverage multiple entrepreneurship and social innovation events. The main purpose behind
the events was to promote youth entrepreneurship, strengthen the growing entrepreneurship
ecosystem; expose young Egyptian’s to high-level experiences, and to help emphasize the
importance of social change. These activities included (i) the RiseUp Innovation Summit in
Cairo (the largest start-up event in the Middle East) and study tour; (ii) support to the Gesr Social
Entrepreneurship Summit (a leading social innovation and incubation event in Egypt); (iii)
support to the YouThinkGreen incubator in Egypt (a new hub for entrepreneurs with
environmental and eco-friendly solutions); and (iv) the launch of the Arab Creativity Bank (the
first crowdfunding platform in the Middle East for youth-led initiatives financing innovation, arts
and culture, and social impact).

        RiseUp Innovation Summit (December 2016) and Study Tour (April 2017)
         The Youth Engagement TA, together with the IFC, leveraged the RiseUp Innovation
         Summit, one of the largest entrepreneurship event in the MENA region in 2016, which
         was attended by more than 7,000 participants. The annual summit which is implemented
         by the RiseUp startup offers a unique entrepreneurship ecosystem serving young
         entrepreneurs and startups effectively, and allowing investors and other service providers
         to offer their support. The Youth Engagement TA supported a strategic activity to turn
         the event into an in-depth learning and training opportunity through a Study Tour. Six
         winning startups were competitively selected to exploire first hand global startup
         ecosystems (i.e. events, conferences, and summits taking place there in a
         entrepreneurship hub). The TA supported this year’s study tour to San Francisco in April
         2017. In total 6 startups were able to participate in the study tour which included
         technical workshops, sightseeing events and the visit of several tech companies (i.e.
         Google, AirBnB, etc.) and a pitch training and competition at the end. Overall the study
         tour was very well received and the entrepreneurs were able to benefit from the unique
         program and high quality of learning events.

        GESR Social Innovation Summit (May 2017)


                                                 21
    The summit is the first of its kind enabling social entrepreneurs to turn their ideas into
    reality and build their socially oriented startups. Such projects tend to have substantial
    impacts on development outcomes and communities, while operating on business models.
    The Youth Engagement TA supported a critical element of the summit by ensuring all
    preparations were led by an experienced event manager. Overall, the Social Innovation
    Summit was a successful event attended by more than 1,400 aspiring social entrepreneurs
    seeking networking opportunities, and benefiting from high-profile speakers, sharing
    experiences, holding critical discussions and developing new ideas, methods and business
    models.

   YouThinkGreen incubator, Egypt (May-June 2017)
    The Sustainability and Entrepreneurship incubator program offered by YouThinkGreen
    Egypt supports youth in developing eco-friendly innovative solutions to local
    sustainability challenges. The incubator offers an extended program to a competitively
    selected group of finalists to igniting their entrepreneurial skills and introducing them to
    the sustainability science. The 2017 theme is “Industrial Waste Management? which will
    enable winners to identify key problems and challenges using modern design thinking
    methodologies and techniques. The program will guide participants through the
    development of their business and financial models to be ready for a tailored incubation
    before entering the Egyptian market. The Youth Engagement TA supported the technical
    support for the incubation program during May and June 2017, to deepen the impact of
    the incubator for a more sustained impact.

   Arab Creativity Bank (June 2017)
    To close critical gaps to financing for young entrepreneurs, social innovators and artists,
    this philanthropic crowdfunding platform will be launched for youth in the Middle East.
    The platform, will offer financing to a number of young participants who will be selected
    competitively based on technical proposals for crowdfunding under three separate
    funding windows: (i) technical innovations, (ii) arts and culture, and (iii) social
    entrepreneurship initiatives. The platform is intended to ignite the entrepreneurial skills
    of young participants while enhancing a comprehensive development model that includes
    social values, arts and culture. The program will guide the participants through the
    development of their business and financial models, in preparation for entering the
    market. In addition, the platform will offer existing market stakeholders promising
    opportunities to collaborate with young innovators, in order to collectively improve the
    local economy. The Youth Engagement TA is supporting the launch of the Arab
    Creativity Bank during Ramadan 2017.

   Arab Youth Forum, Alexandria (February 2016)
    To build partnerships with youth organizations and development partners, the Youth
    Engagement TA participated in the Arab Youth Forum, which was supported by UNIDO


                                            22
       and other donors, and focused on the green growth. The event use critical in supporting a
       mapping of stakeholders and potential partners.


Analytics: NEET Analysis and Education Note
To foster knowledge exchange and promote youth inclusion policies, the Task Team published
several policy briefs. First the Youth Engagement Initiative produced a note on Youth Not in
Education, Employment or Training (NEETs). The analysis found that the three main risk factors
for inactivity in Egypt are (i) low education, (ii) gender and (iii) location (see Figure 1). 70% of
NEET youth have a vocational high school degree or below, 87% of NEET youth are women
and 83% are found in rural areas. Among younger cohorts the largest proportion of inactive
youth is found among those who have achieved less in terms of education and even more so for
women. Overall the risk factors reflect a combination of lack of adequate employment
opportunities corresponding with social norms and expectations.
Another policy brief prepared by the Youth Engagement Initiative was entitled “Youth
Engagement in Education? and this summarized relevant guidelines for policy makers on how to
engage young people in education planning, drawing on global best practices and successful
implementation mechanisms. The brief highlighted the benefit of increased youth engagement in
the education sector.



4.4. Key Factors Affecting Implementation and Outcomes
Factors contributing positively to Project implementation and outcomes included the PDO and
funding mechanisms, which provided sufficient flexibility for innovating and testing new
approaches for youth engagement in the largest post-Arab Spring country. The Project design
through pillars allowed a focused implementation while supporting necessary course corrections
and provided adaptability throughout.
Overall, the Project results reveal that the design of activities was pertinent to the direct
beneficiaries and contributed positively to Project outcomes. The quality of the activities received
very positive feedback and was reported as satisfactory by participants. Activities under all three
pillars allowed to strengthen youth inclusion and engaged with youth from nearly all governorates
through events, essay and entrepreneurship competitions, and an active dialog with young people.
Importantly, the Project helped the Bank to engage constructively and meaningfully with young
people through a multiplicity of channels by showcasing positive examples and supporting youth
leaders.
Factors contributing negatively to implementation and outcomes included the rapidly
deteriorating political environment, which prevented the project from engaging with advocacy
groups and youth NGOs due to fear of reprisal for youth activists, and also made it legally



                                                23
impossible to directly leverage civil society organizations, as initially planned. The Government’s
commitment to youth inclusion is being challenged by security concerns, despite a number of
high-level efforts to reduce youth unemployment and foster youth-led entrepreneurship. In
particular, the trust relationship between young people and public authorities deteriorated
significantly following the arrest of thousands of Egyptian youth without due process or legitimate
charges during the Project period. In this context, the Project innovated in a very sensitive context
in close coordination with the CMU and relevant authorities. It is due to the commitment and
support of the CMU that the Project was able to charter new waters and innovate with youth.

5.       Conclusion

     5.1.       Progress
Progress of the Project in promoting and mainstreaming youth inclusion in Egypt through the
World Bank portfolio has been very effective. The Egypt Youth Engagement Project developed
and applied a “youth filter? to promote and mainstream youth inclusion in Egypt through the
World Bank portfolio. In addition, it helped to leverage entrepreneurial skills and creativity of
youth, and their drive for creating a better future through a variety of activities and event
formats. Overall, this work has been different and path breaking for Egypt, and helped to support
agency, voice and participation of young people in Egypt.
The Youth Engagement Initiative aimed to foster youth inclusion by supporting and enabling
agency, voice and participation through a number of small activities in a challenging country
context. In particular, the youth mainstreaming and youth-led monitoring and evaluation
activities aimed to enable youth to take on a role as agents of positive change and create
opportunities to strengthen the role of youth in development policies. Even though several
activities were affected by the changing security environment and could not be fully
implemented, the Project managed to develop templates for effective engagement, and was able
to text a number of new instruments and approaches. The solutions and tools developed by this
TA have generated new demand across MNA and are being currently being prepared for
application in in other countries, notably Jordan and Tunisia.
The main achievements and takeaways from each Pillar can be summarized as follows:
        Pillar 1: Mainstreaming Youth Inclusion: The Youth Engagement Initiative elaborated
         a preliminary categorization of instruments for mainstreaming youth in World Bank
         operations, which was subsequently applied in a selection of ongoing operations. A
         youth-based country portfolio review was also conducted.
        Pillar 2: Youth-Led Monitoring & Evaluation: The Youth Engagement Initiative
         collaborated with MoIC to establish critical capacity for applying participatory M&E
         systems. While multiple trainings took place and overall technical skills improved
         sharply, the security restrictions in the country made it difficult to apply the new lessons



                                                 24
       to specific operations. However, the methods and tools developed are currently being
       applied in other countries in the region.
      Pillar 3: Outreach, Communication & Entrepreneurship: Overall, the activities by the
       TA were effectively implemented and generated substantial outreach and visibility. The
       Youth Engagement Initiative was able to increase knowledge exchange and promote
       youth inclusion activities within and outside the World Bank in Egypt. Firstly, through its
       analytical work, the TA was able to shed light on youth related risk factors (e.g.
       Unemployment Brief), and inform policy makers (e.g. through a complimentary note on
       Education, which draws on global practices whilst highlighting successful
       implementation mechanisms). Secondly, the Youth Engagement Initiative was also able
       to exchange knowledge with a variety of stakeholders and promote the World Bank’s
       youth inclusion agenda by leveraging selected high-level youth events, in particular the
       Arab Youth Forum 2016, the RiseUp Innovation Summit 2016, Gesr Social Innovation
       Summit 2017, YouThinkGreen incubator for Waste Management in 2017; and the Arab
       Creativity Bank philanthropic crowdfunding platform in 2017.



5.2. Lessons and Recommendations
Lessons Learnt
Lessons for mainstreaming youth in World Bank operations. Drawing on the experience of
Pillar 1 and 2, the TA concludes that the effectiveness of youth mainstreaming increases when
the following conditions are fulfilled:
      Mainstreaming is applied during early stage of project cycle (design or early
       implementation)
      Continuous support to projects is provided
      It is possible to collect data and openly engage with youth on monitoring and evaluation.
Lessons for external youth engagement. Based on the experience on pillar 3, comprehensive
youth engagement would require supporting youth as well as government authorities, in an effort
to establish and nourish a culture of dialog and trust. Without public figures and implementing
agencies directly engaging youth and establishing meaningful two-way communication, ongoing
efforts will have limited impact, since effective inclusion requires joint participation. In this
context, similar youth initiatives should consider providing technical assistance to help the
governments experiment with tools and approaches for incorporating youth considerations in
national strategies and policy formulation and supporting the establishment of spaces to allow for
more active youth, including participatory needs assessments. Consultation with Youth Groups
will be another critical element to be more inclusive, where they are feasible and permitted by the
government. In the absence of such dialog, support to entrepreneurship activities, especially social


                                                25
entrepreneurship and startups with linkages to Bank operations (by sector or location) can be
effective ways to support youth inclusion while establishing strong linkages to development
priorities.
Lessons on Social-Entrepreneurship. The leading trend for youth engagement, which can be
observed in other MENA countries, is a dramatic shift from traditional civil society groups (often
supporting charity work and advocacy), towards a new generation of change-making organizations
through (Social) Entrepreneurship initiatives. The new venues allow young people to develop
concrete meaningful solutions to the challenges faced by their communities, while avoiding the
restrictions and government control directed at traditional civil society groups by organizing
themselves as private sector firms. Social Entrepreneurship in particular is not just a new trend
aiming to fill a niche on the social development sector, but instead a structural transformation of
how the young generation combines results-based methods with entrepreneurial market-based
principles.
Recommendations
On the internal side, it is recommended to replicate the youth mainstreaming approach in other
countries by drawing on the tested instruments and methods. Mainstreaming requires a multi-stage
approach, beginning with (i) a systematic portfolio analysis of the country or Global Practice to
identify feasible projects and programs. The portfolio review yields (ii) a shortlist of Bank
operations which are likely to yield the highest impact regarding youth inclusion and participation.
Next, (iii) the selected projects and programs will require at least 18-24 months of ongoing support
to ensure the youth mainstreaming instruments can be agreed with all project stakeholders on the
client side and with the World Bank, followed by a testing and fine-tuning of the approach, and
providing regular operational support during the implementation. In addition, youth
mainstreaming activities should be based on effective consultations with youth, and build on an
evidence base regarding the youth sector and existing needs and barriers.
On the external side, it is recommended that the Bank approach youth in selected countries with a
systematic support program to social entrepreneurship and other activities that are increasingly
taking the place of traditional civil society organizations.
In selected cases, it may also be possible to support Youth Advisory Councils which work with
Country Offices, and which can help the Bank to better understand how ongoing and pipeline
operations address the needs and challenges of young people. Such councils have been
implemented previously by the Bank, and evidence has been aggregated. While it was not possible
to implement such council in Egypt, it would yield higher level youth mainstreaming, as it would
be located at an intersection of the internal and external track.

5.3. Next steps
On the internal side, the mainstreaming methodology developed under this TA is already being
applied to other countries and projects in MNA. Mainstreaming of pipeline operations requires


                                                26
sustained engagement, and these activities will be merged into the recently launched MENA
Regional Youth Platform, which is a RVP initiative with support from all GPs.
On the external side, encouraging youth participation will be the start of an empowering process,
which begins with informing and involving young people in consultation processes, and leads on
to their inputs being taken into account in the decision-making process in the longer term. In order
to engage young Egyptians, it would be recommended to transition towards a programmatic
approach, which leverages specific topics and activities in a more sustainable manner. An example
of this would be to focus on social entrepreneurship, as it combines economic and social inclusion
opportunities.
Overall, it is recommended to scale up the youth mainstreaming approach across the Bank’s MNA
portfolio in an effort to support the strategic priorities of the region. These include the Social
Contract and also relate to more inclusive societies and better services, which would be directly
strengthened through a scaled-up youth mainstreaming approach.
Finding and recommendations of the Egypt Youth Engagement TA are being shared both
internally and externally. Project outputs under all pillars have already been shared externally, in
particular MoIC has been regularly briefed on the progress under the Youth Mainstreaming
activities (Pillar 1) and directly participating in the Youth M&E activities and capacity building
(Pillar 2), whereas all relevant outputs under Pillar 3 such as the results of the Essay Competition,
support to the various entrepreneurship events and youth related online communications has been
shared externally. On the internal side, elements the project report will be distilled into a youth
mainstreaming toolkit, which will be shared with the MNA CMUs to ensure the recommendations
can be applied to a variety of operations. The toolkit will be drafted as part of the MENA regional
youth platform.




                                                 27
Annex: Activity Overview
Full annex and documentation is attached as ZIP File.




                                              28
