                                                     WPS7980


Policy Research Working Paper                       7980




               Public Mosquito Abatement
                A Cluster Randomized Experiment

                               Josselin Thuilliez
                                 Yves Dumont




Development Economics Vice Presidency
Operations and Strategy Team
February 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 7980


  Abstract
  Mosquito abatement is a public good. A simultaneous                               stagnant water around the house, on a number of out-
  model of mosquito abundance and abatement response is                             comes, including objective entomological indices and
  developed. This paper uses data from a cluster random-                            self-declared protective behaviors. Empirical results doc-
  ized controlled experiment conducted over the period                              ument that households reduce their protective behavior
  2012–2014 in urban areas of Réunion in France to study                            in response to public control. This study holds implica-
  the impact of WHO-recommended mechanical elimi-                                   tions for arboviral disease control, including Zika control.
  nation techniques, which involve removing sources of




  This paper is a product of the Operations and Strategy Team, Development Economics Vice Presidency. It is part of a
  larger effort by the World Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy
  discussions around the world. Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org.
  The authors may be contacted at josselin.thuilliez@univ-paris1.fr.




         The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
         issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
         names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
         of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
         its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                       Produced by the Research Support Team
 Public Mosquito Abatement: A Cluster Randomized Experiment.
                           Josselin Thuilliez and Yves Dumont




JEL: O12, I15, I25

Keywords: Mosquito abatement; Public control; Private behaviors




Josselin Thuilliez (corresponding author) is a researcher at CNRS - Centre d’économie de
la Sorbonne, 106-112, Boulevard de l’Hôpital, 75013 Paris. His email address is
josselin.thuilliez@univ-paris1.fr. Yves Dumont is a researcher at CIRAD UMR AMAP,
34398 Montpellier cedex 5. His email address is yves.dumont@cirad.fr. We are very
grateful to Achyuta Adhvaryu, Emmanuelle Augeraud-Véron, Jean-Claude Berthélemy,
Didier Fontenille, Pierre-Yves Geoffard, Mark Gersovitz, Maria Kuecken, Alessandro
Tarozzi, and numerous seminar participants for their valuable comments and suggestions.
Special thanks also go to ARS-OI and their team of coordinators, technicians, and agents.
In particular, we would like to extend our gratitude to Jean-Sébatien Dehecq, Hélène
Thebault, and Olivier Reilhes, the coordinators Thomas Margueron and Manuel Rodicq,
as well as the many technicians who helped in the implementation and organization of the
fieldwork. Research assistance from Claire Bellia, Marie Hamsany, and Sera Onalan was
greatly appreciated. Finally, the study could not have been achieved without the dedication
and patience shown by all the agents who conducted the interviews. This program was
funded by the French Ministry of Health and Les Fonds Européens and Le Conseil
Régional de la Réunion (FEDER). It was undertaken jointly by ARS (Agence Régionale
de Santé), IRD (Institut de Recherche Développement), CNRS (Centre National de la
Recherche Scientifique) in collaboration with CRVOI (Centre de Recherche et de Veille
sur les maladies émergentes dans l’Océan Indien). The funders had no role in study design,
data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of the manuscript. The
content is solely the responsibility of the authors.
1         Introduction
As emphasized by Carlson and Debord (1976), “ the absence of nuisance insects which are
highly mobile is a public good. Mosquitoes are similar to other airborne irritants in that
they ignore property lines and decrease human health and comfort. Most mosquito control
originated for human disease control but has gradually changed to nuisance prevention ”. In
this article, we study environmental management methods to control mosquitoes and reduce
human-vector contact. Particularly, we assess a zone-based public vector control program1 .
We focus on mechanical elimination techniques that, in this study, refer primarily to the
elimination of sources of stagnant water to reduce the mosquito population around the house.
Mechanical elimination is among the cheapest interventions recommended by the World
Health Organization for vector management2 and can therefore result in high monetary
returns. Such methods have been recommended by the World Health Organization (WHO)
for the control of arboviral diseases and malaria (for exophagic/exophilic aedes or anopheles
that are best controlled through the destruction of breeding sites) and can be implemented
either by an external agency or directly by households in their private dwellings (WHO,
2009).
        In this article, we argue that eliminating sources of stagnant water is a choice made by
the household and, consequently, that adoption rates reﬂect the household’s trade-oﬀ be-
tween costs and eﬃcacy. In addition, we show that a mechanical elimination intervention
piloted by an external agent might act as a substitute for private protection, rather than as
a complement. Moreover, if individuals do not account for the aggregate consequences of
    1
      Vector control is any method to limit or eradicate the mammals, birds, insects or other arthropods that
transmit disease pathogens.
    2
      According to WHO (2009) environmental vector management methods are of three types: “ (i) Envi-
ronmental modiﬁcation – long-lasting physical transformations to reduce vector larval habitats, such as
installation of a reliable piped water supply to communities, including household connections. (ii) Envi-
ronmental manipulation or mechanical elimination – temporary changes to vector habitats involving the
management of “essential” containers, such as frequent emptying and cleaning by scrubbing of water-storage
vessels, ﬂower vases and desert room coolers; cleaning of gutters; sheltering stored tyres from rainfall; recy-
cling or proper disposal of discarded containers and tyres; management or removal from the vicinity of homes
of plants such as ornamental or wild bromeliads that collect water in the leaf axils. (iii) Changes to human
habitation or behaviour – actions to reduce human–vector contact, such as installing mosquito screening on
windows, doors and other entry points, and using mosquito nets while sleeping during daytime.” In addition
to environmental management, chemical control using larvicides, adulticides or insecticides is intended to
reduce mosquito densities, longevity and other transmission parameters. Biological control is based on the
introduction of organisms that prey upon, parasitize, compete with or otherwise reduce populations of the
target species.



                                                      1
their individual compensation, the externality may lead to an over-compensatory response.
As a result, those who received the intervention may be worse oﬀ than if they had not
received it. Similarly, Bennett (2012) highlighted the potentially perverse eﬀects of public
health interventions in the Philippines and showed that piped water introduction increased
poor sanitary behaviors and thus actually led to a slight increase in the incidence of diar-
rhea in children. Our study contributes to the understanding of public policy aspects of
environmental management. Achieving widespread adoption of appropriate behaviors re-
quires costly sustained subsidies or taxation (Arrow, 1963; Gersovitz and Hammer, 2005).
Moreover, two systematic reviews of published evaluations have been conducted that as-
sess zone-based dengue or chikungunya control programs (Heintze, Garrido and Kroeger,
2007; Ballenger-Browning and Elder, 2009). They show that existing studies have generated
little concrete evidence that demonstrates the eﬃcacy of mosquito abatement programs in
reducing the risk of arboviruses.
       Our study takes place in Réunion, a French island and an overseas French department lo-
cated in the Indian Ocean, where Aedes albopictus 3 is well established and the socio-economic
development of the population is high. Education levels are also high, as is knowledge of
disease transmission and recommended practices speciﬁc to the elimination of larval sites.
Though our study is applicable to risk from dengue and chikungunya4 and Aedes mosquitoes,
it also oﬀers implications for Zika control. Réunion has experienced a number of epidemics
due to the favorable environment it provides for the mosquito species to thrive. Past out-
breaks of chikungunya and dengue prompted authorities on the island to implement strategies
to control mosquito density. Following the resurgence of dengue in 2004, the local vector con-
trol services, referred to as the ‘Services de Lutte Antivectorielle’, or LAV, began developing
a control strategy targeted at urban vectors, primarily Aedes albopictus. The major chikun-
gunya outbreak that swept through Réunion in 2005-2006 further increased the authorities’
motivation to establish entomologic surveillance of Aedes albopictus in all urban areas. This
surveillance eﬀort remains in place through the monitoring of traditional stegomyia indices
   3
     Aedes albopictus, commonly known as the Asian tiger mosquito, is an anthropophilic, daytime-biting
species that rapidly establishes itself in new urban areas, owing to its propensity to breed in both artiﬁcial and
natural containers of stagnant water (Benedict et al., 2007). The tiger mosquito is particularly threatening
due to its potential for transmitting a wide range of arboviruses, including dengue, chikungunya, yellow fever,
and several other types of encephalitides (Gratz, 2004; Angelini et al., 2008; Delatte et al., 2010; Paupy et al.,
2010).
   4
     There are no speciﬁc antiviral medicines or vaccines against chikungunya and dengue.


                                                        2
at immature stages, (i.e., the Container Index, House Index, Breteau Index)5 as used in
other control programs (Pierre et al., 2006). Aedes albopictus remains the main target of
the work of the LAV, a service organized by the Regional Health Agency (Agence Régionale
de la Santé, or ARS) in Réunion. The vector control strategy integrates four core activ-
ities: vector surveillance, mechanical control, chemical control (larvicides and adulticides
being applied rarely), and public health education campaigns. Vector control services also
undertake the early detection and treatment of cases of arboviral infection to prevent the
spread of new epidemics. Generally, the day-to-day activities of LAV oﬃcers involve yard
sanitation, education, and the promotion of vector control at the household level. These
oﬃcers have been routinely visiting households in Réunion since 2006 and provide education
to families on the importance of eliminating sources of stagnant water around the house,
such as emptying water from pots and the plates placed under potted plants.
       Given the investment of both ﬁnancial and human resources toward the control of Aedes
albopictus and the observed rise of Aedes albopictus density in Réunion from 2006 to 2011
despite public action (Boyer, Foray and Dehecq, 2014), we begin by modeling the household
decision to eliminate larval sites before providing an experimental test of the theory, as
recommended by Frondel and Schmidt (2005). The aim of a randomized controlled trial
(RCT) is to identify whether the current strategy - of eliminating the presence of larval
breeding sites and changing the behavior of persons by means of home visits - is eﬀective.
This article thus presents one of the few RCTs that evaluate the impact of public sector
mechanical elimination techniques (eliminating sources of stagnant water in and around
private dwellings). In our study, we use data collected during a pre-intervention household
survey conducted in July 2012 (baseline) and a post-intervention survey completed two years
later in March-April 2014 (endline survey). The intervention took place in January-February
2014. Each survey was conducted by interviewing approximately 1000 households, using
similar sample sizes from various urban areas in Réunion. Since the study design assigned a
randomly determined subset of zones (or clusters) to have access to mechanical elimination
of larval habitats by the LAV, the data can be used to gauge the impact of increased access
   5
    The house index is deﬁned as the percentage of houses infested by larvae and/or pupae. The container
index is deﬁned as the percentage of water-holding containers with active immature stages of mosquitoes.
The Breteau index is deﬁned as the number of positive containers per 100 houses, a positive container being
one that contains larval and/or pupal stages of mosquito.



                                                    3
to external (public) mechanical elimination of larval habitats on private protective behaviors
in study areas. We show that the elimination of larval habitats by an external public agent
increases entomological indexes three months after the intervention in the treated group
relative to the control group.
    The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides a simultaneous
model of mosquito abundance and abatement response. The experiment is then described
in Section 3. We include the details of the estimation strategy in Section 4, where we also
describe the results. Finally, Section 5 concludes and outlines the main policy implications.



2     The simple model underlying the experiment
Following Bennett (2012), we begin with a simple economic model in which a zone consists
of two households, which are indexed by i. We focus on Nuisance reduction instead of health
because the intervention takes place during an inter-epidemic stage when human infection
is absent, and we assume that nuisance is proxied by the number of mosquitoes, Mi . Thus,
we regard Household utility as an additively separable function of Mosquitoes and other
consumption, ci .
    For simplicity, we assume that there is only a single technology to protect people from
(the nuisance of) mosquitoes: mechanical elimination of larval sites. Mechanical elimination
can be provided publicly, when public agents remove the larval sites, or privately, when indi-
viduals remove the larval sites. In our experiment, public intervention is allocated randomly
(exogenously) at the zone level.
    The number of mosquitoes, Mi , is a decreasing and convex function of the public interven-
tion, P ub, and private elimination of breeding sites by both households, P rivi and P riv−i .
By including P riv−i , we explicitly incorporate an externality. This externality arises because
the elimination of larval sites by one person directly decreases the nuisance for the others
and thus increases their comfort.
    Households, which are endowed with income, Y , face positive prices of public interven-
tion (pP ub ), through taxes, individual behavior (pP riv ), and other consumption (pc ). Thus,
each household i wants to minimize the Mosquito nuisance and the consumption, which is




                                               4
equivalent to solve the following utility minimization problem:


                                  min (Mi (Privi , Priv−i , Pub))) + ci ) ,                                (1)
                                 Privi ,ci



or, equivalently, to solve the following maximization problem


                                max − (Mi (Privi , Priv−i , Pub))) + ci ) ,                                (2)
                               Privi ,ci



subject to
                                   pP riv P rivi + pP ub P ub + pc ci ≤ Yi .                               (3)

We recover a standard maximization problem with constraint: maxx f (x) subject to g (x) ≤
C , with C a positive real. The Lagrangian is L(x, λ) = f (x) + λ (C − g (x)). Accord-
ing to the Kuhn-Tucker theorem, if x∗ ≥ 0 and λ∗ ≥ 0 verify the Kuhn-Tucker con-
ditions, i.e. ∂j f (x∗ ) − λ∗ ∂j g (x∗ ) = 0 and λ∗ (C − g (x∗ )) = 0, then, f being concave,
and g being linear (convexe), x∗ is a solution of the constrained problem. We set x∗ =
                                   ∗
(P ub∗ (P rivi , ci ; P, Yi ),P rivi (P ub, ci ; P, Yi ) and c∗
                                                              i (P rivi , P ub; P, Yi )), where P is the set of

cost parameters, i.e., P = (pP ub , pP riv , pc ).
       We proceed to derive some comparative statics that motivate the randomized controlled
experiment. We treat Household 2 as the rest of the zone. Several situations may be derived
from this simple model6 . For the reader’s convenience we describe below all cases, and discuss
after what case(s) is (are) plausible according to the experiments conducted in Réunion:

       • Case 1 : if public and individual private mechanical elimination are substitutes (∂P rivi /∂P ub ≺
         0) and

          (a) if the elimination levels of neighbors are complements (∂P rivi /∂P riv−i               0), then

                                                   ∗
                                             dP riv1   ∂P riv1 ∂P riv1 ∂P riv2
                                                     ≈        +                                            (4)
                                              dP ub     ∂P ub   ∂P riv2 ∂P ub

                                                       ∗
                                                 dP riv1                                ∗
                                                                                  dP riv2
              According to (4) we have            dP ub
                                                           ≺ 0 (and, similarly,    dP ub
                                                                                            ≺ 0), showing that
              public elimination reduces private elimination by both households. The comple-
   6
    As in Bennett (2012), we assume that the rest of the zone is much larger than the index household, and
hence, ∂P riv2 /∂P riv1 ≈ 0.


                                                           5
       mentarity of private elimination among neighbors increases the overall eﬀect by
       incorporating the feedback from Household 2 to Household 1.

   (b) if the elimination levels among neighbors are substitutes (∂P rivi /∂P riv−i ≺ 0),
       then according to (4), the sign is undetermined. Thus, we can have two situations:

                         ∗
                   dP riv1                      ∂P riv1               ∂P riv1 ∂P riv2
                           ≺ 0 if (and only if)
                    dP ub                        ∂P ub                ∂P riv2 ∂P ub
       or
                         ∗
                   dP riv1                            ∂P riv1   ∂P riv1 ∂P riv2
                                0 if (and only if)            ≺
                    dP ub                              ∂P ub    ∂P riv2 ∂P ub

  Thus, public elimination either increases or decreases private elimination.

• Case 2 : If zone-level public and individual private mechanical elimination are comple-
  ments (∂P rivi /∂P ub      0) and

   (a) if the elimination levels among neighbors are substitutes (∂P rivi /∂P riv−i ≺ 0),
       then according to (4), the sign is undetermined, and we derive the following two
       possible situations (the opposite of case 1(b):

                         ∗
                   dP riv1                            ∂P riv1         ∂P riv1 ∂P riv2
                                0 if (and only if)
                    dP ub                              ∂P ub          ∂P riv2 ∂P ub

       or
                         ∗
                   dP riv1                      ∂P riv1   ∂P riv1 ∂P riv2
                           ≺ 0 if (and only if)         ≺
                    dP ub                        ∂P ub    ∂P riv2 ∂P ub
       In other words, the direct impact of zone-level public elimination on individual
       private mechanical elimination should be greater (lower) than the externality
       eﬀect.

   (b) if the elimination levels of neighbors are complements (∂P rivi /∂P riv−i               0),
                                                           ∗
                                                     dP riv1               ∗
                                                                     dP riv2
       then, according to (4), we deduce that        dP ub
                                                                0(   dP ub
                                                                               0). In other words,
       public elimination should increase private elimination, which is clearly not what
       we observe in the experiment.

Overall, it is diﬃcult to distinguish between Cases 1(a), 1(b) and 2(a).



                                            6
   Following the same reasoning, if we consider the impact of public elimination on M1 , we
derive
                              dM1     ∂M1    ∂H ∂P riv1
                                    ≈      +              .
                              dP ub   ∂P ub ∂P riv1 ∂P ub
Clearly, only when public elimination and private elimination are complements does public
                                               dM1
elimination aﬀect the mosquito population,          ≺ 0, and thus the nuisance level. The
                                              dP ub
same results hold for the impact of private elimination on M1 :

                              dM1       ∂M1     ∂H ∂P ub
                                     ≈        +              .
                             dP riv1   ∂P riv1 ∂P ub ∂P riv1

   According to the experiments conducted in Réunion, we recover only on case 1a. Cases 1a,
1b (ﬁrst expression) and 2a (second expression) are consistent with public abatement actually
making mosquitoes more abundant. However Case 1a makes more sense than Case 1b (ﬁrst
expression) or 2a (second expression). In Case 1a, public and private abatement eﬀorts
are substitutes while the private abatement eﬀorts by neighbors are strategic complements,
which could arise, for instance, through social norms. In the presence of an externality
and strategic complementarities, aggregate relationships will overstate individual elasticities
and exaggerate the private response to public abatement. This mechanism is prominent in
Bennett (2012) and recent work by Guiteras, Levinsohn and Mobarak (2015).
   In Case 1b, public and private abatement eﬀorts are substitutes while the private abate-
ment eﬀorts by neighbors are also substitutes. In Case 2a, public and private abatement
eﬀorts are complements but the private abatement eﬀorts of neighbors are substitutes. Ei-
ther expression of Case 1b or 2a could be true on its own, but there is no reason for these
conditions to go together in our experiment. They will need very speciﬁc assumptions on the
diﬀerential eﬀects of the public intervention amongst the two households, which do not ﬁt
with our experiment. It is important to note that as the level of information and knowledge
in Réunion is very high (Setbon and Raude, 2009; Duret, Cubizolles and Thiannbo, 2013;
Thuilliez et al., 2014), we do not discuss the role of information in this model, although we
test this explanation in the following sections.
   An alternative explanation is that perceived nuisance is imperfectly correlated with the
objective risk of being bitten. Indeed, the level of tolerance for mosquitoes might be higher
in the treatment group after the intervention, or in other words, perceived nuisance might


                                               7
be lower, leading to decreased protective behavior. Households may also feel absolved of the
responsibility to remove the larval habitats themselves if they believe that the intervention
is eﬃcacious.
        Some predictions of the model can be tested easily with a randomized experiment in
which an exogenous mechanical intervention is introduced at the zone level. The following
sections provide the design and results of an intervention conducted in Réunion. Section 3
presents the study design, and Section 4 reports the results of the experiment.



3        Study design and baseline summary statistics

3.1        The intervention

The intervention evaluated here is called ALIZES (“Actions de Lutte Intégrée sur Zone et
Education Sanitaire”)7 and managed by the ARS8 . The intervention is privileged during
inter-epidemic stages. Its aim is to prevent and eliminate the presence of larval sites and
to change the behavior of persons through door-to-door visits. Homeowners generally allow
LAV oﬃcers of the ARS to enter their private dwellings to carry out routine vector control
activities. ARS oﬃcers identify the causes of strong larval development in the private and
public domains, eliminate them mechanically, monitor quantitatively vector populations9 ,
conduct health education related to the presence of Aedes Albopictus and demonstrate best
practices to eliminate larval sites10 . The systematic identiﬁcation of larval breeding areas
is intended to convince the population to eliminate all deposits immediately following the
demonstration and to adopt these habits in the future to maintain eﬃcacy. Note that demon-
    7
     ALIZES, as undertaken by the ARS when our study took place, is described at here.
    8
     This intervention follows WHO recommendations (WHO, 2009) and is a routine zone-level intervention
that is undertaken, on average, every 18 months per zone. WHO deﬁnes changes to human habitation or
behavior as actions to reduce human–vector contact. According to WHO, the chosen approach should be
eﬀective, practicable and appropriate to local circumstances.
   9
     They calculate stegomyia indices (speciﬁcally, the Breteau index, House index, and Container index)
and follow-up on the typology of the larval habitats.
  10
     Mosquito control is framed legally by texts at the national level that are adapted to the local level in
Réunion through prefectural orders. The fundamental order is no.2966 related to the determination of a
departmental area of mosquito control, signed September 14, 2007. This order established, in a general
sense, the approach to mosquito control across the island’s 24 municipalities. Each year, a prefectural order
clariﬁes the application of the fundamental order. In addition, it allows vector control agents to annually
renew their authorization in the 24 communes of the department to continue to combat mosquitoes and the
diseases they transmit.



                                                     8
strations (e.g., yard sanitation) and mechanical elimination are conducted simultaneously to
health education among a population that has relatively high levels of knowledge on dis-
ease transmission and education (compared with other developing regions). The educational
messages are based on two publicly available documents: the ﬁrst focuses on environmental
management (“ Adoptons les bons gestes ! ”) and the second focuses on disease knowledge
and risk (“ Moustiques & Maladies à La Réunion ”). With respect to mechanical elimination,
the main messages are the following: (i) Clean water reservoirs once a week, (ii) check water
disposal, (iii) clean green waste in the garden, and (iv) clean waste dumped in the garden
or near the house. ARS oﬃcers also distribute informational leaﬂets to the population in
addition to conducting oral explanations and knowledge tests. Chemical spraying is not used
in inter-epidemic stages, except if a case of dengue or chikungunya is detected and conﬁrmed.
       Note that the objective was to assess public action, as performed routinely by public
agents. It was not possible to modify this protocol for administrative and legal reasons.
Although the intervention is a package, making it impossible to separately identify the eﬀects
of knowledge transfer and mechanical control, Réunion exhibits a very high educational level.
Therefore, we assume that the eﬀect of knowledge transfer will be marginal, in keeping with
the model provided in Section 2 and conﬁrmed by the results reported in Section 4.


3.2       Study site, inclusion criteria, and experimental design

The experiment was performed in urban areas of Réunion. The island is divided into 4 geo-
graphic sectors (North/South/East/West), 24 municipalities and 273 neighborhoods. These
neighborhoods are divided into 1253 zones used by the ARS for Aedes albopictus surveillance
and control. These homogenous zones are deﬁned according to urban planning and environ-
mental criteria. They extend over 275 km2, or 11% of the island, and mostly cover urban
areas11 .
       A number of inclusion criteria were speciﬁed for the selection of zones included in this
study. We used zones located at less than 500 meters in altitude, where the presence of
mosquitoes from one year to the next is most likely to persist, to ensure relative homogene-
ity in environmental factors. Next, we focused on zones that showed relative stability in
  11
    According to the National Institute of Statistics and Economic Studies (or INSEE) in France, an urban
area is deﬁned as an agglomeration of more than 2000 residents where no dwelling is separated from the
next closest dwelling by more than 200 meters.


                                                   9
mosquito density and were subject to control actions by the ARS on a minimum of three
occasions between 2007 and 2011. We classiﬁed these as either negative or positive zones
using criteria based on the Breteau Index (i.e., the number of positive containers per 100
houses). Using historical data gathered over this 5-year period, we deﬁned a negative zone
as one that had a value for the Breteau Index during routine LAV visits that was lower than
50% of the average Breteau Index value during the same month and year in all zones. A
positive zone was deﬁned as having a value for the Breteau Index during routine LAV visits
that was higher than 50% of the average Breteau Index value during the same month and
year in all zones. A zone was retained for inclusion in the study if it was classiﬁed as positive
or negative a majority of times during all routine LAV visits (e.g., classiﬁed as positive twice
during three routine visits conducted between 2007 and 2011). This was done to ensure a
degree of stability in the classiﬁcation of zones over time. A total of 184 zones, 68 positive
zones and 116 negative zones, were identiﬁed using this selection criterion.
       Since conducting face-to-face interviews in 184 zones were not feasible, a two-stage cluster
(zone) random sample was drawn from this ﬁrst selection in 2012. In the ﬁrst stage, a ran-
dom sample of 26 zones (13 positive and 13 negative ) was drawn, taking into account the geo-
graphic distribution of the island’s population across the four sectors (North/South/East/West),
using a stratiﬁed sample without replacement. Next, within every zone, 40 households were
randomly selected based on maps of the zones and habitats provided by the IGN (National
Geographic Institutes)12 . For each selected household, the LAV oﬃcers conducted both a
face-to-face interview that was addressed to the head of the household and an observational
survey of the exterior of the dwelling itself. The data collected were validated by comparing
key characteristics of our sample to information provided in the latest census (e.g., num-
ber of household members by age of the head of household, level of education of the head
of household, socio-economic status). No signiﬁcant diﬀerences were found for these key
characteristics.
       After the ﬁrst survey was ﬁnalized, the intervention described above was randomly as-
signed at the zone level to 13 zones,13 thus ensuring that research staﬀ and participants were
  12
     The average size of a zone is 212 households (median=193). The average percentage of absentees was
36% (range of 5% to 50%), and the average percentage of refusals was 12% (range of 4% to 24%). The
most frequently cited reason for refusing to participate in the survey was a lack of time to respond to the
questionnaire.
  13
     The cluster randomized trial (CRT) is the “gold standard” for evaluating the eﬀectiveness of interven-


                                                    10
blind to the randomization process. If any, an observer eﬀect - or Hawthorne eﬀect - should
therefore operate similarly in the control and treated groups for self-reported outcomes. The
26 zones were next surveyed following the same process as above (random household selection
based on directions)14 . Figure 1 provides the map of control and treated zones15 .


3.3     Baseline summary statistics

The randomization was successful overall at producing balance in a broad range of statistics
between the treated and control groups. Table 1 shows that treatment and comparison
areas did not diﬀer in their baseline levels of house and garden environment, socio-economic
and demographic factors, stegomya indices (an objective measure of mosquito presence),
perceived risk of a new epidemic, nuisance and past infections, knowledge of mosquitoes,
self-reported household protective behaviors during the past month, and access to health
information.
    The summary statistics document the high socio-economic status of sample households.
As presented in Table 1, the average head of household is 52 years old, living with 3.11 family
members in the household. Most people have a high level of education, with 71% having a
secondary or post-secondary level of education. The percentage of homes infested by larvae
and/or pupae was approximately 20% in July 2012. Of the respondents, 77% report having
mosquitoes at home. Knowledge of diseases transmitted by mosquitoes was good, with an
average score of 3.73 on a scale from 0 to 5 (5 being the maximum score). The perceived risk
of a new epidemic of dengue or chikungunya was high (2.7 and 2.7 on a scale from 0 to 3).
Access to health information was globally high through TV, radio, or general practitioners
(74%, 55%, 94%).
tions because: (i) One can assemble treatment and control groups that are similar in every attribute, both
measurable and unmeasurable, with only the treatment diﬀering between groups. (ii) The control group
is followed contemporaneously with the treatment group, making CRTs robust to outcome variations over
time. (iii) Randomizing treatment allocations provides further protection from confounding. (iv) Allocating
subjects as clusters provides both convenience and protection from contamination between treatment arms.
A comparison of past Breteau indexes at the zone level revealed no signiﬁcant diﬀerence between treated
and control zones.
   14
      Sample size was determined to ensure an 80% probability of rejecting the null of no eﬀect at the 5%
signiﬁcance level, assuming an intra-class correlation of 0.05 and an eﬀect size of a 20 percentage-point
diﬀerence between the two experimental arms.
   15
      The ethics evaluation committee of Inserm (IORG0003254, FWA00005831), the Institutional Review
Board (IRB 00003888) of the French Institute of Medical Research and Health, reviewed and approved the
research project (Decision 14-137).


                                                    11
3.4    Deviations from the experimental protocol

The results in Table 1 show a good degree of balance in observed characteristics between
treatment and control areas. However, the implementation agency did not always comply
with the experimental protocol because new cases of arboviruses appeared during the period,
which was an obvious public health priority and required public action. In reality, 15 zones
were treated instead of 13, and therefore, actual control coincided with the randomly assigned
control zones in 11 instead of 13 control zones.
   In Table S1, we report the results of a linear probability model in which we regress a
dummy variable equal to one if the household resided in a zone where ALIZES was actually
introduced on another dummy variable equal to one when the zone was assigned to ALIZES
and a list of observed household characteristics. Assigned treatment is the strongest predictor
of treatment, and other coeﬃcients are small and not signiﬁcant at standard levels. A joint
test of the signiﬁcance of all slopes except assigned treatment is rejected. The results of this
regression thus suggest no selective program placement, for instance toward areas that were
wealthier or more educated.


3.5    Endline survey, attrition concerns and sub-sample cohort anal-
       ysis

The endline survey was completed in March-April 2014, approximately two years after the
pre-intervention survey. As explained above, the endline sample was drawn independently
from the baseline sample, selected randomly according to administrative directions. This
does not allow us to evaluate attrition in a straightforward way, which has potentially im-
portant implications for the interpretation of the results (see Tarozzi, Desai and Johnson
(2015)).
   Our focus on intent to treat estimates nevertheless allows us to interpret the main re-
sults as causal impacts of assigning zones to receive ALIZES. However, the interpretation of
intent to treat estimates would change if the intervention had an impact on the composition
of the surveyed sample (diﬀerential migration or diﬀerential response rates, as emphasized
by Tarozzi, Desai and Johnson (2015)). In Table S2, we evaluate whether either actual
or assigned treatment was systematically associated with certain household characteristics


                                              12
such as mobility (travels outside Réunion), household composition, and head of household
characteristics that were least likely to have changed directly as a consequence of the in-
tervention. Signiﬁcant changes in these characteristics could signal diﬀerential migration
or survey response, but we ﬁnd no evidence of this issue. The results in Table S2 suggest
that migration and diﬀerential survey response are unlikely to bias the results. However, we
cannot deﬁnitively rule out these concerns with this test.
       It is acknowledged that the cohort design is theoretically more powerful from a statistical
perspective, since it allows an analysis that controls for individual baseline values, thus
allowing the eﬀect of intervention to be estimated with greater precision. However, as shown
by Feldman and McKinlay (1994), this advantage must be weighed against the risk of loss to
the follow-up that arises in any longitudinal study. The “worst-case scenario” arises when the
loss to follow-up diﬀers across intervention groups, as the ﬁnal estimate of the intervention
eﬀect may then be subject to substantial bias. Even when subject attrition is unrelated to
treatment assignment, a large loss to follow-up rate may result in reduced eﬃciency relative
to a cross-sectional design. Other disadvantages of the cohort design, as reviewed by Atienza
and King (2002), include (i) a loss of representativeness of the target population related to
the aging of the cohort and (ii) “learning eﬀects” that may result from repeated assessments
of the same individual. These considerations suggest that a cohort design is most eﬀective
when participating clusters are relatively small in size, the study population is relatively
stable and compliant, and follow-up times are not lengthy (which is not the case here).
It follows that for studies enrolling large communities, where complete follow-up is rarely
feasible, cross-sectional designs have often been preferred. To avoid the analytic limitations
of cross-sectional designs, an approach adopted by some investigators has been to augment
this design by subsampling a cohort consisting of a relatively small number of subjects
in each zone16 . We followed this approach and randomly selected 180 households to be
followed in cohort design, 174 of which were included in the ﬁnal cohort. Table S3 provides
the comparison between the cohort sub-sample (N=174) and the remainders (N=850) at
baseline and shows no statistically signiﬁcant diﬀerences across groups except for the number
of elderly individuals living in the household. Table S4 provides baseline descriptive statistics
  16
   Methods of analysis that are particularly suited to cross-sectional designs have been discussed by Uk-
oumunne and Thompson (2001) and Nixon and Thompson (2003) for the case of binary outcomes and by
Koepsell et al. (1991) and Murray (2001) for the case of continuous outcomes.


                                                   13
for the cohort sub-sample and shows a good degree of balance in observed characteristics
between areas assigned to treatment and control (as in Table 1). The endline regression
results provided in Table S5 do not aﬀect our main conclusions, although the p -values are
higher than for the main sample, which can be easily explained by the size of the sample.
Table S6 provides Diﬀerence-in-Diﬀerences estimates. The conclusions remain unchanged.



4     Estimation methods and results
To estimate the impact of the ALIZES intervention in an area, we focus on intent to treat
(ITT) estimates, which are simple comparisons of the averages in treatment and comparison
areas. We present ITT estimates of the eﬀect of ALIZES on self-reported household protec-
tive behaviors and objective measures of arbovirus risk. Each column reports the results of
a regression of the form


                            yiz = α + β × Treatiz + Xi + Φz + i ,                          (5)


where yiz is an outcome for household i in zone z , Treatiz is an indicator for living in a
treated zone, and β is the ITT eﬀect. Xi is a vector of household control variables at endline,
including observed presence of a natural garden, a gutter, a septic tank, waste dumped in
the garden, and fans and declared presence of mosquitoes. Φz is a vector of control variables,
calculated as zone level baseline values, including the average wealth index, educational level
of the head of household, and the Breteau index. Standard errors are adjusted for clustering
at the zone level.
    With respect to objective entomological household outcomes, we use three main variables:
i) a binary variable for infested/not infested house; ii) the proportion of infested containers
per house (number of infested containers / total number of containers, infested or not); and
iii) total number of infested containers per house.
    With respect to self-reported behaviors, we also create a summary measure of multiple
self-reported protective behaviors collected in the survey, following Kling, Liebman and Katz
(2007) and Dammert, Galdo and Galdo (2014), deﬁned as the unweighted average of the




                                              14
various indicators as follows.
                                                      k
                                                 1         yiz − µk
                                         y∗
                                          iz   =                                                      (6)
                                                 k   k=1
                                                              σk

where each indicator k is standardized by the mean and variance of the control group. Thus,
the magnitude of the estimated index shows where the mean of the treatment group is in
the distribution of the control group in terms of standard deviation units. This allows us to
test whether the treatment had an overall positive or negative ITT eﬀect.
       As an alternative, we estimate a model analogous to (1) using two-stage least squares
(2SLS), replacing the dummy for assigned treatment with a dummy for actual treatment
using the former exogenous variable to instrument for the latter potentially endogenous
variable17 .



4.1       Self-reported Protective behaviors

We start with the analysis of the impact of ALIZES on households’ self-reported behavior
(Table 2). The evidence suggests that ALIZES decreases slightly the overall standardized
index. by 0.107 standard deviations, the ITT estimate being signiﬁcant at the 10% level and
the 2SLS estimate being nearly signiﬁcant at the 5% level (p -value=0.056). Behaviors such
as cleaning waste dumped in the garden and covering or cleaning water reservoirs were also
reported less frequently in the “treated” group than in the “control” group (7% less and 5%
less, respectively). None of the other three impacts on private behaviors was signiﬁcantly
diﬀerent from zero at standard levels, although all estimates are negative and some of them
are large in magnitude. The results are thus suggestive of a negative impact.


4.2       Objective entomological measures

Next we turn to the analysis of the impact of ALIZES on entomological measures. Treat-
ment eﬀects on household entomological outcomes and disaggregated indexes - using the
site typology provided by Boyer, Foray and Dehecq (2014) - are reported in Table 3. ITT
  17
    As emphasized by Tarozzi, Desai and Johnson (2015), because “ randomly assigned treatment status is
an exogenous and strong instrument for treatment, 2SLS will estimate the ITT impact of providing access to
ALIZES if program impact is homogeneous across areas ”. 2SLS will estimate a local average treatment eﬀect
(Imbens and Angrist, 1994). The LATE can thus be interpreted as the impact only for ‘complier’ zones.


                                                     15
and 2SLS estimates diﬀer only slightly, and we demonstrate that the intervention led to
substantive and statistically signiﬁcant increases in entomological indexes.
   Recalling that a positive container is one in which larval and/or pupal stages of mosquitoes
are present, the ﬁgures in columns 1, 2, and 3 show that assignment to ALIZES increased the
probability of being infested by 8 percentage points. The proportion of infested households
in the control group at endline is 18.65%. The null of the impact is rejected at the 5% level
for the ITT and 2SLS estimates. The proportion of infested containers per house increased
by 6.1 percentage points (signiﬁcant at the 5% levels for the ITT and 2SLS estimates; the
proportion of infested containers per house is 12.906% in the control group), and the number
of infested containers per house increased by 0.5 containers on average (signiﬁcant at the 5%
and 1% levels for the ITT and 2SLS estimates respectively; the average number of infested
containers per house in the control group is 0.369).
   With respect to the typology of sites, an interesting result concerns the fact that the
presence of small positive containers (ﬂower pots, saucers, small water containers) were
signiﬁcantly more present in the treated group than in the control group. This is not the
case for large water containers or gutters, which are likely more diﬃcult to empty on a weekly
basis.
   As the productivity of breeding sites (which was not observed here) can diﬀer according
to site typology but will be similar across “treated” and “control” groups, the observed diﬀer-
ences in classical entomological indexes should lead to a higher density of adult mosquitoes
in the treated group. Lastly, we note that the main results are not aﬀected when we remove
cluster level controls from the regression, that may reﬂect endogenous mosquito abatement
choices (Table S7).



4.3      Potential Mechanisms

4.3.1    Knowledge, perceived risk, perceived eﬃcacy and other protective mea-
         sures

Knowledge, perceived risk, and perceived eﬃcacy would represent alternative explanations
if the average values of these variables were signiﬁcantly higher in the control group than in



                                              16
the treated group at endline18 .
    As shown in Table 4, knowledge and perceived risks of new epidemics were globally
unaﬀected by the intervention. None of the coeﬃcients from column (1) to column (4) were
signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from zero at standard levels. This result can be explained by the fact
that the educational level in Réunion is already high, and people are well aware of the risk
of new epidemics and modes of transmission of arboviral diseases. Approximately 88% of
households believe that eliminating larval sites is eﬀective at reducing nuisance, but the
intervention had no signiﬁcant impact on this perception.
    As shown in Table 5, the other self-reported protective measures (sprays, coils, mosquito
nets, fans and air conditioning) follow the same pattern as the elimination of larval sites.
The evidence suggests that ALIZES decreases the use of mosquito nets and fans. None of the
other impacts on private behaviors was signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from zero at standard levels,
although half of the estimates are negative.
    Therefore, the variables tested and reported on in Tables 4 and 5 do not seem to provide
convincing explanations for the results provided above (increased stegomya indices and less
frequent self-reported behaviors).


4.3.2    Nuisance perception and associated eﬀects

As discussed in Section 3, the ﬁnding that self-reported protective behaviors occur at a lower
frequency in the treated group could be consistent with an imperfect correlation between
perceived and objective nuisance or a psychological eﬀect induced by the intervention. For
instance, the level of tolerance for mosquitoes could be higher in the treated group after
the external intervention, despite having higher stegomya indexes. To test this prediction,
individuals were asked at endline to indicate the extent to which mosquitoes bothered them.
The ITT and 2SLS results (Table 4) for this question show that the treated individuals
declare themselves to be less aﬀected by mosquitoes and less aﬀected by mosquito bites than
the control group, but these results were not signiﬁcant. Baseline comparisons for these
   18
      The dependent variables are: i) dummies on knowledge of diseases transmitted by mosquitoes (an
ordinal score ranging from 0 to 5 from diﬀerent possible answers, dengue, ﬂu, malaria, HIV, chikungunya);
ii) knowledge of mosquitoes based on 2 binary questions (female is biting gender and distance traveled by
the tiger mosquito); iii) perceived risk of epidemics of chikungunya or dengue (on a 0-4 scale from no risk
to high risk, the exact question being: In your opinion, what is the current risk to have a new epidemic
of chikungunya? ); iv) inconvenience related to mosquitoes or mosquito bites; and v) perceived eﬃcacy of
private elimination is also a binary variable.


                                                    17
indicators revealed no diﬀerences (Table 1).
         A psychological eﬀect should be related to the perceived eﬃcacy of mechanical elimina-
tion. As this perceived eﬃcacy is not aﬀected by the intervention, we test heterogeneous
eﬀects conditional on perceived eﬃcacy (Table 6). Indeed if a psychological eﬀect exists,
we should have a higher eﬀect for this sub-sample. This does not seem to be the case, and
therefore, we conclude that the psychological explanation is fragile. We note however that a
high proportion (88%= 921/1043) believe that mechanical elimination is an eﬃcient method,
which may explain why we obtain very similar results when compared with those in Table
319 .


4.3.3        Heterogeneous treatment eﬀects

Heterogeneous treatment eﬀects are provided in Table 6. Panels A and B test heterogeneous
treatment eﬀects for zones with a value higher than the average of the Breteau Index in
2012 (pre-intervention) and for households who believe that elimination of larval sites is
eﬃcacious. We do not ﬁnd signiﬁcant diﬀerences with respect to these two variables. Panels
C, D, E and F test heterogeneous eﬀects across geographic areas (North, South, East, West).
There is some evidence of heterogeneous eﬀects, as the increase in entomological indexes was
concentrated in the North, the East and the West, but not in the South. The most aﬀected
area is the western part of the island.



5         Discussion and Conclusions
Externalities associated with risky behaviors usually justify public interventions. Using a
cluster randomized ﬁeld trial in Réunion, we evaluate the eﬀect of a public intervention
intended to reduce larval habitats in urban areas on entomological indices and behavioral
outcomes. This empirical strategy might be useful for two reasons: 1) to know whether the
public intervention serves as a substitute or a complement for private behaviors and 2) to
observe the rate at which households are willing to substitute personal protective behavior
for an improved comfort. We show that a mechanical elimination intervention piloted by an
    19
    We also note that the correlation coeﬃcients between the three entomological household outcomes and
the two nuisance perception outcomes were never signiﬁcantly diﬀerent from zero in either the treated or
control group at endline.


                                                  18
external agent might act as a substitute for private protection rather than as a complement
in the short term (i.e., 3 months after the intervention). Moreover, our empirical results
show that households overcompensate for the public intervention. These results suggest that
individuals do not account for the aggregate consequences of their individual compensation.
Although there may be counterexamples, policymakers should be aware of such perverse
eﬀects when implementing environmental management methods to control mosquitoes and
reduce human-vector contact.
   Our results are subject to some limitations. For example, the context under study is very
speciﬁc, where the population’s socio-economic level, education, and knowledge of the disease
are very high. However, mosquito nuisance and dengue and chikungunya are prevalent
primarily in low or middle-income countries, where information and income constraints could
have a greater eﬀect on the adoption of new technologies, meaning that there is a greater role
for external vector control management policies. Moreover, the intervention is a package,
making it impossible to separately identify the eﬀects of knowledge transfer and mechanical
control. As a ﬁrst step, we have shown that the educational level is very high in Réunion,
and knowledge transfer thus likely plays a minor role in our context. However, much remains
to be understood regarding the extent to which knowledge transfer may aﬀect the dynamics
described above. It was also not possible to employ a placebo in the current study, and
therefore, we were unable to isolate possible placebo eﬀects. Finally, we note that we assessed
the eﬀect of the program within a very short time frame, despite that similar interventions
have been occurring for seven years. Because we cannot exclude the potential for marginal
decreasing returns of the ALIZES intervention, it is possible that the procedure was more
eﬃcient at reducing mosquitoes in 2007 (just after the major chikungunya crisis in Réunion).
Long-term evaluations of such interventions and a deeper understanding of the mechanisms
constitute avenues for future research.
   Nonetheless, we believe that our analysis can inform the debate on potentially perverse
eﬀects of public interventions for nuisance prevention. Our results lead to three recom-
mendations. First, policymakers implementing zone-based vector control programs should
consider such negative externalities. Even if the intervention is fully subsidized, the number
of mosquitoes and the risk of disease may converge to form a nuisance trap with a high num-
ber of adult mosquitoes and a relatively low proportion of protected individuals. Second,


                                              19
it might not be optimal for the government to promote health education through demon-
strations that are conducted simultaneously with government agents’ implementation of the
preventative actions because doing so induces reductions in private protective measures. An
alternative is the use of mobile technologies as surveyed by Fjeldsoe, Marshall and Miller
(2009) or tested by Dammert, Galdo and Galdo (2014). They show that repeated exposure
to SMS-delivered information encourages households’ uptake of preventative measures, in
keeping with recent evidence showing that households are responsive to information on the
risks they face (Dupas, 2011). Our study also has important implications for similar pro-
grams used for Zika control. As there is no preventive treatment for or vaccine against Zika,
vector management is crucial to prevent the disease.




                                             20
References
Angelini, P., P. Macini, A. C. Finarelli, C. Po, C. Venturelli, R. Bellini, and
  M. Dottori. 2008. “Chikungunya epidemic outbreak in Emilia-Romagna (Italy) during
  summer 2007.” Parassitologia, 50(1-2): 97–98.

Arrow, Kenneth J. 1963. “Uncertainty and the welfare economics of medical care. 1963.”
  Bulletin of the World Health Organization, 82(2): 141–149.

Atienza, Audie A., and Abby C. King. 2002. “Community-based health intervention
  trials: an overview of methodological issues.” Epidemiologic reviews, 24(1): 72–79.

Ballenger-Browning, Kara K., and John P. Elder. 2009. “Multi-modal Aedes aegypti
  mosquito reduction interventions and dengue fever prevention.” Tropical Medicine & In-
  ternational Health, 14(12): 1542–1551.

Benedict, Mark Q., Rebecca S. Levine, William A. Hawley, and L. Philip Louni-
  bos. 2007. “Spread of the tiger: global risk of invasion by the mosquito Aedes albopictus.”
  Vector-Borne and Zoonotic Diseases, 7(1): 76–85.

Bennett, Daniel. 2012. “Does Clean Water Make You Dirty? Water Supply and Sanitation
  in the Philippines.” Journal of Human Resources, 47(1): 146–173.

Boyer, Sebastien, Coralie Foray, and Jean-Sebastien Dehecq. 2014. “Spatial and
  Temporal Heterogeneities of Aedes albopictus Density in La Reunion Island: Rise and
  Weakness of Entomological Indices.” PLoS ONE, 9(3): e91170.

Carlson, Gerald A, and Donald V Debord. 1976. “Public mosquito abatement.” Journal
  of Environmental Economics and Management, 3(2): 142–153.

Dammert, Ana C., Jose C. Galdo, and Virgilio Galdo. 2014. “Preventing dengue
  through mobile phones: Evidence from a ﬁeld experiment in Peru.” Journal of health
  economics, 35: 147–161.

Delatte, Helene, Amelie Desvars, Anthony Bouétard, Séverine Bord, Geoﬀrey
  Gimonneau, Gwenaël Vourc’h, and Didier Fontenille. 2010. “Blood-Feeding Be-


                                             21
  havior of Aedes albopictus , a Vector of Chikungunya on La Réunion.” Vector-Borne and
  Zoonotic Diseases, 10(3): 249–258.

Dupas, Pascaline. 2011. “Do Teenagers Respond to HIV Risk Information? Evidence
  from a Field Experiment in Kenya.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics,
  3(1): 1–34.

Duret, Pascal, Sylvain Cubizolles, and Marie Thiannbo. 2013. “La crise sanitaire
  du chikungunya : une épreuve de recomposition des rapports sociaux à La Réunion.”
  Sociologie, , (N3, vol. 4).

Feldman, Henry A., and Sonja M. McKinlay. 1994. “Cohort versus cross-sectional
  design in large ﬁeld trials: precision, sample size, and a unifying model.” Statistics in
  Medicine, 13(1): 61–78.

Fjeldsoe, Brianna S., Alison L. Marshall, and Yvette D. Miller. 2009. “Behav-
  ior change interventions delivered by mobile telephone short-message service.” American
  journal of preventive medicine, 36(2): 165–173.

Frondel, Manuel, and Christoph M. Schmidt. 2005. “Evaluating environmental pro-
  grams: The perspective of modern evaluation research.” Ecological Economics, 55(4): 515–
  526.

Gersovitz, Mark, and Jeﬀrey S. Hammer. 2005. “Tax/subsidy policies toward vector-
  borne infectious diseases.” Journal of Public Economics, 89(4): 647–674.

Gratz, N. G. 2004. “Critical review of the vector status of Aedes albopictus.” Medical and
  veterinary entomology, 18(3): 215–227.

Guiteras, Raymond, James Levinsohn, and Ahmed Mushﬁq Mobarak. 2015. “En-
  couraging sanitation investment in the developing world: A cluster-randomized trial.”
  Science, 348(6237): 903–906.

Heintze, Carl, M. Velasco Garrido, and A. Kroeger. 2007. “What do community-
  based dengue control programmes achieve? A systematic review of published evaluations.”
  Transactions of the Royal Society of Tropical Medicine and Hygiene, 101(4): 317–325.


                                            22
Imbens, Guido W., and Joshua D. Angrist. 1994. “Identiﬁcation and estimation of local
  average treatment eﬀects.” Econometrica: Journal of the Econometric Society, 467–475.

Kling, Jeﬀrey R., Jeﬀrey B. Liebman, and Lawrence F. Katz. 2007. “Experimental
  analysis of neighborhood eﬀects.” Econometrica, 75(1): 83–119.

Koepsell, Thomas D., Donald C. Martin, Paula H. Diehr, Bruce M. Psaty, Ed-
  ward H. Wagner, Edward B. Perrin, and Allen Cheadle. 1991. “Data analysis
  and sample size issues in evaluations of community-based health promotion and disease
  prevention programs: a mixed-model analysis of variance approach.” Journal of clinical
  epidemiology, 44(7): 701–713.

Murray, David M. 2001. “Statistical models appropriate for designs often used in group-
  randomized trials.” Statistics in Medicine, 20(9-10): 1373–1385.

Nixon, R. M., and S. G. Thompson. 2003. “Baseline adjustments for binary data in
  repeated cross-sectional cluster randomized trials.” Statistics in medicine, 22(17): 2673–
  2692.

Paupy, Christophe, Benjamin Ollomo, Basile Kamgang, Sara Moutailler, Do-
  minique Rousset, Maurice Demanou, Jean-Pierre Hervé, Eric Leroy, and
  Frédéric Simard. 2010. “Comparative role of Aedes albopictus and Aedes aegypti in
  the emergence of dengue and chikungunya in Central Africa.” Vector-Borne and Zoonotic
  Diseases, 10(3): 259–266.

Pierre, V., J. Thiria, E. Rachou, C. Lassalle, D. Sissoko, and P. Renault. 2006.
  “Dengue fever outbreak in La Réunion Island in 2004.”

Setbon, M, and J Raude. 2009. “Population response to the risk of vector-borne diseases:
  lessons learned from socio-behavioural research during large-scale outbreaks.” Emerging
  Health Threats Journal, 2.

Tarozzi, Alessandro, Jaikishan Desai, and Kristin Johnson. 2015. “The impacts of
  microcredit: Evidence from Ethiopia.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics,
  7(1): 54–89.


                                            23
Thuilliez, Josselin, Claire Bellia, Jean-Sébastien Dehecq, and Olivier Reilhes.
  2014. “Household-Level Expenditure on Protective Measures Against Mosquitoes on the
  Island of La Réunion, France.” PLoS Negl Trop Dis, 8(1): e2609.

Ukoumunne, Obioha C., and Simon G. Thompson. 2001. “Analysis of cluster ran-
  domized trials with repeated cross-sectional binary measurements.” Statistics in medicine,
  20(3): 417–433.

WHO. 2009. Dengue: guidelines for diagnosis, treatment, prevention and control. WHO.




                                            24
6   Figures
       Figure 1: Map showing the locations of treatment and control zones




                                      25
7    Tables
                             Table 1: Baseline Descriptive Statistics



                                              Treatment group   Control group   Diﬀ (T-C)   p-Value

House, Garden environment
Natural Garden                                     0.333            0.298         0.035      0.519
Gutter                                             0.503            0.370         0.133      0.926
Septic tank                                        0.364            0.354         0.010      0.943
Waste dumped in the garden                         0.143            0.141         0.002      0.943
Socio-economic and demographic factors
Number of rooms in the house                       6.088            5.912         0.176      0.180
Air conditioning                                   0.239            0.266        -0.027      0.636
Swimming pool                                      0.092            0.073         0.019      0.366
Washing machine                                    0.944            0.938         0.006      0.676
Dishwasher                                         0.233            0.185         0.048      0.326
Flat screen TV                                     0.620            0.627        -0.007      0.850
Internet                                           0.511            0.513        -0.002      0.968
Number of cars                                     1.072            1.065         0.007      0.950
Wealth index                                       0.050           -0.052         0.102      0.641
Head: Age                                         52.994           51.703         1.291      0.443
Head: Female                                       0.649            0.623         0.026      0.512
Head: level of education - No schooling            0.059            0.065        -0.006      0.812
Head: level of education - Primary                 0.241            0.213         0.028      0.452
Head: level of education - Secondary               0.538            0.589        -0.051      0.251
Head: level of education - Post-secondary          0.160            0.131         0.029      0.468
Number of household members                        3.118            3.119        -0.001      0.996
Number of children (<18)                           0.773            0.824        -0.051      0.693
Number of elderly (>60)                            0.659            0.615         0.044      0.510
Stegomya Indices (objective indices)
Historical stability index                         0.540            0.478         0.062      0.763
Infested Household                                 0.203            0.193         0.010      0.787
Proportion of infested containers                 12.741           11.451         1.290      0.618
Number of infested containers per Household        0.390            0.456        -0.066      0.468




                                                 26
                             Table 1: Baseline Descriptive Statistics (continued)



                                                                           Treatment group   Control group   Diﬀ (T-C)   p-Value

 Perceived risk of new epidemic, nuisance and past infections
 A member of the household was diagnosed with chikungunya                       0.771            0.761         0.010      0.820
 Perceived risk of a new epidemic of chikungunya (0-4 scale)                    2.663            2.680        -0.017      0.833
 Perceived risk of a new epidemic of dengue (0-4 scale)                         2.755            2.745         0.010      0.886
 Presence of mosquitoes at home                                                 0.751            0.796        -0.045      0.218
 Are you bothered by mosquitoes?                                                0.904            0.896         0.008      0.721
 Are you bothered by mosquitoes bites?                                          0.856            0.822         0.034      0.273
 Knowledge on mosquitoes
 Female is biting gender                                                        0.410            0.358         0.052      0.259
 Average distance traveled by the tiger mosquito is less than 500 meters        0.486            0.426         0.060      0.216
 Diseases transmitted by mosquitoes (score between 0 and 5)                     3.712            3.762        -0.050      0.646
 Household protective behaviors during past month (self reported)
 Use Mosquito coils                                                             0.666            0.715        -0.049      0.343
 Use Insect/mosquito repellent sprays for the house                             0.525            0.528        -0.003      0.959
 Use Anti-mosquito body sprays/creams                                           0.352            0.384        -0.032      0.616
 Use Treated or untreated mosquito nets                                         0.136            0.149        -0.013      0.708
 Use Fans                                                                       0.162            0.233        -0.071      0.225
 Use Air-conditioning                                                           0.074            0.087        -0.013      0.674
 Clean water reservoir daily or weekly                                          0.582            0.635        -0.053      0.294
 Access to health information
 Health information through ARS                                                 0.114            0.149        -0.035      0.360
 Health information through Internet                                            0.348            0.340         0.008      0.857
 Health information through TV                                                  0.756            0.733         0.023      0.648
 Health information through Radio                                               0.572            0.529         0.043      0.505
 Health advice through doctor                                                   0.959            0.934         0.025      0.151
 Health advice through pharmacist                                               0.394            0.326         0.068      0.453


Notes: Data from baseline (2012) survey. Sample size is 1024, of which 522 are assigned to Treatment and

502 are assigned to Control. Columns 1 and 2 report statistics for households in each group. Column 3

shows the diﬀerence between the mean for households in zones assigned to ALIZES and the means in column

2. Column 4 shows p-values for the test of equality of means, robust to intra-zone correlation. The number

of zones is 26. *, ** and *** denote statistical signiﬁcance at the 10, 5 and 1% level, respectively. The joint

null of equal means is rejected at standard levels.




                                                                    27
   Table 2: Treatment eﬀect on Household protective behaviors during past month (self
                                                 reported)

                (1)             (2)            (3)              (4)             (5)              (6)
                                               Clean green                                       Clean water
                Overall                                         Clean waste     Cover or clean
                                Tend the       waste in the                                      reservoirs
                Standardized                                    dumped          water
                                garden         garden (fruit,                                    daily
                index                                           in the garden   reservoirs
                                               branches, etc)                                    or weekly
 ITT            -0.107*         -0.051         -0.022           -0.072**        -0.049**         -0.037
                (0.055)         (0.031)        (0.030)          (0.030)         (0.021)          (0.036)
 R2             0.03            0.026          0.034            0.033           0.024            0.026



 2SLS           -0.128*         -0.061         -0.026           -0.086**        -0.059**         -0.044
                (0.067)         (0.038)        (0.036)          (0.039)         (0.025)          (0.042)
 Observations   1043            1043           1043                             1043             1043


Notes: Data from endline (2014) survey. Sample size is 1043, of which 523 are assigned to Treatment and 520

are assigned to Control. Standard errors (in brackets) and tests are robust to intra-zone correlation (there

are 26 zones or clusters). All regressions include household control variables at endline, including observed

presence of a natural garden, a gutter, a septic tank, waste dumped in the garden, and fans and declared

presence of mosquitoes. All regressions also include zone-level baseline values, including average wealth

index, educational level of the head of household, and average Breteau index. The dependent variables

are deﬁned as follows: the Overall Standardized index is a summary of multiple self-reported protective

behaviors collected in the survey, following Kling, Liebman and Katz (2007) and Dammert, Galdo and

Galdo (2014), deﬁned as the unweighted average of the diﬀerent indicators and detailed in equation (30).

All other dependent variables are dummies for self-reported behavior. The ITT line represents the intent-

to-treat coeﬃcients. The 2SLS line represents the 2SLS estimation of the model with treatment deﬁned in

terms of zone-level actual treatment status with the corresponding zone-level randomly assigned status used

as an instrument. *, ** and *** denote statistical signiﬁcance at the 10, 5 and 1% level, respectively.




                                                       28
                                            Table 3: Treatment eﬀect on stegomya indices (objective measures of risk)



                   Stegomya Indices                                     Types of water holding containers (with larvae and/or pupae)

                   (1)            (2)                (3)                (4)            (5)             (6)             (7)             (8)          (9)       (10)      (11)
                                  Proportion of      Number of
                                                                                                                                                                        Stripped
                                  infested           infested
                   Infested                                             Flower pots    Saucers under   Small water     Large water     Natural                          vehicle
                                  containers         containers                                                                                     Tyre      Gutter
                   Household                                            and vases      Flower pots     container       container       containers                       or abandoned
                                  per       House-   per       House-
                                                                                                                                                                        car part
                                  hold               hold
      ITT          0.087**        6.148**            0.259**            0.031*         0.071**         0.089*          0.015           0.002        0.017     0.009     0.025
                   (0.039)        (2.578)            (0.103)            (0.015)        (0.031)         (0.049)         (0.022)         (0.014)      (0.015)   (0.006)   (0.017)
      R2           0.083          0.071              0.05               0.012          0.016           0.032           0.025           0.01         0.301     0.046     0.023



      2SLS         0.105**        7.372**            0.311**            0.037**        0.085**         0.107*          0.018           0.003        0.02      0.011     0.03
29




                   (0.047)        (3.109)            (0.126)            (0.018)        (0.037)         (0.057)         (0.027)         (0.017)      (0.018)   (0.007)   (0.021)
      Observations 1043           1043               1043               1043           1043            1043            1043            1043         1043      1043      1043


     Notes: Data from endline (2014) survey. Sample size is 1043, of which 523 are assigned to Treatment and 520 are assigned to Control. Standard errors

     (in brackets) and tests are robust to intra-zone correlation (there are 26 zones or clusters). All regressions include household control variables at endline,

     including observed presence of a natural garden, a gutter, a septic tank, waste dumped in the garden, and fans and declared presence of mosquitoes. All

     regressions also include zone-level baseline values, including average wealth index, educational level of the head of household, and average Breteau index.

     The 3 main dependent variables are infested household (0/1), the proportion of infested containers per household, the number of infested containers per

     household. All other dependent variables are numbers of positive containers classiﬁed by type of container at the dwelling (household) level. The ITT line

     represents the intent-to-treat coeﬃcients. The 2SLS line represents the 2SLS estimation of the model with treatment deﬁned in terms of zone-level actual

     treatment status with the corresponding zone-level randomly assigned status used as an instrument. *, ** and *** denote statistical signiﬁcance at the 10,

     5 and 1% level, respectively.
                                                                         Table 4: Potential mechanisms

                             (1)                   (2)             (3)                  (4)                  (5)                  (6)             (7)             (8)
                             Diseases
                                                                   Average       dis-                                                                             Do you think
                             transmitted                                                Perceived risk Perceived risk Are you both- Are you both-
                                                                   tance                                                                                          that
                             by                    Female is                            of a new             of a new             ered            ered
                                                                   travelled by                                                                                   elimination of
                             mosquitoes            biting gender                        epidemic        of   epidemic        of   by              by mosquitoes
                                                                   Tiger                                                                                          larval sites is
                             (score          be-                                        chikungunya          dengue               mosquitoes?     bites?
                                                                   mosquito                                                                                       eﬃcacious?
                             tween 0-5)

              ITT                  -0.011                -0.010          0.029                0.001                0.046                -0.022          -0.037          -0.018
                                   (0.061)               (0.037)         (0.039)              (0.080)              (0.082)              (0.022)         (0.031)         (0.022)
              R2                   0.056                 0.053           0.029                0.023                0.020                 0.017           0.029           0.014
30




              2SLS                 -0.014                -0.012          0.034                0.001                0.056                -0.026          -0.049          -0.021
                                   (0.071)               (0.044)         (0.046)              (0.094)              (0.093)              (0.026)         (0.038)         (0.027)
              Observations          1043                  1043            1043                 1043                 1043                 1043            1043            1043


     Notes: Data from endline (2014) survey. Sample size is 1043, of which 523 are assigned to Treatment and 520 are assigned to Control. Standard errors

     (in brackets) and tests are robust to intra-zone correlation (there are 26 zones or clusters). All regressions include household control variables at endline,

     including observed presence of a natural garden, a gutter, a septic tank, waste dumped in the garden, and fans and declared presence of mosquitoes. All

     regressions also include zone-level baseline values, including average wealth index, educational level of the head of household, and average Breteau index.

     The dependent variables are i) dummies on knowledge of diseases transmitted by mosquitoes (an ordinal score ranging from 0 to 5 from diﬀerent possible

     answers: dengue, ﬂu, malaria, HIV, chikungunya), ii) knowledge of mosquitoes based on 2 binary questions (female is biting gender and distance travelled

     by the tiger mosquito), iii) perceived risk of epidemics of chikungunya or dengue (on a 0-4 scale) and inconvenience related to mosquitoes or mosquito

     bites. iv) The last question on the eﬃcacy of private elimination is also a binary variable. The 2SLS line represents the 2SLS estimation of the model with
     treatment deﬁned in terms of zone-level actual treatment status with the corresponding zone-level randomly assigned status used as an instrument. *, **

     and *** denote statistical signiﬁcance at the 10, 5 and 1% level, respectively.
31
                                                        Table 5: Other protective measures (self-reported)


                       (1)               (2)                 (3)             (4)               (5)               (6)              (7)          (8)
                                         Insect or
                       Anti-
                                         mosquito            Rechargeable                      Treated
                       mosquito                                                                                  Mosquito nets
                                         repellent           vaporizers or   Mosquito coils    mosquito                                 Fans   Air-conditioning
                       body                                                                                      for children
                                         and sprays for      diﬀusers                          nets
                       sprays/creams
                                         the house
       ITT                   0.041              -0.02              0.006           0.025             -0.014*           -0.002      -0.103**          0.006
                             (0.032)           (0.046)             (0.029)         (0.029)           (0.007)           (0.013)      (0.037)          (0.019)
       R2                    0.029             0.027               0.015            0.01              0.013            0.006         0.063           0.198
32




       2SLS                  0.049             -0.023              0.007            0.03             -0.017*           -0.002     -0.124***          0.007
                             (0.038)           (0.054)             (0.034)         (0.034)           (0.008)           (0.015)      (0.043)          (0.023)
       Observations           1043              1043                1043            1043              1043              1043         1043             1043


     Notes: Data from endline (2014) survey. Sample size is 1043, of which 523 are assigned to Treatment and 520 are assigned to Control. Standard errors

     (in brackets) and tests are robust to intra-zone correlation (there are 26 zones or clusters). All regressions include household control variables at endline,

     including observed presence of a natural garden, a gutter, a septic tank, waste dumped in the garden, and fans and declared presence of mosquitoes. All

     regressions also include zone-level baseline values, including average wealth index, educational level of the head of household, and average Breteau index.

     The dependent variables are dummies for self-reported behavior. The ITT line represents the intent-to-treat coeﬃcients. The 2SLS line represents the

     2SLS estimation of the model with treatment deﬁned in terms of zone-level actual treatment status with the corresponding zone-level randomly assigned

     status used as an instrument. *, ** and *** denote statistical signiﬁcance at the 10, 5 and 1% level, respectively.
                                                                Table 6: Heterogeneous Treatment Eﬀect

                                     Proportion of      Number of                           Proportion of      Number of                       Proportion of      Number of
                                     infested           infested                            infested           infested                        infested           infested
                    Infested                                               Infested                                               Infested
                                     containers         containers                          containers         containers                      containers         containers
                    Household                                              Household                                              Household
                                     per       House-   per       House-                    per       House-   per       House-                per       House-   per       House-
                                     hold               hold                            hold            hold                                   hold               hold
                                                                             PANEL B: Household believe
                      PANEL A: 2012 Breteau Index higher
                                                                             that private elimination                                         PANEL C: North
                      than average
                                                                             is eﬃcacious
     ITT            0.076            7.278*             0.319*             0.087**          6.140**            0.239**            0.064*       2.275              0.319***
                    (0.050)          (3.549)            (0.163)            (0.040)          (2.682)            (0.103)            (0.031)      (1.605)            (0.054)
     R2             0.111            0.089              0.078              0.09             0.074              0.052              0.111        0.093              0.058



     2SLS           0.095            9.066*             0.397*             0.106**          7.490**            0.292**            0.078***     2.783*             0.391***
33




                    (0.059)          (4.631)            (0.211)            (0.049)          (3.333)            (0.129)            (0.027)      (1.508)            (0.112)
     Observations   521              521                521                921              921                921                277          277                277

                                 PANEL D: South                                             PANEL E: East                                     PANEL F: West

     ITT            -0.003           -2.498             -0.057             0.085***         3.113              0.224***           0.281***     22.338***          0.546***
                    (0.051)          (3.297)            (0.173)            (0.017)          (2.168)            (0.049)            (0.043)      (4.337)            (0.083)
     R2             0.089            0.053              0.079              0.154            0.092              0.123              0.094        0.083              0.067



     2SLS           -0.003           -2.498             -0.057             0.085***         3.113              0.224***           0.660***     47.976***          1.289***
                    (0.047)          (3.031)            (0.159)            (0.015)          (1.946)            (0.044)            (0.072)      (7.111)            (0.144)
     Observations   320              320                320                200              200                200                159          159                159
8     Appendix
                         Table S1: Predictors of actual treatment status

                   Dependent var is ALIZES=1                               Coeﬃcient s.e

                   Randomly assigned to treatment                          0.845***   (0.099)
                   Head: Age                                               0.000      (0.001)
                   Head: Female                                            -0.002     (0.001)
                   Head: level of education - No schooling (ref)           .
                   Head: level of education - Primary                      0.035      (0.033)
                   Head: level of education - Secondary                    0.027      (0.039)
                   Head: level of education - Post-secondary               0.02       (0.036)
                   Number of household members                             -0.006     (0.012)
                   Number of children (<18)                                0.022      (0.020)
                   Number of elderly (>60)                                 0.007      (0.011)
                   Number of rooms in the house                            -0.002     (0.002)
                   Air conditioning                                        0.000      (0.052)
                   Swimming pool                                           -0.055     (0.041)
                   Washing machine                                         -0.03      (0.044)
                   Dishwasher                                              0.005      (0.012)
                   TV                                                      0.025      (0.022)
                   Internet                                                0.000      (0.007)
                   Number of cars                                          -0.007     (0.016)
                   Breteau Index 2012 (Zone level)                         0.000      (0.003)
                   Wealth Index 2012 (Zone level)                          0.058      (0.082)
                   Educational Level 2012 (Zone level)                     0.366      (0.345)
                   Average expenditure on protective measures (Zone level) -0.003     (0.008)
                   Intercept                                               0.034      (0.221)


                   Observation                                             895
                   R-squared                                               0.766
                   P-Value, H0: all slopes except Treated equal to zero    0.999


Notes: Data from baseline (2012) survey. The ﬁgures are regression coeﬃcients from an OLS regression of
a dummy for actual treatment status (whether ALIZES was applied in the zone) and a series of predictors.
Standard errors (in brackets) and tests are robust to intra-zone correlation. *, ** and *** denote statistical
signiﬁcance at the 10, 5 and 1% level, respectively.




                                                          34
                                 Table S2: Actual changes in sample composition.


                                                                          Means at Endline

                                                        Treatment group   Control group      Diﬀ (T-C)   p-Value
            Panel A: Randomly assigned treatment

            Head: Age                                   58.119            55.350             2.769       0.318
            Head: Female                                1.580             1.617              -0.037      0.678
            Head: level of education - No schooling     0.053             0.098              -0.045      0.271
            Head: level of education - Primary          0.344             0.246              0.098       0.175
            Head: level of education - Secondary        0.483             0.530              -0.047      0.544
            Head: level of education - Post-secondary   0.118             0.123              -0.005      0.918
            Head: Travel outside La Réunion             0.591             0.555              0.036       0.644
            Number of household members                 2.838             3.259              -0.421      0.131
            Number of children (< 18)                   0.534             0.688              -0.154      0.294
            Number of elderly (> 60)                    0.923             0.818              0.105       0.460
            Second home                                 0.107             0.135              -0.028      0.615



            Panel B: Actual treatment
            Head: Age                                   58.336            54.161             4.175       0.144
            Head: Female                                1.585             1.619              -0.034      0.714
            Head: level of education - No schooling     0.054             0.111              -0.057      0.181
            Head: level of education - Primary          0.333             0.238              0.095       0.200
            Head: level of education - Secondary        0.504             0.507              -0.003      0.965
            Head: level of education - Post-secondary   0.108             0.142              -0.034      0.507
            Head: Travel outside La Réunion             0.567             0.587              -0.020      0.806
            Number of household members                 2.900             3.269              -0.369      0.206
            Number of children (< 18)                   0.556             0.694              -0.138      0.365
            Number of elderly (> 60)                    0.926             0.779              0.147       0.324
            Second home                                 0.108             0.142              -0.034      0.549




Notes: Data from endline (2014) survey. The ﬁgures are means of the variables calculated for each treatment
arm, deﬁned according to random assignment (Panel A) or according to actual implementation (Panel B).
The ﬁgures in the last column are p-values for the test of equal changes between baseline and endline across
the four arms. The test is robust to intra-zone correlation.




                                                            35
   Table S3: Comparison between cohort sub-sample (N=174) and remainders (N=850) at baseline




                                            Cohort Sub-sample   Remainders   Diﬀ (C-R)   p-Value

Treatment
Randomly assigned treatment                 0.534               0.504        0.030       0.913
Actual treatment                            0.637               0.577        0.060       0.826
House, Garden environment
Natural Garden                              0.339               0.311        0.028       0.700
Gutter                                      0.459               0.434        0.025       0.860
Septic tank                                 0.379               0.355        0.024       0.856
Waste dumped in the garden                  0.109               0.149        -0.040      0.359
Socio-economic and demographic factors
Number of rooms in the house                6.092               5.983        0.109       0.553
Air conditioning                            0.242               0.304        -0.062      0.412
Swimming pool                               0.069               0.085        -0.016      0.552
Washing machine                             0.948               0.940        0.008       0.674
Dishwasher                                  0.206               0.210        -0.004      0.955
Flat screen TV                              0.643               0.620        0.023       0.632
Internet                                    0.471               0.521        -0.050      0.548
Number of cars                              1.023               1.078        -0.055      0.714
Wealth index                                0.000               0.000        0.000       0.997
Head: Age                                   54.442              51.935       2.507       0.293
Head: Female                                0.632               0.655        -0.023      0.670
Head: level of education - No schooling     0.069               0.061        0.008       0.825
Head: level of education - Primary          0.229               0.227        0.002       0.955
Head: level of education - Secondary        0.569               0.562        0.007       0.912
Head: level of education - Post-secondary   0.132               0.149        -0.017      0.745
Number of household members                 3.086               3.125        -0.039      0.850
Number of children (< 18)                   0.678               0.823        -0.145      0.405
Number of elderly (> 60)                    0.798               0.604        0.194       0.045
Stegomya Indices (objective indices)
Historical stability index                  0.569               0.497        0.072       0.793
Container Index                             0.202               0.197        0.005       0.923
House Index                                 0.284               0.291        -0.007      0.911
Breteau Index                               41.433              42.459       -1.026      0.932




                                                36
     Table S3: Comparison between cohort sub-sample (N=174) and remainders (N=850) at baseline
                                                               (continued)


                                                                             Cohort Sub-sample   Remainders   Diﬀ (C-R)   p-Value

 Perceived risk of new epidemic, nuisance and past infections
 A member of the household was diagnosed with chikungunya                          0.287           0.223      0.064        0.223
 Perceived risk of a new epidemic of chikungunya (0-4 scale)                       2.682           2.669      0.013        0.902
 Perceived risk of a new epidemic of dengue (0-4 scale)                            2.778           2.744      0.034        0.722
 Presence of mosquitoes at home                                                    0.747           0.778      -0.031       0.543
 Frequency of mosquito bites in the last 7 days (0-3 scale)                        0.488           0.511      -0.023       0.828
 Knowledge on mosquitoes
 Female is biting gender                                                           0.373           0.387      -0.014       0.823
 Average distance travelled by a mosquito is less than 500 meters                  0.505           0.447      0.058        0.384
 Diseases transmitted by mosquitoes (score between 0 and 5)                        3.758           3.732      0.026        0.858
 Household protective behaviors during past month (self reported)
 Use Mosquito coils                                                                0.712           0.685      0.027        0.692
 Use Insect/mosquito repellent sprays for the house                                0.551           0.522      0.029        0.690
 Use Anti-mosquito body sprays/creams                                              0.362           0.369      -0.007       0.931
 Use Treated or untreated mosquito nets                                            0.120           0.147      -0.027       0.601
 Use Fans                                                                          0.252           0.185      0.067        0.390
 Use Air-conditioning                                                              0.109           0.075      0.034        0.386
 Clean water reservoir daily or weekly (declared)                                  0.546           0.621      -0.075       0.254
 Access to health information
 Health information through ARS                                                    0.109           0.136      -0.027       0.582
 Health information through Internet                                               0.304           0.352      -0.048       0.437
 Health information through TV                                                     0.781           0.737      0.044        0.522
 Health information through Radio                                                  0.569           0.548      0.021        0.809
 Health advice through doctor                                                      0.971           0.942      0.029        0.235
 Health advice through pharmacist                                                  0.373           0.358      0.015        0.902



Notes: Data from baseline (2012) survey. Columns 1 and 2 report statistics for households in the cohort sub-
sample (N=174) and remainders (N=850). Column 3 shows the diﬀerence between the mean for households
in zones assigned to the cohort sub-sample (N=174) and the means in column 2. Column 4 shows p-values
for the test of equality of means, robust to intra-zone correlation. The number of zones is 26. *, ** and
*** denote statistical signiﬁcance at the 10, 5 and 1% level, respectively. The joint null of equal means is
rejected at standard levels.




                                                                    37
                   Table S4: Baseline Descriptive Statistics: Cohort sub-sample (N=174)




                                               Treatment group     Control group    Diﬀ (T-C)   p-Value

House, Garden environment
Natural Garden                                      0.355              0.321          0.034      0.731
Gutter                                              0.516              0.395          0.121      0.376
Septic tank                                         0.333              0.432          -0.099     0.444
Waste dumped in the garden                          0.096              0.123          -0.027     0.627
Socio-economic and demographic factors
Number of rooms in the house                        6.279              5.876          0.403      0.065
Air conditioning                                    0.301              0.308          -0.007     0.930
Swimming pool                                       0.064              0.074          -0.010     0.807
Washing machine                                     0.957              0.938          0.019      0.587
Dishwasher                                          0.204              0.209          -0.005     0.949
Flat screen TV                                      0.645              0.642          0.003      0.975
Internet                                            0.462              0.481          -0.019     0.815
Number of cars                                      0.924              1.135          -0.211     0.140
Wealth index                                        0.000              0.001          -0.001     0.998
Head: Age                                           56.526            52.049          4.477      0.118
Head: Female                                        0.688              0.617          0.071      0.337
Head: level of education - No schooling             0.064              0.074          -0.010     0.811
Head: level of education - Primary                  0.279              0.172          0.107      0.125
Head: level of education - Secondary                0.505              0.642          -0.137     0.144
Head: level of education - Post-secondary           0.150              0.111          0.039      0.464
Number of household members                         3.021              3.160          -0.139     0.614
Number of children (<18)                            0.623              0.740          -0.117     0.511
Number of elderly (>60)                             0.892              0.691          0.201      0.121
Stegomya Indices (objective indices)
Historical stability index                          0.591              0.543          0.048      0.839
Infested Household                                  0.204              0.197          0.007      0.912
Proportion of infested containers                   12.326            12.492          -0.166     0.969
Number of infested containers per Household         0.311              0.518          -0.207     0.35




                                                   38
              Table S4: Baseline Descriptive Statistics: Cohort sub-sample (N=174) (continued)



                                                                         Treatment group   Control group   Diﬀ (T-C)   p-Value

 Perceived risk of new epidemic, nuisance and past infections
 A member of the household was diagnosed with chikungunya                     0.268            0.308        -0.040      0.569
 Perceived risk of a new epidemic of chikungunya (0-4 scale)                  2.750            2.597         0.153      0.363
 Perceived risk of a new epidemic of dengue (0-4 scale)                       2.855            2.681         0.174      0.293
 Presence of mosquitoes at home                                               0.720            0.777        -0.057      0.455
 Frequency of mosquito bites in the last 7 days (0-3 scale)                   0.419            0.567        -0.148      0.220
 Knowledge on mosquitoes
 Female is biting gender                                                      0.354            0.395        -0.041      0.591
 Average distance travelled by a mosquito is less than 500 meters             0.526            0.481         0.045      0.618
 Diseases transmitted by mosquitoes (score between 0 and 5)                   3.677            3.851        -0.174      0.341
 Household protective behaviors during past month (self reported)
 Use Mosquito coils                                                           0.688            0.740        -0.052      0.486
 Use Insect/mosquito repellent sprays for the house                           0.602            0.493         0.109      0.185
 Use Anti-mosquito body sprays/creams                                         0.301            0.432        -0.131      0.144
 Use Treated or untreated mosquito nets                                       0.129            0.111         0.018      0.773
 Use Fans                                                                     0.225            0.284        -0.059      0.389
 Use Air-conditioning                                                         0.096            0.123        -0.027      0.674
 Clean water reservoir daily or weekly                                        0.537            0.555        -0.018      0.836
 Access to health information
 Health information through ARS                                               0.086            0.135        -0.049      0.306
 Health information through Internet                                          0.279            0.333        -0.054      0.511
 Health information through TV                                                0.752            0.814        -0.062      0.368
 Health information through Radio                                             0.58             0.555         0.025      0.747
 Health advice through doctor                                                 0.989            0.95          0.039      0.196
 Health advice through pharmacist                                             0.376            0.37          0.006      0.95



Notes: Data from baseline (2012) survey. Sample size is 174, of which 93 are assigned to Treatment and 84
are assigned to Control. Columns 1 and 2 report statistics for households in each group. Column 3 shows
the diﬀerence between the mean for households in zones assigned to ALIZES and the means in column 2.
Column 4 shows p-values for the test of equality of means, robust to intra-zone correlation. The number of
zones is 26. *, ** and *** denote statistical signiﬁcance at the 10, 5 and 1% level, respectively. The joint
null of equal means is rejected at standard levels.




                                                                    39
                                              Table S5: Treatment eﬀect on stegomya indices (objective measures of risk): Cohort sub-sample.



                     Stegomya Indices                                   Types of water holding containers (with larvae and/or pupae)

                     (1)                (2)             (3)             (4)               (5)                (6)               (7)           (8)          (9)       (10)      (11)
                                        Proportion of   Number of                                                                                                             Stripped
                     Infested           infested        infested        Flower pots       Saucers under      Small water       Large water   Natural                          vehicle
                                                                                                                                                          Tyre      Gutter
                     Household          containers      containers      and vases         Flower pots        container         container     containers                       or abandoned
                                        per Household   per Household                                                                                                         car part

      ITT            0.153**            11.206**        0.529**         0.098**           0.174              0.110             0.074**       -0.004       0.008     0.034     0.035
                     (0.056)            (5.152)         (0.200)         (0.037)           (0.153)            (0.127)           (0.034)       (0.021)      (0.023)   (0.021)   (0.032)
      R2             0.126              0.113           0.075           0.143             0.033              0.026             0.054         0.051        0.533     0.084     0.017



      2SLS           0.202***           14.845**        0.701***        0.130***          0.230              0.145             0.098**       -0.005       0.011     0.045*    0.046
                     (0.066)            (6.239)         (0.221)         (0.045)           (0.196)            (0.145)           (0.046)       (0.026)      (0.028)   (0.028)   (0.039)
      Observations   174                174             174             174               174                174               174           174          174       174       174
40




     Notes: Data from endline (2014) survey, cohort sub-sample. Sample size is 174, of which 93 are assigned to Treatment and 84 are assigned to Control.
     Standard errors (in brackets) and tests are robust to intra-zone correlation (there are 26 zones or clusters). All regressions include household control
     variables at endline, including observed presence of a natural garden, a gutter, a septic tank, waste dumped in the garden, and fans and declared presence
     of mosquitoes. All regressions also include zone-level baseline values, including average wealth index, educational level of the head of household, and
     average Breteau index. The dependent variables are deﬁned as follows: the house index is deﬁned as the percentage of houses infested by larvae and/or
     pupae. The container index is deﬁned as the percentage of water-holding containers with active immature stages of mosquitoes. The Breteau index is
     deﬁned as the number of positive containers per 100 houses, a positive container being one that contains larval and/or pupal stages of mosquito. All
     other dependent variables are numbers of positive containers classiﬁed by type of container at the dwelling (household) level. The ITT line represents
     the intent-to-treat coeﬃcients. The 2SLS line represents the 2SLS estimation of the model with treatment deﬁned in terms of zone-level actual treatment
     status with the corresponding zone-level randomly assigned status used as an instrument. *, ** and *** denote statistical signiﬁcance at the 10, 5 and 1%
     level, respectively.
 Table S6: Treatment eﬀect (DiD) on stegomya indices (objective measures of risk): Cohort sub-sample.


                                       (1)                    (2)                  (3)
                                                              Proportion of        Number of
                                       Infested               infested             infested
                                       Household              containers           containers
                                                              per Household        per Household

         ITT (T reated × P ost)        0.173**                11.482**             0.745**
                                       (0.071)                (5.525)              (0.273)
         R2                            0.070                  0.083                0.088



         2SLS (T reated × P ost)       0.219**                14.536**             0.944***
                                       (0.088)                (6.628)              (0.302)
         Observations                  348                    348                  348


Notes: Sample size is 174 × 2 = 348. Of these, 93 households are assigned to Treatment and 84 are assigned
to Control. Standard errors (in brackets) and tests are robust to intra-zone correlation (there are 26 zones or
clusters). Regressions are intra-household ﬁxed-eﬀects regression models. The 3 main dependent variables
are infested household (0/1), the proportion of infested containers per household, the number of infested
containers per household. The ITT line represents the intent-to-treat coeﬃcients. The 2SLS line represents
the 2SLS estimation of the model with treatment deﬁned in terms of zone-level actual treatment status
with the corresponding zone-level randomly assigned status used as an instrument. *, ** and *** denote
statistical signiﬁcance at the 10, 5 and 1% level, respectively.




                                                      41
     Table S7: Treatment eﬀect on stegomya indices (objective measures of risk), without potentially
                                      endogenous cluster level controls.


                                (1)                   (2)                  (3)
                                                      Proportion of        Number of
                                Infested              infested             infested
                                Household             containers           containers
                                                      per Household        per Household

                ITT             0.080*                4.951*               0.238**
                                (0.042)               (2.819)              (0.099)
                R2              0.080                 0.062                0.048


                2SLS            0.096*                5.926*               0.284**
                                (0.050)               (3.365)              (0.120)
                Observations    1043                  1043                 1043


Notes: Data from endline (2014) survey. Sample size is 1043, of which 523 are assigned to Treatment and 520
are assigned to Control. Standard errors (in brackets) and tests are robust to intra-zone correlation (there
are 26 zones or clusters). All regressions include household control variables at endline, including observed
presence of a natural garden, a gutter, a septic tank, waste dumped in the garden, and fans and declared
presence of mosquitoes. The 3 main dependent variables are infested household (0/1), the proportion of
infested containers per household, the number of infested containers per household. The ITT line represents
the intent-to-treat coeﬃcients. The 2SLS line represents the 2SLS estimation of the model with treatment
deﬁned in terms of zone-level actual treatment status with the corresponding zone-level randomly assigned
status used as an instrument. *, ** and *** denote statistical signiﬁcance at the 10, 5 and 1% level,
respectively.




                                                     42
