                                                              WPS7902


Policy Research Working Paper                                7902




      Housing Finance and Inclusive Growth
                   in Africa
            Benchmarking, Determinants, and Effects

                           Christian-Lambert Nguena
                            Fulbert Tchana Tchana
                               Albert G. Zeufack




Macroeconomics and Fiscal Management Global Practice Group
 &
Africa Region
Office of the Chief Economist
December 2016
Policy Research Working Paper 7902


  Abstract
  Using a partially constructed panel database of 48 Sub-Sa-                         addition, the analysis finds that housing finance development
  haran African countries from 2000 to 2013, this paper                              in Africa is not yet an effective tool for reducing economic
  analyzes the structure of housing finance in Africa, its deter-                    inequality, at its current, very early stage. However, the
  minants, and its impact on inclusive growth. The findings                          paper shows that above a given threshold, housing finance
  show that market capitalization and urbanization are key                           could be efficient at reducing inequality. Finally, there is a
  positive determinants of housing finance, and the post-con-                        slightly positive relationship between housing finance and
  flict environment is conductive to greater housing finance                         greater economic development in Africa. All these findings
  development. This result suggests that housing finance is                          suggest that policies to boost housing finance development
  driven by standard market forces of demand and supply. In                          in Africa would be fruitful in the medium to long terms.




  This paper is a product of the Macroeconomics and Fiscal Management Global Practice Group and the Office of the Chief
  Economist, Africa Region. It is part of a larger effort by the World Bank to provide open access to its research and make
  a contribution to development policy discussions around the world. Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on
  the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The authors may be contacted at nguena@aaye.org, ftchanatchana@worldbank.
  org, and azeufack@worldbank.org.




          The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
          issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
          names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
          of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
          its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                        Produced by the Research Support Team
                           Housing Finance and Inclusive Growth in Africa
                             Benchmarking, Determinants, and Effects1




                Christian-Lambert Nguena2                            Fulbert Tchana Tchana3                Albert G. Zeufack4
                The University of Dschang                               The World Bank                      The World Bank




KEYWORDS: housi ng fi na nce, Sub-Saharan Africa, inclusive growth, inequality and shared prosperity.




JEL CLASSIFICATION: G21, R1, O4.




1 The views expressed in this paper are not necessarily those of the World Bank Group. The authors thank Simon Walley for sharing
Badev et al. (2014) database on housing finance and Constant Lonkeng Ngouana and Harold Ngalawa for comments and suggestions
on an earlier version of the paper. All errors and omissions are the authors’ sole responsibility.
2 Lecturer/Research, The University of Dschang and African Association of Young Economists, nguena@aaye.org.
3 Senior Economist, The World Bank, ftchanatchana@worldbank.org.
4 Chief Economist, The Africa Region, The World Bank, azeufack@worldbank.org.
    1. Introduction
Countries in Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA) have experienced stable economic growth averaging 5 percent over
the past decade. However, growth has not been inclusive, and poverty as well as unemployment have
remained very high. The challenge of inclusive growth is made even more daunting by unmanaged
urbanization that has led to millions living in substandard housing.
Africa has the highest rate of urbanization growth, but the least developed housing finance in the world
(World Bank 2014). UN Habitat reports that 46 African cities now hold more than one million people and
that every day for the next fifteen years, Africa’s cities will have to accommodate an extra 40,000 people.
Over the next 25 years, more and more people will be added to the number of urban dwellers in Africa. This
new challenge is emerging in a context of already widespread poverty and inequality in cities, where many
people are living in slums without adequate basic services. Better housing finance systems are needed to
meet the growing demand for housing that African countries face.
However, the low capacity of the construction industry and the absence of a strong housing finance sector
are likely to exacerbate stresses on the housing market, raising rents and further widening income inequality.
Despite a positive trend, the ratio of mortgage debt to GDP remains extremely low in Africa at 3 percent,
compared to 70 percent in developed countries. Africa’s mortgage markets are nascent and small by
international comparisons. However, according to data from Badev et al. (2013), the average proportion of
the population with the minimum income required for a prudent mortgage is 16 percent in Africa.
So far, efforts of African governments, international partners, and financial institutions have barely reduced
the gap between high housing demand and insufficient housing supply in Africa’s urban areas. As in other
parts of the world, this gap is even more important for low- and middle-income households. In fact, currently
most low- and middle-income households in Africa only have access to the unregulated, informal housing
sector. With the exception of South Africa, formal sector housing programs (public or private) have mostly
targeted middle- and high-income households in Africa.
Housing finance has generated at least three main strands in economic literature. The first strand focuses on
housing finance determinants (see Badev et al. 2014; Egert and Mihaljek 2007; Haibin Zhu 2006; and
Buckley and Madhusudhan 1984); the second on the channels with which it affects inclusive growth (see
Buckley 1996 and Dubel 2007); and the third on its impact on growth and shared prosperity (see Hongyu et
al. 2002 and Gutierrez et al. 2007). This literature has answered numerous questions of interest on housing
finance determinants, but so far it has not focused on specific characteristics of SSA housing finance, due
to housing finance’s very low level of development among other things. The literature has yet to provide a
comprehensive analysis of the linkage between housing finance and shared prosperity, especially in Africa.
Building on existing literature and to fill the gap, this paper offers answers to the following questions: What
is the structure and typology of housing finance in Africa? What are the determinants of housing finance
development in Africa? What is the relationship between housing finance, economic growth, and inequality
in Africa?
Our investigation suggests that the housing finance sector in Africa is very weak. The ratio of mortgage debt
to GDP is less than 10 percent for almost all countries other than South Africa and Namibia. Housing
penetration (the percentage of the adult population with an outstanding loan to purchase a home) is also
very low, with no country posting more than a 9 percent penetration rate and three out of four countries
having a rate of lower than 5 percent. In addition, in African countries, the mortgage rate, the legal system,


                                                      2
and the country’s GDP per capita are correlated with housing finance. Countries with a high GDP per capita
and low mortgage interest rates enjoy greater access to housing finance. In turn, greater access to housing
finance in Africa is positively related to GDP growth, inequality reduction, and human development
indicators.
Our econometric investigation provides important findings on each of our questions of interest. Stock market
capitalization and urban population growth rate are the strongest positive determinants of housing finance,
while recovery from conflict is another determinant, albeit less strong. In addition, some variables seem to
be hampering housing finance depending on the economic environment. These variables are the ratio of
credit to the economy to GDP, which is a proxy of the development of the banking sector, and trade openness,
which may mask the low level of housing finance in oil exporting countries.
In addition, housing finance has a positive impact on inequality reduction and inclusive growth. First, there
is a threshold effect of the impact of housing finance on inequality. Indeed there is a middle range of value
in which housing finance depth (ratio of mortgage debt to total credit) has a significant negative correlation
to inequality—values that are too high or too low do not lead to a significant result. Second, our results
suggest that a one percentage point increase of housing finance depth could lead to a 0.37 percentage point
increase in growth of GDP per capita. This result is in line with Hongyu et al. (2002), Erbas and Nofthaft
(2002), Uy (2006), and Freire et al. (2006) as well as findings from other regions.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 provides a literature review; section 3 presents
the characteristics of housing finance policy in Africa and investigates the link between housing finance and
shared prosperity; section 4 provides an econometric analysis using a panel dataset we have built and draws
some policy implications; and section 5 concludes.

       2. An Empirical Literature Review of Housing Finance and its Impact on Inclusive
          Growth
The literature related to housing finance determinants and impact on inclusive growth is growing. The
literature has been mostly empirical and has focused less on specific issues facing housing markets in Africa.
In this section, we present the literature in three strands. The first strand reviews papers on housing finance
determinants; the second focuses on the channels used by housing finance to affect growth and inequality;
and the third strand presents the impact of housing finance on growth and inequality reduction. In each of
these strands, we distinguish between theoretical and empirical findings as well as between findings within
SSA and at the global level.

2.1.      Determinants of housing finance
The literature so far has been empirical and has not focused on specific determinants of housing finance in
SSA. This literature highlights three main determinants: GDP per capita, as a proxy for the level of
development; stock market development; and informal finance. Most importantly, the literature shows that
government support or subsidy is not a determining factor.
In fact, Badev et al. (2014), using a new set of data on the depth and penetration of mortgage markets across
countries in the world, find that (a) mortgage markets seem to develop only at relatively high levels of GDP
per capita; (b) policies associated with financial system development (such as price stability or the efficiency
of contractual and information frameworks) are also associated with mortgage market development, and (c)
well-functioning insurance markets and better capitalized stock markets are strongly associated with


                                                       3
mortgage market development. Moreover, Buckley and Madhusudhan (1984) test a model of the
relationship between housing investment and GDP, anticipated inflation, changes in inflation, and the extent
of capital deepening across several developing and transition countries. They find that, holding all else
constant, countries with deeper financial markets invest relatively more in housing.
Moreover, Haibin and Zhu (2006), by analyzing the structure of housing finance markets and house prices
in selected Asian countries, find evidence that in economies with more flexible housing finance markets,
house prices are more responsive to overall changes in market conditions, particularly equity price
movements. The main explanatory variables used were GDP, bank credit, equity prices, short-term rates,
consumer price index, and the exchange rate.
In addition, Besley et al. (1992), showed that the Rotating Savings and Credit Associations (ROSCAS)
achieve much higher allocative performance than other types of finance do—an indication that informal
finance matters in long-term finance. Their result highlights the need to verify whether ROSCAS can be
used as a housing finance alternative in Africa, where this type of financial institution is very common. The
fact that the formal housing finance system is limited in SSA countries underscores the need to investigate
the alternative of informal housing finance systems.
Finally, many studies show that government involvement is not one of the determinants. For example, Badev
et al. (2014) show that neither government subsidies, nor government support of housing financing through
state banks dedicated to housing finance, has been proven to spur the housing sector. In fact, many
developing countries have had such banks for many decades, but their housing finance sector remains
miniscule.

2.2.    Channels used by housing finance to impact growth and inequality
The literature indicates that housing finance affects economic growth by reducing the cost of capital,
increasing savings, increasing tax revenues, increasing investment in education, reducing vulnerability, and
increasing financial deepening. By reducing the cost of capital, housing finance can spur economic growth.
In fact, Dubel (2007) provides a model analyzing the relationship between housing finance and housing
affordability and shows that well-functioning housing finance reduces loan interest rates. That in turn results
in greater affordability of housing, with a potential positive impact on economic growth.
By increasing savings, housing finance can spur growth. According to Buckley (1996), many reasons
explain why improving housing finance may lead to increased savings in the economy. First, the returns to
housing will likely be positive. Second, housing provides the most secure collateral against market
fluctuations and in immature markets can be easily expected to offer positive yields over the long run. Third,
housing prices are less volatile than other asset prices. Fourth, the availability of housing improves labor
mobility and therefore employment potential. Finally, the availability of affordable housing finance may
lead to increased savings as potential homeowners save to make the required down payment and to maintain
their assets. This saving will be an engine of investment, helping to stoke economic growth and development.
By increasing tax revenues, housing finance contributes to the development of public infrastructure and
ultimately to economic growth and reduction of inequality. Hangen and Northrup (2010) and Econsult (2009)
estimate that, in the United States, activity related to housing has a positive impact on revenues of states and
other local governments. In the United States as well as in other countries, greater revenues to local
government often translate into better infrastructure for the population and ultimately into reduced
inequality. Moreover, using a large panel data set encompassing over 100 countries and over the period


                                                      4
1960-2000; Calderon and Serven (2008) show that growth is positively affected by the stock of
infrastructure assets, and income inequality declines with higher infrastructure quantity and quality.



2.3.    Housing finance, economic growth and reduction of inequality
Studies suggest that housing investment has an impact on economic growth (especially short-run growth)
and employment. For example, Hongyu et al. (2002) find that compared to non-housing investment, housing
investment has a stronger short-run effect on economic growth. They also find that housing investment has
a long-run impact on economic growth but not on non-housing investment. Chen and Zhu (2008) find that
the relationship between housing investment and economic growth in China is different depending on which
provinces are analyzed. Moreover, Erbas and Nothaft (2002) find that low-income housing has a lower
import component in production and higher labor intensity. This implies that construction of low-income
housing will lead to greater employment and growth than the construction of middle- or high-income
housing. Tipple (1994), by verifying the links between employment and housing development, shows that
investment in shelter is very effective for promoting employment, especially among lower-income groups.
Some of the benefits to the economy tend to be inversely proportional to housing costs, meaning that low-
cost housing is more beneficial to the economy.
In addition, with respect to the empirical analysis of the relationship between housing and economic growth,
there are some estimates of multiplier effects associated with construction in developing countries. For
example, Uy (2006) notes that for every 1 peso spent on housing activities in the Philippines, an additional
16.61 pesos is contributed to national GDP.
Meanwhile, housing finance has the potential to increase investment in education, hence reducing the
vulnerability of the poor; it could also contribute to financial deepening and inclusion. This improvement
of financial deepening is critical for poverty reduction in SSA.
Housing finance could increase investment in education and reduce vulnerability for the poor. Becker (1975)
and Atkinson (1975) studied the link between investment in human capital and wealth distribution. An
implication of these models is that income inequality will decrease as access to finance improves and that
housing improves homeowner’s borrowing capacity. They also suggest that housing finance could lead to
more investment in human capital. To the extent that improved housing affordability benefits the poor,
housing finance may improve education opportunities for the poor. Jacoby (1994) finds that lack of access
to credit perpetuates poverty in Peru because poor households cannot afford to provide their children with
appropriate education. Jacoby and Skoufias (1997) find that without access to finance, income shocks cause
poor families to discontinue schooling for children; housing provides an asset that can be used to smooth
income shocks.
A more inclusive housing financial system can improve access to housing finance for poor and low-to-
moderate-income households. Consistent with this view, Malpezzi (1999) suggests shifting from a housing
finance perspective—where special circuits are used to mobilize short-term household deposits for long-
term mortgages—to a perspective where housing finance is integrated with broader capital markets. Singh
and Huang (2011) analyze data from Africa between 1992 and 2006 and find that financial deepening (as
measured in part by credit to the private sector as a percent of GDP) is associated with less poverty and
reduced income disparities in African countries, and that this is most important in the early stages of
financial development. Stronger property rights strengthen this relationship. Beck, Demirguc-Kunt, and


                                                     5
Levine (2004) examine a broad cross-country sample of 58 developing countries and find that financial
development (as measured by the ratio of private sector financial intermediation to GDP) reduces income
inequality by disproportionately raising the incomes of the poor. Moreover, Singh and Huang (2011) find
that poverty is inversely related to financial deepening. In addition, financial deepening reduces absolute
levels of poverty, but does not affect income inequality to a significant degree in African countries.

       3. Stylized Facts on Housing Finance in SSA
3.1.      Data
To develop our stylized facts and econometric analysis, we examined a sample of 54 African countries with
data from African Development Indicators (ADI), the Financial Development and Structure Database
(FDSD), and the Housing Finance Databases of the World Bank. The database summary and description is
presented in the appendix. The analysis is limited to 2000-2012 to ensure more up-to-date results. Housing
market and finance policy data are drawn from the newest housing finance databases of the World Bank.

3.2.      Benchmarking the SSA housing market and finance policy: Typology and characteristics
Benchmarking the SSA housing market and finance policy along with a comparative approach is essential
to have a clear picture of what has been done to date and what remains to be done. The following subsection
presents a general perspective applicable to all SSA countries and is followed by a presentation of country-
specific views, which vary based on fundamental characteristics such as wealth, legal origins, political
stability, regional context, and oil resources.

SSA housing market and finance policy: A general point of view
Overall, the banking sector in Africa has been growing since liberalization two decades ago when African
governments adopted new legislation for financial institutions and institutionalised private banking systems,
in some cases ending state monopolies in this sector. SSA countries’ financial systems are growing rapidly
and becoming increasingly integrated into the global financial system. At the core of the systems are banks,
followed by pension funds. The regular Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP) implemented in those
countries has generally confirmed that the banking system is well capitalized, liquid, and profitable.
However, few commercial banks clearly offer their customers housing loans in the form of mortgages. The
majority of banks in Africa finance housing acquisitions, not via housing loans specifically, but as private
investments or standard consumer loans. These latter products generally have high interest rates with short
repayment periods.
Some African countries have opted to establish specialized single-purpose nonbank mortgage lenders, or
“monoline” lenders. Most notable is Kenya, which has housing finance companies. Nigeria also has primary
mortgage institutions, and South Africa has financial service providers specializing in mortgage lending.
Typically, these institutions have a narrow banking license limiting their activities and, in particular,
restricting deposit collection. This means that they are usually reliant on wholesale funding on the liability
side of their balance sheets. These institutions are particularly vulnerable during crisis periods because their
funding costs rise to a much greater extent than those of lenders with a deposit base.
The banking and the financial system in most SSA countries remains underdeveloped compared to other
developing regions. The ratio of private sector credit to GDP is less than 20 percent for some countries and
financial access is lower (there is only one branch per 100,000 adults in some countries). The small size of


                                                       6
national markets, the low level of incomes, and the weak creditor rights and judicial enforcement
mechanisms could explain this situation. Moreover, there is a need to improve the development level of the
financial sector, especially the mortgage financing and banking sector. However, prospects are good since
gradual financial deepening is underway in most SSA countries (Montfort et al., 2013).
Although the mortgage market in Africa is still small by international standards, the sector is growing
gradually and is attracting attention from policy makers. Positive growth is now observed in some markets
such as Kenya, Uganda, and others. For example Kenya's mortgage market grew by 37 percent in 2012,
resulting in a total of 19,700 mortgages. Uganda, for its part, showed signs of growth at the end of December
2012, representing about 0.98 percent of GDP. According to figure 3.1 below, South Africa and Namibia
remain the market leaders in SSA in terms of depth. Figure 3.2 highlights practically the same classification
with a GDP value of close to zero and minimal differences among a number of countries (Malawi, Djibouti,
Chad, Mauritania, Mauritius, Tanzania) with higher levels of mortgage penetration. The highest mortgage
penetration in SSA is 6.48 percent in Malawi, still significantly less than many countries in the world, such
as Sweden at almost 60 percent.

 Figure 3.1: Comparative Mortgage Depth across SSA                  Figure 3.2: Comparative Mortgage Penetration across
 Countries (as a percentage of GDP for 2000-2010).                  SSA Countries (housing loan penetration)
                                                                                6.5
                                                                                6.3
                                                                                6.3
           30.8%




                                                                               6.1


 35%                                                                    7
                                                                             5.7
                                                                            5.4
        20.0%




                                                                            5.4

 30%                                                                    6
 25%
                                                                                           4.3


                                                                        5
 20%
                                                                                        3.6



 15%                                                                    4
                                                                                                         2.8
                                                                                                       2.3
                     2.5%
                     2.3%
                    2.0%




                                                                                                      2.1
                    1.2%
                    1.2%




 10%                                                                    3
                   1.0%
                   0.5%
                   0.4%
                   0.4%
                   0.2%
                   0.1%
                   0.1%
                   0.1%
                   0.0%
                   0.0%




                                                                                                     1.8
                                                                                                     1.8
                                                                                                    1.7
                                                                                                  1.2
  5%
                                                                                                  1.2
                                                                                                  1.1
                                                                        2                         1.1
                                                                                                 1.0
                                                                                                0.8
                                                                                                0.7
                                                                                               0.7
                                                                                               0.6
                                                                                               0.6
                                                                                               0.6
  0%




                                                                                              0.3
                                                                                              0.3
                                                                                             0.2
                                                                                             0.1
                                                                                             0.1
                                                                        1
                            Kenya




                           Nigeria



                             Chad

                           Gabon
                     South Africa
                         Namibia




                          Rwanda
                           Algeria
                          Uganda



                           Ghana
                         Tanzania




                           Guinea
                      Congo, Rep.
                          Senegal




                       Cameroon




         Central African Republic
                        Botswana




                                                                        0
                                                                                          Chad




                                                                                       Guinea
                                                                            Central Afric. Rep.


                                                                            Congo, Dem. Rep.
                                                                                          Niger
                                                                                       Malawi




                                                                                           Mali




                                                                                      Senegal
                                                                                      Djibouti




                                                                                          Togo




                                                                                Mozambique




                                                                                      Burundi
                                                                                     Mauritius




                                                                                    Cameroon
                                                                                         Kenya




                                                                                 Burkina Faso
                                                                                      Uganda




                                                                                         Benin
                                                                                        Angola


                                                                                      Rwanda
                                                                                    Botswana




                                                                                        Gabon
                                                                                       Nigeria
                                                                                   Mauritania
                                                                                     Tanzania
                                                                                 South Africa
                                                                                        Liberia
                                                                                        Ghana


                                                                                       Zambia




                                                                                  Congo, Rep.
                                                                                 Madagascar




 Source: Authors’ calculation using the World Bank database on      Source: Authors’ calculation using the Global Financial Inclusion
 housing finance launched by Badev et al., 2014: “Housing finance   database (FINDEX) launched by Demirguc-Kunt, Asli and Leora
 across countries: New data and analysis,” WPS6756.                 Klapper (2012), “Measuring financial inclusion: The global Findex
                                                                    Database,” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 6025.
                                                                    Note: Percentage of adult population with an outstanding loan to
                                                                    purchase a home. Unlike the mortgage depth indicator, the penetration
                                                                    index refers to any provider of housing loans, including regulated
                                                                    financial institutions, microfinance institutions, and other formal
                                                                    sources.

Sub-Saharan Africa is the region in the world where housing finance is the least developed. In fact, in SSA,
many countries have less than 1 percent mortgage depth or do not have a mortgage market. Moreover, the
most advanced countries in mortgage market development, such as South Africa (30.8 percent) and Namibia
(20.0 percent), are far behind many countries in the world with a deeper mortgage market, like Denmark
with 109.8 percent. Figure 3.3 below shows that annual housing demand is increasing. This could be

                                                                    7
explained by an increasing urbanization rate. Even if the demand for housing is projected to be flat post-
2015, it is still increasing at a low rate.
                                             Figure 3.3: Annual Housing Demand Evolution in SSA, 1965-2050 (projection)
                                                  6,000

                                                  5,000

                                                  4,000

                                                  3,000

                                                  2,000

                                                  1,000

                                                     -
                                                             1950
                                                                     1955
                                                                             1960
                                                                                    1965
                                                                                           1970
                                                                                                  1975
                                                                                                         1980
                                                                                                                1985
                                                                                                                       1990
                                                                                                                               1995
                                                                                                                                      2000
                                                                                                                                                                  2005
                                                                                                                                                                             2010
                                                                                                                                                                                    2015
                                                                                                                                                                                             2020
                                                                                                                                                                                                       2025
                                                                                                                                                                                                               2030
                                                                                                                                                                                                                      2035
                                                                                                                                                                                                                              2040
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     2045
                                             Source: Authors’ calculation using the World Bank database on housing finance launched by Badev et al.,
                                             2014: “Housing finance across countries: New data and analysis,” WPS6756.

Many initiatives have been taken in Africa to support the development of the mortgage market. For example,
the recent creation of national and regional mortgage refinancing institutions in Nigeria (2013), Tanzania
(2011), and the WAEMU (West African Economic and Monetary Union) sub-region (2010) will improve
mortgage loan granting. There potentially may be a way to improve household access to long-term liquidity
through developing mortgage markets, and at a reasonable cost. Unfortunately, as shown in figures 3.4 and
3.5 below, interest rates are too high in almost all African countries, which undermines mortgage market
accessibility.
 Figure 3.4: Mortgage Market Access and Housing                                                                                       Figure 3.5: Mortgage Penetration and Housing Finance
 Finance Policy in SSA.                                                                                                               Policy in SSA.
                                            70                                                                                                                    8
  Proportion of population with access to




                                                                    CAP        MAS                                                                                       SOU
                                            60                                                                                                                    7                             DJI CHA               MAL
                                                                    SOU                                                                                                                              TOG
                                                                                                                                       Mortgage penetration (%)




                                            50                              SEN                                                                                                        11.708 MAU
                                                                                                                                                                  6
                                                                                                                                                                                             ANG MAR
           mortgage market (%)




                                            40
                                                                            GUB                                                                                   5
                                            30             NAM                                                                                                                                   LIB
                                                                        BOT                                                                                       4
                                            20                        SWA                                                                                                                                               GHA
                                                                    SUD
                                                                         ANG                                                                                      3
                                            10            COM                       SIE                                                                                                         CMR
                                                                                                                                                                                               BTS UGA
                                                          ETH                               GAM                   MAD                                             2                              KEN    ZAM
                                              0                                                                                                                                            MAI    CAR
                                                                                                                                                                                            NGR BUR
                                                                                                                                                                                                 GAB
                                                                                                                                                                                                  CDR
                                                                                                                                                                                                BEN                                              MAD
                                                                                                                                                                  1
                                            -10 0            10               20            30             40             50                                                                  14.5CON
                                                                                                                                                                                                 BDI RWA
                                                                                                                                                                                                           GUI
                                            -20                                                                                                                   0
                                                                      Mortgage rate (%)                                                                                  0                 10                 20             30             40         50
                                                                                                                                                                                                    Mortgage policy (%)
                                                    Regression Mortgage access = f( Mortgage policy)                                                                                  Mortgage penetration=f(mortgage policy)

                                                    Linear (Regression Mortgage access = f( Mortgage policy))                                                                         Linear (Mortgage penetration=f(mortgage policy))

 Source: Authors’ calculation using the World Bank database on housing                                                                Source: Authors’ calculation using the Global Financial Inclusion
 finance launched by Badev et al., 2014: “Housing finance across                                                                      database (FINDEX) launched by Demirguc-Kunt, Asli and Leora
 countries: New data and analysis,” WPS6756.                                                                                          Klapper (2012), “Measuring financial inclusion: the global Findex
                                                                                                                                      Database,” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 6025.



                                                                                                                              8
 Note: The figure is a partial scatter plot, visually representing the                                      Note: The figure is a partial scatter plot, visually representing the
 regression of changes in the mortgage access (2006–2010 average) on the                                    regression of changes in the mortgage penetration (2006–2010 average)
 mortgage rate (2006–2010 average). The abbreviations next to the                                           on the mortgage rate (2006–2010 average). The abbreviations next to
 observations are the three-letter country codes as defined by the                                          the observations are the three-letter country codes as defined by the
 International Organization for Standardization.                                                            International Organization for Standardization.

This general point of view is complemented by a specific case study of the housing financial system of three
specific African countries (Tanzania, Zambia and Cameroon), presented in the appendix. The description
mainly highlights the fact that the formal housing finance system is not well developed and is bank based—
it cannot therefore respond to the demand from economic agents. We are therefore not surprised to see that
housing supply is not sufficiently abundant or affordable to meet the population’s housing needs.

3.3.      SSA housing market and finance policy typology and comparison
In order to take into account the heterogeneity of SSA countries, the 48 SSA countries are broken down into
various groups depending on characteristics such as wealth, legal origins, oil exporting, ecoclimate (Sahel
or forested), and regional proximity; see figure 3.6.


 Figure 3.6: Poverty Level across Different Types of SSA Countries
  3.0                                                                                                                                                                                     60
  2.5                                                                                                                                                                                     58
  2.0
                                                                                                                                                                                          56
  1.5
  1.0                                                                                                                                                                                     54
  0.5                                                                                                                                                                                     52
  0.0                                                                                                                                                                                     50
 -0.5
                                                                                                                                                                                          48
 -1.0
 -1.5                                                                                                                                                                                     46
 -2.0                                                                                                                                                                                     44
          1991

                 1992

                        1993

                               1994

                                       1995

                                                   1996

                                                              1997

                                                                         1998

                                                                                    1999

                                                                                                2000

                                                                                                            2001

                                                                                                                        2002

                                                                                                                                2003

                                                                                                                                        2004

                                                                                                                                               2005

                                                                                                                                                      2006

                                                                                                                                                              2007

                                                                                                                                                                     2008

                                                                                                                                                                            2009

                                                                                                                                                                                   2010
          1      2      3      4      5        6          7          8          9          10          11          12      13      14     15     16      17    18    19     20     21
                        Oil exporters (LHS)                                                                                     Frontier markets (LHS)
                        Fragile states (LHS)                                                                                    Others (LHS)
                        Actual poverty rate in SSA (percent of population, RHS)


 Source: Authors’ calculation based on WDI database

We checked to see if there are also differences in mortgage market policy and development across SSA
countries. Additionally, we compared the effective performance of housing finance policy, depth,
penetration, housing need, cheapest price, and input price with the benchmark performance.

Wealth-based breakdown
From a wealth point of view, expected income levels may affect housing finance indicators. In fact, table
A.1 in the appendix shows that upper-middle-income countries perform better on housing finance indicators.

Breakdown based on legal origins
The origin of a country’s legal system may affect its housing market and finance policies. Intuitively,
colonized countries seem likely to have inherited their legal systems, and thus the way their housing markets

                                                                                                 9
function would be essentially similar to that of their colonizers. The main legal origins in SSA we considered
are the French (code civil) and British (common law) systems. Table A.2 in the appendix shows that
countries with a French-based legal system may perform better on mortgage rate policy, while countries
with a British-based legal system may perform better on housing finance depth, housing finance penetration,
and housing finance access.
Other grouping
We found that oil-exporting countries perform better in terms of housing finance than non-oil-exporting
countries, which may, in fact, be explained by the income level. In addition, regional proximity is relevant
for housing finance performance. We found that ECCAS (Economic Community of Central African States)
presents the best performances in housing finance policy and demand; SADC (Southern African
Development Community) performs best in housing finance depth, penetration and access; and ECOWAS
(Economic Community of West African States) has the best performance in housing price and input price.
EAC (East African Community) presents average performance in all housing finance characteristics.

3.4.    Housing finance, inclusive growth, and inequality in SSA: A statistical analysis
Recent literature states that in the world in general and in Africa in particular, more urbanized countries
have lower rates of inequality and that urbanization goes hand in hand with more prosperity (Fox and
Sohnesen 2012; Christiansen 2013; World Bank 2013). The process of urbanization should be accompanied
by the growth of an affordable housing supply to respond to the consequent growing demand for housing.
The development of the housing finance system could be an excellent tool for this objective.
This statement is confirmed by figures 3.7 and 3.8, which show that mortgage penetration is positively
correlated with economic growth and negatively correlated with the Gini coefficient. This means that better
mortgage penetration spurs growth and reduces inequality. Expanded housing finance can therefore boost
inclusive growth and reduce inequality in Africa.
Figures 3.9 and 3.10 show that housing finance is positively correlated to two key indicators of national
wealth for SSA countries. In fact, in SSA, mortgage depth is positively correlated to growth of GDP per
capita. There is also a nonlinear positive relationship between mortgage penetration and the Human
Development Index (HDI). This means that countries with greater mortgage penetration have a better level
of human development.




                                                     10
 Figure 3.7: Mortgage Penetration and Economic Growth                                                 Figure 3.8: Mortgage Penetration and Gini Coefficient
 in SSA                                                                                               in SSA
                                                            0                                                                 0.7




                                                                                                       Gini coeficient (%)
         -1.5                        -1           -0.5          0          0.5           1                                    0.6
                                                         -0.5
                                                                                                                              0.5
    GDP growth (%)




                                                           -1                                                                 0.4
                                                                                                                              0.3
                                                         -1.5                                                                 0.2                      y = -0.489x + 0.4524
                                                                                                                              0.1                           R² = 0.0143
                                                           -2 y = 0.1383x - 1.2774
                                                                    R² = 0.0696                                                 0
                                                         -2.5                                              -0.02                      0            0.02          0.04          0.06         0.08
                                                    Mortgage penetration (%)                                                              Mortgage penetration (%)
                                          GDP growth function of mortgage penetration
                                                                                                                                          Gini coeficient function of mortgage depth
                                          Linear (GDP growth function of mortgage penetration)
                                                                                                                                          Linear (Gini coeficient function of mortgage depth)

 Source: Authors’ calculation based on a collection of data from a survey,                            Source: Authors’ calculation based on a collection of data from a
 the World Bank and Housing Finance in Africa yearbooks 2010, 2011                                    survey, the World Bank and Housing Finance in Africa yearbooks
 and 2013. Available at: www.housingfinanceafrica.org (accessed: Sept                                 2010, 2011 and 2013. Available at: www.housingfinanceafrica.org
 08, 2014).                                                                                           (accessed: Sept 08, 2014).
 Note: variables are in logarithmic terms on both axes.                                               Note: variables are in logarithmic terms on both axes.



 Figure 3.9: Nexus between Mortgage Penetration and                                               Figure 3.10: Mortgage Penetration and HDI
 GDP Per Capita Growth in SSA
                                   0.15
                                                                                                                                                                 0
  GDP per capita growth (%)




                                                                                                                             -2                   -1        -0.05 0                     1
                                    0.1
                                                                                                                                                              -0.1
                                   0.05                                                                                                                     -0.15
                                                                                                           HDI (%)




                                                                                                                                                              -0.2
                                      0
                              -1            0              1               2                 3                                                              -0.25
                                   -0.05                                                                                                                      -0.3
                                                                                                                                                            -0.35
                                    -0.1                                                                                                                      -0.4

                                   -0.15                                                                                                                    -0.45
                                                Mortgage depth (%)                                                                                            -0.5
                                                                                                                                             Mortgage penetration (%)
                                     Shared prosperity function of mortgage depth                                                 Poverty reduction function of Mortgage penetration

                                     Linear (Shared prosperity function of mortgage depth)                                        Linear (Poverty reduction function of Mortgage penetration)

 Source: Authors’ calculation based on a collection of data from a                                Source: Authors’ calculation based on a collection of data from a survey,
 survey, the World Bank and Housing Finance in Africa yearbooks                                   the World Bank and Housing Finance in Africa yearbooks 2010, 2011 and
 2010, 2011 and 2013. Available at: www.housingfinanceafrica.org                                  2013. Available at: www.housingfinanceafrica.org (accessed:
 (accessed: 08/09/2014).                                                                          08/09/2014).
                                                                                                  Note: variables are in logarithmic terms on both axes.
                                                                                                  Overall there is a positive link between housing finance and shared
                                                                                                  prosperity and between housing finance and poverty reduction.

In order to complete this exploratory analysis, we have presented a housing finance market typology for
some selected SSA countries in the appendixes. The case study focuses on three SSA countries from three
different subregions. These countries are Cameroon for Central and West Africa, Tanzania for East Africa,
and Zambia for Southern Africa.


                                                                                                 11
       4. Empirical Investigation and Analysis
4.1.      Regression models
In order to answer the three questions of interest, three regression models are used. The first model assesses
housing finance determinants. It is given by
HFINit = α + β1 MACAP it+ β2 Upopit+ β3 GDPPCit+β4 GDPgrowthit+ ΒXit +εit
where:
1. HFIN is a housing finance indicator, MACAP a financial market indicator, Upop the ratio of urban
population to total population, GDPPC is GDP per capita which is an indicator of the level of development
of the country, GDP growth; and X is a set of control variables (see the appendix for more detail).
2. α, β, are parameters, B a matrix of parameters, εit the disturbance term; the other variables are defined in
the appendix.
This regression model is based on the theoretical background of determinant financial product development,
such as housing finance products’, which has been developed in the literature review.
The second model assesses the linkage between housing finance and economic growth. It is based on
theoretical arguments developed in the literature review and specific findings about the SSA housing market
presented in section 3. It is given by
ሺ‫ܥܲܲܦܩ‬ሻ௜,௧ = 	߬ + 	 ߙଵ 	ሺ‫ܰܫܨܪ‬ሻ௜,௧ + 	 ߙଶ 	ሺܺሻ௜,௧ + ߤ௜,௧                                              (2)

where τ, α1, α2, are parameters, ߤit the disturbance term.
The set of control variables accounts for all relevant determinants of GDP per capita given by neoclassical
growth theory: labor, capital, and so on. In addition it accounts for origins of legal tradition and regional
considerations highlighted in section 3.
The third model assesses the linkage between housing finance and inequality. It too is based on theoretical
arguments developed in the literature review and specific findings about the SSA housing market presented
in section 3. It is given by
ሺ‫ܳܰܫ‬ሻ௜,௧ = 	ߠ + 	 ߴଵ 	ሺ‫ܰܫܨܪ‬ሻ௜,௧ + 	 ߴଶ 	ሺܺሻ௜,௧ + ߴ௜,௧                                                (4)

where ߠ , ߴଵ , ߴଶ 	 are parameters, ߴ௜,௧ the disturbance term, and INQ an inequality indicator.
The set of control variables accounts for all relevant determinants of inequality and is given by development
theory, including employment, education, and gender inequality among others. It also accounts for key
findings highlighted in section 3.
4.2.      Estimation strategy
The choice of panel data analysis gives us the advantage of having a reasonable size of time series data for
analysis, which could not have been performed on each of the individual countries. The double dimension
of panel data allows us to simultaneously take into account their dynamic behavior and their possible
heterogeneity across countries, which is not possible with either time series or cross-sectional data.
To estimate the static model specification, we carry out specification and robustness checks including
stationary and cointegration tests; based on the result we apply the Feasible Generalized Least Square (FGLS)
in case of presence of heteroscedasticity or we apply XTPMG in case of a non-stationary problem. To

                                                        12
estimate the model, we use the System Generalized Method of Moment (GMM) estimator developed by
Blundell and Bond (1998). The estimator combines two sets of equations. The first set includes first-
difference equations where the right-hand side variables are instrumented by the levels of the series lagged
one period or more. The second set consists of the equations in levels with the right-hand side variables
being instrumented by lagged first- or higher-order differences.
This estimator has several advantages5 such as taking into account country-specific effects, while enabling
us to address issues associated with endogeneity, measurement errors, and omitted variables. By exploiting
internal instruments, the System GMM estimator removes the often hard task of identifying valid external
instruments consisting of variables that are correlated with the endogenous explanatory variable, but not
with the error term of the equation.
The validity of these internal instruments (lagged variables in level and first differences) was not rejected.
As suggested by Arellano and Bond (1991), and Blundell and Bond (1998), a Sargan-Hansen test of over-
identifying restrictions and a serial correlation test were carried out. In both instances, the null hypothesis
could not be rejected—the instrumental variables are not correlated with the residual, and the errors exhibit
no second-order serial correlation.
In addition, to limit the risk of over-instrumentation, we keep the number of instruments to the minimum
by using as instrument only the first valid lagged value of the right-hand side variables. We assume that
financial variables are endogenous, and therefore are instrumented by their second lag value, while the
other variables, treated as predetermined, are instrumented by their first lag value.
4.3.        Results analysis and discussion
We present below estimation results of the three models using variables.


Housing finance determinants
Table 4.1 below presents results on housing finance determinants. It shows that stock market capitalization,
the growth rate of the urban population, and the dummy variable of lagged conflict are key determinants of
housing finance in SSA. Stock market capitalization and the growth rate of urban population are the
strongest positive determinants, while recovery from conflict is not significant for some specifications. In
addition, some variables seem to be hampering housing finance depending on the economic environment.
These variables are: the credit to the private sector, which is a proxy of the development of the banking
sector and trade openness, which may mask the low housing finance in oil exporting countries.
Table 4.1: Housing finance determinants (housing finance depth)
                                              Model A1: Housing finance determinants (housing finance depth)
                                        (1)               (2)              (3)               (4)               (5)

     Market capitalization       0.001***           0.001***         0.001***         0.001***          0.001***
                                 (0.00005)          (0.00005)        (0.00005)        (0.00006)         (0.00005)
     Urban population growth     0.0001*            0.0002**         0.0001*          0.0001*           0.0002**
                                 (0.00008)          (0.00008)        (0.00008)        (0.00006)         (0.00008)
     Conflict dummy t-1          0.007**            0.008**          0.007**          0.004             0.009
                                 (0.003)            (0.003)          (0.003)          (0.002)           (0.003)
     Investment stock            -0.0001            0.0005           -0.0001          0.0006            -0.002
                                 (0.002)            (0.002)          (0.002)          (0.002)           (0.002)

5
    Bond, Hoeffler, and Temple (2001) offer a good overview on GMM estimation of empirical growth models.

                                                           13
   GDP per capita                      0.0002                0.0001              0.0002              0.0002                0.0003
                                       (0.002)               (0.002)             (0.002)             (0.002)               (0.002)
   Voice accountability                -0.00003              -0.00006            -0.00004            0.00004               0.00001
                                       (0.0001)              (0.0001)            (0.0001)            (0.00008)             (0.0001)
   Domestic credit to private sector   -0.0002               -0.0001             -0.0002             0.0002**              -0.0002
                                       (0.0001)              (0.0001)            (0.0001)            (0.0001)              (0.0001)
   Trade openness                      -0.00004              -0.00004            -0.0003             -0.00003              -0.00003
                                       (0.00003)             (0.00003)           (0.00003)           (0.00002)             (0.00003)
   Inflation                           0.00005               0.0001              0.00005             0.0001                -0.00001
                                       (0.0002)              (0.0002)            (0.0002)            (0.0001)              (0.0002)
   Interest rate                       0.0001                0.0002              0.0001              0.00003               0.0001
                                       (0.0001)              (0.0001)            (0.0001)            (0.0001)              (0.0001)
   Transfers                           8.95e-20              1.03e-19            8.9e-20             8.9e-21               4.9e-20
                                       (1.15e-19)            (1.1e-19)           (1.1e-19)           (9.3e-20)             (1.1e-19)
   Kaolegal                            ---                   -0.007**            ---                 ---                   ---
                                                             (0.002)
   Kaosahel                            ---                   ---                 -0.001              ---                   ---
                                                                                 (0.005)
   Kaomac                              ---                   ---                 ---                 -0.0004***            ---
                                                                                                     (0.00004)
   Kaofcbf                             ---                   ---                 ---                 ---                   0.003***
                                                                                                                           (0.0009)
   Constant                            -0.004                -0.02               -0.005              -0.027                0.04
                                       (0.063)               (0.061)             (0.062)             (0.05)                (0.062)

   Countries                              45                45                  45                   45                     45
   Observations                           223               223                 233                  223                    223
Source: Authors estimates
Note: Kaolegal (Financial openness*Legal-dummy: Legal-based decomposition-); Kaosahel (Financial openness*Sahel-dummy: Sahel-based
decomposition-); Kaowealth (Financial openness*Wealth-dummy: wealth-based decomposition-); Kaotrop (Financial openness*Trade openness);
Kaomac (Financial openness*Market capitalization); Kaofbcf (Financial openness*Investment stock). *,**,**: significance levels of 10%, 5% and
1% respectively. Values in bracket are standard errors.

Stock market capitalization is a key determinant of housing finance in SSA. In fact, it is significant in all
specifications of our empirical model. This result is coherent with the theoretical prediction and the
empirical finding of Badev et al. (2014) at a global level. As a matter of fact, financial and stock markets
are less developed in almost all African countries. A study by Beck et al. (2011) shows that more banking
and less stock market are the key features of the financial structure; this could be the reason why SSA has a
weak housing finance market, since its financial structure is more bank based than market based.
Indeed, we can see that this financial structure failed to improve housing finance depth in SSA. This could
be explained by the fact that the banking sector usually does not offer specific and acceptable housing loans,
which are generally long-term loans. For almost all these countries, there are several government and private
banks, but mortgage depth remains low, stable, and sometimes tends to decrease.
Therefore, policy makers who wish to boost housing finance in SSA countries should consider strengthening
the development of stock markets. Moreover, credit to the private sector is non-significant and negatively
correlated to housing finance in some countries while it is significant and positively correlated to housing
finance in others. This ambiguous empirical result might mean that the assumption that banking
development is a catalyzer of housing finance should be reconsidered since it seems to be detrimental.
Indeed, the country case studies in the appendix show that in Africa the banking sector is more developed
than the financial sector—however, the region still has a low depth of housing finance. Developing mortgage
markets is imperative and should be encouraged by a clear state policy.




                                                                       14
In addition, the growth rate of the urban population is instrumental to housing market development in SSA.
In table 4.1, the growth rate of the urban population is a positive determinant of housing finance in all
empirical model specifications except one. This variable drives the demand of marketable housing in any
country and specifically in SSA countries. This result confirms the finding of Badev et al. (2014) at a global
level in the African context.
Furthermore, reconstruction after years of conflict that has devastated infrastructure is also a key
determinant of housing finance. In many empirical specifications, the dummy of lagged conflict is positively
and significantly correlated to greater housing finance in SSA. There are two main rationales behind this
finding: (a) after conflicts where housing has been widely destroyed, there is a need to reconstruct; and (b)
at the end of a financially draining conflict, they people do not have enough money saved to build a house
without financing, so rebuilding will require credit.
The inflation rate, interest rate, transfers from abroad, and the GDP per capita rate are associated positively
with housing finance, but these are not significant relationships. Thus these four variables are weak
determinants of financial deepening. These findings are the same as those of Egert and Mihaljek (2007) and
Haibin Zhu (2006). However, trade openness, domestic credit, and investment stock have a negative impact
on housing finance.
In addition to the basic model and in subsequent regressions, we added one composed variable at a time.
The idea is to check the compounded effect of our previous context differentiation. We find that financial
openness combined with legal_dummy, investment stock, and market capitalization has a significant impact
while its combination with Sahel_dummy is non-significant. On one hand, the combination of legal_dummy
and market capitalization has a negative effect on housing finance depth and on other hand, the combination
with investment stocks has a positive influence.
Tables 4.2 and 4.3 present estimated results of the shared prosperity and inclusive growth model. They show
that housing finance depth has no significant impact on inequality in SSA. However, based on the literature,
we were expecting a negative relation between those two variables. Our results are closer to this prediction
when we consider housing finance policy. It fact, this policy appears to reduce inequality, since a negative
and significant coefficient of housing finance indicators on inequality suggests that countries with more
highly developed housing financial systems tend to have lower levels of inequality than those with bank-
based financial systems.

Impact of housing finance on inequality

Table 4.2: Impact of Housing Finance on Inequality (Gini index)
                                   (1)          (2)          (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)         (7)

  Housing finance depth (X)        -0.181       ---          8.39        -1.52       12.46       30.08       39.16
                                   (0.942)                   (13.03)     (3.75)      (15.66)     (36.43)     (36.38)
  X2                               ---          -0.056*      ---         ---         ---         ---         ---
                                                (0.137)
  Housing finance policy           -0.006***    -0.01***     -0.005***   -0.006***   -0.005***   -0.006***   -0.006***
                                   (0.0009)     (0.0008)     (0.0009)    (0.0009)    (0.0009)    (0.0009)    (0.0009)
  Inflation                        -5.7e-06     -1.056       -5.6e-06    -5.7e-06    -5.6e-06    -5.7e-16    -5.7e-06
                                   (0.0003)     (0.002)      (0.00003)   (0.00003)   (0.00003)   (0.00003)   (0.00003)
  GDP per capita                   -0.004       -0.058       -0.004      -0.004      -0.004      -0.004      -0.004
                                   (0.008)      (1.005)      (0.008)     (0.008)     (0.007)     (0.008)     (0.008)
  Human capital                    -0.012***    0.0001       -0.01***    -0.012***   -0.012***   -0.012***   -0.012***
                                   (0.002)      (1.281)      (0.002)     (0.002)     (0.002)     (0.002)     (0.002)


                                                             15
   Gender                              0.001          0.022          0.0007         0.001          0.0005         0.0012         0.001
                                       (0.003)        (1.007)        (0.004)        (0.003)        (0.004)        (0.003)        (0.003)
   Conflict dummy t-1                  0.277**        0.801          0.269**        0.274**        0.255**        0.28**         0.279**
                                       (0.09)         (2.729)        (0.091)        (0.091)        (0.095)        (0.09)         (0.09)
   Political stability                 -0.02**        -0.0005        -0.001**       -0.013**       -0.002**       -0.001**       -0.002**
                                       (0.002)        (1.418)        (0.002)        (0.002)        (0.002)        (0.002)        (0.002)
   Hfinva                              ---            ---            -0.128         ---            ---            ---            ---
                                                                     (0.194)
   Hfinconf                            ---            ---            ---            1.41           ---            ---            ---
                                                                                    (3.85)
   Hfinwealth                          ---            ---            ---            ---            -6.29          ---            ---
                                                                                                   (7.785)
   Hfinlegal                           ---            ---            ---            ---            ---            -30.29         ---
                                                                                                                  (36.45)
   Hfinsahel                           ---            ---            ---            ---            ---            ---            -39.36
                                                                                                                                 (36.39)
   Constant                            5.1***         4.92***        5.13***        5.1***         5.16***        5.098***       5.1***
                                       (0.292)        (0.055)        (0.296)        (0.292)        (0.302)        (0.292)        (0.292)

    Countries                         45             45              45            45              45            45              45
    Observations                      446            502             446           446             446           446             446
Source: Authors’ estimates.
Note: Hfinva (Housing finance depth*Voice accountability); Hfinconf (Housing finance depth*Conflict dummy t-1); Hfinwealth (Housing finance
depth*Wealth-dummy: wealth-based decomposition); Hfinlegal (Housing finance depth*Legal-dummy: legal-based decomposition); Hfinsahel
(Housing finance depth*Sahel-dummy: Sahel-based decomposition). *,**,**: significance levels of 10%, 5% and 1% respectively. Values in bracket
are standard errors.

Concerning the impact of housing finance depth, the non-significance of the impact has allowed us to verify
the threshold effect. Our verification (in the table above and appendix) was conclusive since a higher value
(squared values) of housing finance depth then became negatively and significantly correlated to inequality.
However a very higher value (exponential value) presents a non-significant result again.
These results confirm the fact that there is a threshold effect. Indeed, above a certain threshold, higher values
of housing finance depth conclusively reduce inequality, while lower and very high values do not have a
significant impact. Well-developed housing finance systems are therefore associated with inequality
reduction. Based on these findings, we can recommend the development of housing finance systems in
African countries.
Turning to the control variables, the results are mostly in line with expectations. There is a strong negative
but non-significant influence on inequality of inflation and of income per capita; and a significant negative
impact of human capital on inequality, suggesting that higher levels of economic development and human
capital are associated with lower levels of inequality. Additionally, the governance level indexed by political
stability appears to reduce inequality. These results are in line with the theoretical and empirical literature,
which assumes that investing in human and physical capital is a good tactic to reduce inequality.
However, the conflict dummy is contrary to inequality reduction objectives, since their coefficients are
positive and significant. These last results suggest that the positive impact of the conflict dummy on housing
finance development should be mitigated. While countries may expand housing finance after a conflict to
boost reconstruction, the rich may be better positioned than the poor to take advantage of it, which risks
increasing inequality. Additional measures may be needed to compensate for this effect.
Our composed variables are non-significant; however, all of them present the expected theoretical negative
sign excluding housing finance depth interacted with conflict_dummy. Housing finance depth is contrary to
inequality reduction in a post-conflict country. The reason could be the same as highlighted above since
there is unequal access to and distribution of money, favoring the wealthy more than the poor. The capacity

                                                                     16
of housing finance depth to reduce inequality is multiplied when it is combined with voice and
accountability and with wealth, legal, and Sahel dummies. Our previous decomposition is therefore relevant
in the analysis of the capacity of housing finance to reduce inequality.


Impact of housing finance on inclusive growth

Table 4.3: Impact of Housing Finance on Per Capita Economic Growth (GDPPC) and Economic Growth (GDP)
                                               GDPPC (1)              GDP            GDPPC (2)        GDPPC (3)         GDPPC (4)

   Housing finance depth                          0.365**       2.25**                   11.56             79.85             0.009
                                                   (1.44)       (1.11)                 (15.43)            (86.3)           (0.007)
   Housing finance policy                           0.009       0.002***                 0.009              0.01             0.007
                                                  (0.007)       (0.0003)               (0.007)           (0.007)           (0.007)
   Population 15-64                                3.56**       -1.63**                 3.64**            3.53**            3.56**
                                                   (1.39)       (0.777)                  (1.4)            (1.39)             (1.4)
   Investment stock                             0.717***        -0.013               0.718***            0.72***           0.72***
                                                  (0.097)       (0.042)                (0.097)           (0.097)           (0.097)
   Human capital                                  0.013**       ---                    0.012**           0.013**           0.013**
                                                  (0.004)                              (0.004)           (0.004)           (0.004)
   Trade openness                               -0.012***       -0.007***            -0.012***         -0.012***         -0.012***
                                                 (0.0014)       (0.001)                (0.001)           (0.001)           (0.001)
   Conflict dummy t-1                               0.109       ---                      0.089             0.12              0.109
                                                  (0.117)                              (0.119)           (0.117)           (0.117)
   Infrastructure (Electricity)                   0.015**       0.002**                0.016**           0.002**           0.022**
                                                 (0.0047)       (0.002)                (0.005)           (0.005)           (0.005)
   Inflation                                       -0.002       ---                     -0.002            -0.002            -0.002
                                                  (0.008)                              (0.008)           (0.008)           (0.008)
   Interest rate                                   -0.002       ---                     -0.002            -0.003            -0.002
                                                  (0.006)                              (0.006)           (0.006)           (0.006)
   Transfers                                      1.1e-17       ---                    1.2e-17           1.2e-17           1.1e-17
                                                 (1.8e-17)                            (1.8e-17)         (1.8e-17)         (1.8e-17)
   Domestic credit to private sector               -0.011       ---                      -0.01             -0.01            -0.011
                                                  (0.007)                              (0.007)           (0.007)           (0.007)
   Hfinwealth                                         ---       ---                      -5.98               ---              ---
                                                                                       (7.702)
   Hfinlegal                                       ---          ---                        ---           -80.28              ---
                                                                                                         (6.94)
   Hfinsahel                                       ---          ---                      ---               ---             -0.365
                                                                                                                            (1.44)
   Constant                                     -23.06**        19.04***              -23.43**          -22.9**           -23.06**
                                                  (6.96)        (3.34)                  (6.96)           (6.94)             (6.96)

   Countries                                            45                45                  45                 45         45
   Observations                                        188               500                 188                 188        188
Source: Authors estimates.
Note: Kaotrop (Financial openness*Trade openness); Hfinwealth (Housing finance depth*Wealth-dummy: wealth-based decomposition); Hfinlegal
(Housing finance depth*Legal-dummy: Legal-based decomposition-); Hfinsahel (Housing finance depth*Sahel-dummy: Sahel-based
decomposition-). *,**,**: significance levels of 10%, 5% and 1% respectively. Values in brackets are standard errors.

From table 4.3 above, we can see that housing finance depth has a positive and significant impact (5 percent
level) on GDP per capita growth and GDP growth in Africa. This result confirms that the development of
housing finance is relevant to the pursuit of inclusive growth objectives. The impact is expected to be higher
on economic growth than on per capita economic growth. Interestingly, our results imply that for every 100
dollars spent on housing finance activities in Africa, 36.5 dollars are added to per capita GDP while 225
dollars are added to GDP. This result confirms the findings of Hongyu et al. (2002), Erbas and Nofthaft


                                                                  17
(2002), Uy (2006) and Freire et al. (2006) in other regions and is another reason why African countries
should consider expanding their mortgage markets.
In addition, the working population (indexed by the 15–64 age cohort of the population), investment stock,
human capital, and infrastructure are determinants of inclusive growth in Africa. These results are also in
line with previous literature on the subject. However, trade openness is negatively and significantly related
to GDP growth and GDP per capita growth. We can attribute these contradictory results to the proxy used
to index these variables.
The combined variables are all non-significant and are associated to a negative sign; without combining
them, we still have the same non-significant result. We are able to conclude then that our decomposition is
relevant—but in the wrong way in terms of housing finance development impact on per capita economic
growth. The variables housing finance policy, transfers, and conflict_dummy present the positive sign
predicted by the theory, while the variables inflation, interest rate, and domestic credit to private sector
present a negative sign, contrary to the theoretical predictions.

4.4.    Robustness check
In order to make sure that our results are robust, we implemented additional estimations, changing some
variables by their proxy, changing the specification, and changing the estimation method. By changing the
specification, we were guided by the maximization of the number of observations relative to the one of the
principal estimations. Practically, we either added control variables that might affect the dependent variable
or removed other control variables to maximize the number of observations. As shown in the annexed tables,
our results are conclusive since we have the same sign and signification variable as in the principal results
discussed.
By exchanging some variables with their proxy, we were able to verify whether we obtain the same result
even when we use different measures for the same variable. By changing the estimation method from FGLS
to GMM, we verified the robustness of our main results. In addition, we used alternative measures of growth
(GDP per capita growth and GDP growth) and housing finance (mortgage depth and mortgage penetration)
to verify the quality of our results.
Tables A.6, A.7, and A.8 present the results of our robustness check regression. The results overall are
conclusive. However, by comparing table A.6 in the appendix to table 4.1, the interpretation of the impact
of conflict_dummy is either positive or negative and significant depending on how we change the housing
finance index. So, the previous results of a positive impact of conflict_dummy are plausible only for housing
finance depth and not housing finance penetration. Also, our combined variables become positively and
significantly related to housing finance when the proxy is housing finance penetration.
We can therefore confirm that there is a little relative difference depending on the variable we use to index
housing finance even if results remain mostly similar. The rest of the variables retain the same sign and
significance independently of the change of the proxy of housing finance development and the estimation
method.
Comparing table A.7 in the appendix to table 4.3, we see that by changing specification and dependent
variables, our results remain globally unchanged. However, labor becomes not significant. Additionally,
trade openness is negatively related to economic growth when we use the FGLS estimation method.
However, when we use the GMM estimation method, trade openness positively and significantly affects


                                                     18
economic growth. Since the results for economic growth are largely similar to those of the inclusive growth
equation, we can confirm the robustness of the impact of housing finance development on inclusive growth.
Comparing table A.8 in the appendix to table 4.2, the results remain the same independently of the
estimation method. However, governance indexed by political stability produces either positive or negative
(and significant) impacts on inequality, depending on the method.

    5. Conclusion
This paper used a new database on mortgage depth and penetration across countries and panel data
econometric techniques to investigate housing finance determinants and the potential of housing finance to
contribute to inclusive growth in Africa. It begins by using a benchmarking exercise with a decomposition
approach to describe and present the typology of housing finance systems in Africa.
The statistical analysis mainly revealed that housing finance performance varies significantly based on the
decomposition of country characteristics. In addition, our analysis emphasized that housing finance systems
in Africa are generally nascent and based more on banks than on markets.
The paper’s econometric analysis leads to the following key findings.
First, stock market capitalization and urban growth are the main determinants of housing finance
development in Africa. Specifically, stock market capitalization is one of the main determinants of housing
finance development in Africa; while credit to the private sector is non-significant and negatively correlated
to housing finance in some countries but it is significant and positively correlated to housing finance in
others. Hence, the assumption that banking development is a catalyzer of housing finance should be
reconsidered.
Second, countries with more highly developed housing financial systems tend to have lower levels of
inequality than those with bank-based financial systems. Hence, well-developed housing finance systems
are associated with inequality reduction.
Third, human capital appears to be the main factor for reducing inequality. In fact, there is a significant
negative impact of human capital on inequality, suggesting that higher levels of economic development and
human capital are associated with lower levels of inequality. These results are in line with the theoretical
and empirical literature, which assumes that investing in human and physical capital is a good tactic to
reduce inequality.
Fourth, housing finance depth is contrary to inequality reduction in a post-conflict country. The reason could
be the same as highlighted above since the unequal access to and distribution of money favor the wealthy
more than the poor.
Overall, to develop SSA housing finance markets, this study suggests that governments should focus on
market capitalization and mortgage markets development.




                                                     19
    6. Appendix


Table A.1: Statistical Comparison of Lower Income, Middle Income, and Upper Income Housing Markets and Finance
Policy
                                                            Mean           Std. dev.     Benchmark        Comment
 Housing      finance         policy    Low                 15.77          8.25                           Performance
 (mortgage rate)                        Lower middle        16.12          4.99          Low              order is: UM, L,
                                        Upper middle        12.94          1.74                           LM.
 Housing        finance      depth      Low                 0.23           0.63                           Performance
 (mortgage debt to GDP / credit to      Lower middle        0.37           0.65          High             order is: UM, LM,
 GDP)                                   Upper middle        13.29          14.69                          L.
 Housing finance penetration            Low                 2.11           2.21                           Performance
 (financial inclusion indicator of      Lower middle        2.17           2.15          High             order is: UM, LM,
 percentage of adult population         Upper middle        2.57           2.49                           L.
 with outstanding loan to
 purchase a home)
 Housing       finance      access      Low                 2.38           3.87                           Performance
 (proportion of population who          Lower middle        16.26          20.26         High             order is: UM, LM,
 can access mortgage rate in SSA)       Upper middle        35.72          11.41                          L.
 Housing demand                         Low                 112.73         127.9                          Performance
 (annual housing demand)                Lower middle        115.33         201.33        Low              order is: UM, L,
                                        Upper middle        23.67          34.58                          LM.
 Cheapest housing price (price of       Low                 40388          58999                          Performance
 the cheapest, newly built house        Lower middle        37381          23090         Low              order is: UM, LM,
 by a formal developer or               Upper middle        32308          22674                          L.
 contractor)
 Housing input price                    Low                 12.21          5.1                            Performance
 (cost of standard 50kg bag of          Lower middle        10.42          1.96          Low              order is: UM, LM,
 cement in US$)                         Upper middle        7.61           0.53                           L.
Source: Authors’ calculation based on a collection of data from a survey, the World Bank and Housing Finance in Africa yearbooks
2010, 2011 and 2013. Available at: www.housingfinanceafrica.org (accessed: 08/09/2014).
Notes: All measures are in US$. The countries included in each group are: (1) Lower income countries: Guinea-Bissau, Guinea,
Sierra Leone, Liberia, Mali, Burkina Faso, Togo, Benin, Niger, Chad, Central African Rep., Dem. Rep. of Congo, Uganda, Kenya,
Ethiopia, Eritrea, Somalia, Tanzania, Mozambique, Zimbabwe, Madagascar, Comoros; (2) Lower middle income countries: Cape
Verde, Senegal, Mauritania, Ivory Coast, Ghana, Nigeria, Cameroon, Congo, Angola, Zambia, Lesotho; (3) Upper middle income
countries: Gabon; Namibia, Botswana, South Africa, Equatorial Guinea.
Table A.2: Statistical Comparison of Housing Markets of Countries’ with French and British Legal Origins and
Finance Policy
                                                        Mean        Std dev.      Benchmark     Comment
  Housing finance policy               French           15.91       7.25                        French speaking countries
  (mortgage rate)                      speaking                                   Low           perform better than English
                                       English          16.16       6.3                         speaking countries
                                       speaking
  Housing     finance     depth        French           0.14        0.45                        English speaking countries
  (mortgage debt to GDP / credit       speaking                                   High          perform better than French
  to GDP)                              English          3.92        8.99                        speaking countries
                                       speaking
  Housing finance penetration          French           1.88        2.25                        English speaking countries
  (financial inclusion indicator       speaking                                                 perform better than French
  of percentage of adult               English          3.26        2.27          High          speaking countries
  population with outstanding          speaking
  loan to purchase a home)


                                                               20
  Housing      finance    access       French           10.38       16.45                       English speaking countries
  (proportion of population who        speaking                                High             perform better than French
  can access mortgage rate in          English          10.96       17.58                       speaking countries
  SSA)                                 speaking
  Cheapest housing price (price        French           42560       58330                       Both tend to have the same
  of the cheapest, newly built         speaking                                Low              performance
  house by a formal developer or       English          43520       26039
  contractor)                          speaking
  Housing input price (cost of         French           12.29       5.3                         Both tend to have the same
  standard 50kg bag of cement in       speaking                                Low              performance
  US$)                                 English          10.49       3.94
                                       speaking
Source: Authors’ calculation based on a collection of data from a survey, the World Bank and Housing Finance in Africa yearbooks
2010, 2011 and 2013. Available at: www.housingfinanceafrica.org (accessed: 08/09/2014).
Notes: All measures are in US$. The countries included in each group are: (1) French speaking countries: Angola, Benin, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Central African Rep., Chad, Comoros, Congo, Ivory Coast, Dem. Rep. of Congo, Djibouti,
Equatorial Guinea, Gabon, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Madagascar, Mali, Mauritania, Niger, Sao Tome & Principe, Senegal and Togo;
(2) English speaking countries: Botswana, Eritrea, Ethiopia, Gambia, Ghana, Kenya, Lesotho, Liberia, Malawi, Mauritius,
Mozambique, Namibia, Nigeria, Rwanda, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Somalia, South Africa, Sudan, Swaziland, Tanzania, Uganda,
Zambia and Zimbabwe.

Table A.3: Variable Definition and Data Source
 Variables                   Signs           Variable Definitions                                      Sources
 Housing finance policy      HFINP           Mortgage rate                                             Housing finance data
                                                                                                       base, World Bank
 Mortgage depth              HFIND           Mortgage debt to GDP / Credit to GDP                      Housing finance data
                                                                                                       base, World Bank
 Mortgage penetration        HFINPE          Percentage of adult population with an outstanding loan   Financial inclusion data
                                             to purchase a home.                                       base, World Bank
 Housing cost                HFINC           Cheapest house price                                      Housing finance in
                                                                                                       Africa
 Housing    construction     HFINCP          Housing input price                                       Housing finance in
 price                                                                                                 Africa
 Housing demand              HFINDM          Annual housing demand                                     Housing finance data
                                                                                                       base, World Bank
 Urban population            UPOP            Urban population (% of total)                             World Bank (WDI)
 Public spending             PSPEND          Public spending on education, total (% of GDP)            World Bank (WDI)
 Real interest rate          TXINT           Real interest rate (annual %)                             World Bank (WDI)
 Financial openness          KAOPEN          economy capital account degree of openness                Chin & Ito (2006)
 Domestic credit             BCRED           Domestic credit to private sector by banks (% of GDP)     World Bank (WDI)
 Net transfers               TRANS           Net current transfers from abroad (constant LCU)          World Bank (WDI)
 Shared prosperity           INEQ1           Gini index                                                World Bank (WDI)
 Shared prosperity           INEQ2           GDP per capita                                            World Bank (WDI)
 Trade openness              TROPEN          Imports plus Exports in commodities (% of GDP)            World Bank (WDI)
 Public Investment           PUBIV           Gross Public Investment (% of GDP)                        World Bank (WDI)
 Stock              market   MACAP           Total value of all listed shares in a stock market as a   Standard & Poor's,
 capitalization to GDP (%)                   percentage of GDP. (Standard & Poor's, Global Stock       Global Stock Markets
                                             Markets Factbook and supplemental S&P data)               Fact book and
                                                                                                       supplemental S&P data
 Inflation                   INFL            Consumer Price Index (annual %)                           World Bank (WDI)
 Economic Prosperity         GDPG            GDP Growth (annual %)                                     World Bank (WDI)
 Per Capita Economic         GDPPC           GDP per capita Growth (annual %)                          World Bank (WDI)
 prosperity
 Foreign Direct Investment   FDI             Foreign Direct Investment (%)                             World Bank (WDI)
 Unemployment                UNEM            Unemployment rate (annual %)                              World Bank (WDI)
 Human Capital               SE_SEC_E        Secondary school enrollment (% gross)                     World Bank (WDI)
                             NRR
 Gender education            SE_ENR_P        Ratio of girls to boys in primary and secondary           World Bank (WDI)
                             RSC_FIN         education (%)


                                                              21
 Population                  POP          Population ages 15-64 (% of total)                         World Bank (WDI)
 Governance                  VA_PER_R     Voice and accountability                                   World Bank (WGI)
                             NK
 Public spend                PSPEND       Public spending on education (% of GDP)                    World Bank (WDI)
 Infrastructure 1            IS_ROD_P     Roads paved (% of total roads)                             World Bank (WDI)
                             AVED
 Infrastructure 2            EG_ELC_H     Electricity production from hydroelectric (% of total)     World Bank (WDI)
                             YRO_ZS
 Wealth_dummuy               WEALTH      Dummy variable based on the decomposition of                Author compute
                                         (lower=0, lower middle=1, upper=2) wealth level
 Conflict_dummy          CONFLICT Dummy variable based on the decomposition of                       Author compute
                                         (Conflict=1 versus absence of conflict=0) countries
 Sahel_dummy             SAHEL           Dummy variable based on the decomposition of                Author compute
                                         (Sahel=0 versus Forest=1) countries
 Legal_dummy             LEGAL           Dummy variable based on the decomposition of (French        Author compute
                                         law=0 versus Common law=1) countries
 WDI: World Bank Development Indicators. FDSD: Financial Development and Structure Database.
Source: Authors’ construction.

Table A.4: Mortgage Depth Data Sources
  Country                      Region                     No. of Obs         Period       Source
  Botswana                     Sub-Saharan Africa             1            2009-2009      Other
  Burkina Faso                 Sub-Saharan Africa             5            2006-2010      Central Bank
  Burundi                      Sub-Saharan Africa             5            2007-2011      Central Bank of Burundi
  Cameroon                     Sub-Saharan Africa             1            2005-2005      Other
  Central African Republic     Sub-Saharan Africa             1            2005-2005      Other
  Chad                         Sub-Saharan Africa             1            2005-2005      Other
  Congo, Rep.                  Sub-Saharan Africa             1            2005-2005      Other
  Gabon                        Sub-Saharan Africa             1            2005-2005      Other
  Ghana                        Sub-Saharan Africa             2            2006-2008      Other
  Guinea                       Sub-Saharan Africa             1            2005-2005      Other
  Kenya                        Sub-Saharan Africa             5            2006-2010      Other
  Malawi                       Sub-Saharan Africa             2            2006-2007      Central Bank
  Namibia                      Sub-Saharan Africa             1            2011-2011      Hofinet
  Nigeria                      Sub-Saharan Africa             2            2006-2008      Other
  Senegal                      Sub-Saharan Africa             1            2004-2004      Other
  South Africa                 Sub-Saharan Africa             12           2000-2011      South African Reserve Bank
  Tanzania                     Sub-Saharan Africa             1            2009-2009      World Bank Mission April 2009
  Togo                         Sub-Saharan Africa             5            2006-2010      Other
  Uganda                       Sub-Saharan Africa             2            2010-2011      Central Bank
Source: Authors’ construction based on Badev et al. (2014) database on housing finance.

Table A.5: Housing Loan Penetration by Country (2011)
 Country                         %              Country                  %               Country            %
 Angola                          4.3            Rwanda                   2.1              Kenya             1.2
 Burundi                         0.1             Sudan                   6.4             Liberia            3.6
 Benin                           0.6            Senegal                  0.1             Lesotho            0.8
 Burkina Faso                    0.7          Sierra Leone               0.5           Madagascar           0.6
 Botswana                        1.8            Somalia                  6.9               Mali             0.8
 Central African Republic        1.1              Chad                   6.3           Mozambique           1.1
 Cameroon                        1.7              Togo                   2.3            Mauritania          6.1
 Congo, Rep.                     0.3            Tanzania                 5.4            Mauritius           5.7
 Comoros                         0.7            Uganda                   1.2             Malawi             6.5
 Djibouti                        6.3          South Africa               5.4              Niger             1.0
 Gabon                           0.6        Congo, Dem. Rep.             0.7             Nigeria            0.3
 Ghana                           2.8             Zambia                  1.8
 Guinea                          0.2           Zimbabwe                  1.3
Source: Authors’ construction based on Badev et al. (2014) database on housing finance.



                                                           22
Table A.6: Housing Finance Determinants (Sensitivity and Robustness Check)
                           Model A2: Housing finance determinants (Sensitivity and robustness check)
                                                                         FGLS                                                   GMM
                                                   HFD             HFP               HFP                HFP              HFP              HFD
   Housing finance depth L1                  ---             ---               ---                ---               1.02*             0.131
                                                                                                                    (0.045)           (0.086)
   Market capitalization                     0.001***        0.03**            0.03***            0.02              0.001***          0.001***
                                             (0.00003)       (0.012)           (0.013)            (0.12)            (0.00005)         (0.0001)
   Urban population growth                   0.00008*        -0.06*            0.06**             -0.03*            0.0002**          0.001
                                             (0.0005)        (0.022)           (0.023)            (0.022)           (0.00008)         (0.002)
   Conflict dummy t-1                        0.004*          -2.28*            -3.42**            -2.2*             ---               ---
                                             (0.002)         (1.12)            (1.23)             (1.15)
   Investment stock                          0.00009         1.22**            0.59               1.11**            -0.002            -0.00003
                                             (0.001)         (0.479)           (0.53)             (0.504)           (0.002)           (0.01)
   GDP per capita                            -1.0003***      -1.58***          -2.1***            -2.3***           0.0003            0.0002
                                             (0.002)         (0.482)           (0.51)             (0.512)           (0.002)           (0.002)
   GDP growth                                2.15***         2.37***           2.18***            2.5***            0.0001            0.0001
                                             (0.002)         (0.459)           (0.485)            (0.487)           (0.002)           (0.002)
   Political stability                       0.08***         0.1***            0.1**              0.1***            0.00001           -0.0001
                                             (0.023)         (0.025)           (0.026)            (0.026)           (0.0001)          (0.0004)
   Domestic credit to private sector         ---             -0.035            -0.06*             -0.035            -0.0002           0.0001
                                                             (0.028)           (0.029)            (0.028)           (0.0001)          (0.0006)
   Trade openness                            ---             -0.006            -0.01              -0.006            -0.00003          -0.00004
                                                             (0.01)            (0.01)             (0.01)            (0.00003)         (0.0001)
   Inflation                                 ---             0.19**            0.16**             0.18**            -0.00001          0.0001
                                                             (0.06)            (0.06)             (0.063)           (0.0002)          (0.0003)
   Interest rate                             ---             0.28***           0.267***           0.28***           0.0001            0.0001
                                                             (0.04)            (0.04)             (0.04)            (0.0001)          (0.0003)
   Transfers                                 9.1e-20         3.02e-17          2.14e-17           3e-17             4.9e-20           -5.4e-21
                                             (9.8e-20)       (3.4e-17)         (3.33e-17)         (3.4e-17)         (1.1e-19)         (1.3e-19)
   Kaolegal                                  ---             0.86**            ---                ---               ---               ---
                                                             (0.33)
   Kaosahel                                  ---             ---               0.962**            ---               ---               ---
                                                                               (0.292)
   Kaowealth                                 ---             ---               ---                0.16              ---               ---
                                                                                                  (0.266)
   Constant                                  -0.105          -28.4**           -0.913             -26.15*           ---               ---
                                             (0.04)          (14.9)            (16.84)            (15.41)
   Auto                                      na              Na                Na                 Na                -1.06             -1.089
                                                                                                                    (0.255)           (0.276)
   Sargan OIR                                na              Na                Na                 Na                2.052             1.682
                                                                                                                    (0.307)           (0.794)
   Wald                                      na              Na                Na                 Na                12.48*            70.374***
                                                                                                                    (0.067)           (0.000)
    Countries                                 45              45                45                45                45                45
    Observations                              401             252               252               252               223               206
Source: Estimation result observation by the authors.
Note: HFD (Housing finance depth); HFP (Housing finance penetration); Kaolegal (Financial openness*Legal-dummy: Legal based decomposition-
); Kaosahel (Financial openness*Sahel-dummy: Sahel based decomposition-); Kaowealth (Financial openness*Wealth-dummy: wealth based
decomposition-); Kaotrop (Financial openness*Trade openness-); Kaomac (Financial openness*Market capitalization); Kaofbcf (Financial
openness*Investment stock). *,**,**: significance levels of 10%, 5% and 1% respectively. Values in bracket are standard errors. Auto:
Autocorrelation test. OIR: Overidentifying Restrictions test. The significance of bold values is twofold. 1) The significance of estimated coefficients
and the Wald statistics. 2) The failure to reject the null hypotheses of: a) no autocorrelation in the Auto tests and; b) the validity of the instruments
in the Sargan OIR test. P-values in brackets. AR(1): First Order Autoregression. AR(2): Second Order Autoregression. Autoregression is on the
Return variables.




                                                                          23
Table A.7: Impact of Housing Finance on Economic Growth (Sensitivity and Robustness Check)
                                                                                FGLS                                           GMM
                                                                   (1)                           (2)                            (4)
   GDP L1                                              ---                            ---                         0.94***
                                                                                                                  (0.075)
   Housing finance depth                               2.25**                         2.27**                      0.133
                                                       (1.11)                         (1.11)                      (0.146)
   Housing finance policy                              0.002***                       0.002***                    0.0005*
                                                       (0.0003)                       (0.0004)                    (0.0002)
   Population 15-64                                    -1.63**                        -1.62**                     -1.126
                                                       (0.777)                        (0.777)                     (0.222)
   Investment stock                                    -0.013                         ---                         -0.012
                                                       (0.042)                                                    (0.012)
   Human capital                                       ---                            ---                         -0.0002
                                                                                                                  (0.0007)
   Trade openness                                      -0.007***                      -0.01***                    0.0004*
                                                       (0.001)                        (0.001)                     (0.0002)
   Conflict dummy t-1                                  ---                            ---                         ---

   Infrastructure (electricity)                        0.002**                        0.003**                     0.0006
                                                       (0.002)                        (0.002)                     (0.001)
   Inflation                                           ---                            ---                         -0.0004
                                                                                                                  (0.0003)
   Interest rate                                       ---                            ---                         -0.0002
                                                                                                                  (0.0003)
   Transfers                                           ---                            ---                         -1.2e-18**
                                                                                                                  (5.9e-19)
   Domestic credit to private sector                   ---                            ---                         -0.0009
                                                                                                                  (0.0005)
   Constant                                            19.04***                       18.61***                    ---
                                                       (3.34)                         (3.037)
   Auto                                                Na                             Na                          -1.110
                                                                                                                  (0.266)
   Sargan OIR                                          Na                             Na                          3.462
                                                                                                                  (0.483)
   Wald                                                Na                             Na                          3.688*
                                                                                                                  (0.054)
    Countries                                          45                             45                          45
    Observations                                       500                            500                         178
Source: Estimation result observation by the authors.
Note: Kaotrop (Financial openness*Trade openness); Hfinwealth (Housing finance depth*Wealth-dummy: wealth-based decomposition-); Hfinlegal
(Housing finance depth*Legal-dummy: Legal-based decomposition-); Hfinsahel (Housing finance depth*Sahel-dummy: Sahel-based
decomposition-). *,**,**: significance levels of 10%, 5% and 1% respectively. Values in bracket are standard errors. Values in bracket are standard
errors. Auto: Autocorrelation test. OIR: Overidentifying Restrictions test. The significance of bold values is twofold. 1) The significance of estimated
coefficients and the Wald statistics. 2) The failure to reject the null hypotheses of: a) no autocorrelation in the Auto tests and; b) the validity of the
instruments in the Sargan OIR test. P-values in brackets. AR(1): First Order Autoregression. AR(2): Second Order Autoregression. Autoregression
is on the Return variables.




                                                                           24
Table A.8: Impact of Housing Finance on Inequality (Sensitivity and Robustness Check)
                                                                          FGLS                                         GMM
                                    (1)               (2)             (3)            (4)             (5)               (8)
   Ineq L1                          ---               ---             ---            ---             ---               1.013***
                                                                                                                       (0.007)
   Housing finance depth (X)        0.825             ---             ---            -1.52           12.46             -0.012
                                    (0.907)                                          (3.75)          (15.66)           (0.01)
     2
   X                                ---               -0.056*         ---            -0.015**        -0.031**          -0.015*
                                                      (0.137)                        (2.039)         (1.019)           (0.017)
   ex                               ---               ---             0.124          6.035           1.086             -0.006
                                                                      (0.017)        (5.06)          (21.35)           (0.009)
   Housing finance policy           -0.006***         -0.01***        -0.005***      -0.006***       -0.005***         -0.003**
                                    (0.0009)          (0.0008)        (0.0009)       (0.0009)        (0.0009)          (0.001)
   Inflation                        -6e-06            -1.056          -5.6e-06       -5.7e-06        -5.6e-06          -1e-07
                                    (0.00003)         (0.002)         (0.00003)      (0.00003)       (0.00003)         (1e-07)
   GDP per capita                   -0.007            -0.058          -0.004         -0.004          -0.004            0.004***
                                    (0.008)           (1.005)         (0.008)        (0.008)         (0.007)           (0.00003)
   Human capital                    -0.01***          0.0001          -0.01***       -0.01***        -0.01***          -0.00006
                                    (0.001)           (1.281)         (0.002)        (0.002)         (0.002)           (0.00005)
   Gender                           ---               0.022           0.0007         0.001           0.0005            -0.00008
                                                      (1.007)         (0.004)        (0.003)         (0.004)           (0.00009)
   Conflict dummy t-1               ---               0.801           0.269**        0.274**         0.255**           ---
                                                      (2.729)         (0.091)        (0.091)         (0.095)
   Political stability              ---               -0.0005         - 0.012**      0.015**         0.012**           0.007**
                                                      (1.418)         (0.004)        (0.003)         (0.002)           (0.0003)
   Hfinwealth                       ---               ---             -6.09          ---             ---               ---
                                                                      (7.84)
   Hfinlegal                        ---               ---             ---            -33.6           ---               ---
                                                                                     (36.56)
   Hfinsahel                        ---               ---             ---            ---             -43.86            ---
                                                                                                     (36.45)
   Constant                         5.5***            4.99***         5.13***        5.1***          5.16***           ---
                                    (0.082)           (0.053)         (0.296)        (0.292)         (0.302)
   Auto                             na                na              Na             Na              Na                -1.089
                                                                                                                       (0.276)
   Sargan OIR                       na                na              Na             Na              Na                1.682
                                                                                                                       (0.794)
   Wald                             na                na              Na             Na              Na                70.374***
                                                                                                                       (0.000)
   Countries                        45                45             45               45             45                45
   Observations                     457               502            446              446            446               367
Source: Estimation result observation by the authors.
Note: Hfinwealth (Housing finance depth*Wealth-dummy: wealth-based decomposition); Hfinlegal (Housing finance depth*Legal-dummy: legal-
based decomposition); Hfinsahel (Housing finance depth*Sahel-dummy: Sahel-based decomposition). *,**,**: significance levels of 10%, 5% and
1% respectively. Values in bracket are standard errors. Auto: Autocorrelation test. OIR: Overidentifying Restrictions test. The significance of bold
values is twofold. 1) The significance of estimated coefficients and the Wald statistics. 2) The failure to reject the null hypotheses of: a) no
autocorrelation in the Auto tests and; b) the validity of the instruments in the Sargan OIR test. P-values in brackets. AR(1): First Order
Autoregression. AR(2): Second Order Autoregression. Autoregression is on the Return variables.




                                                                        25
 Box A.1: Housing Policy and the Formal Sector Share of Housing Production in Cameroon
 Since Cameroon’s independence in 1960, its housing policy has been based primarily on a system of direct central
 government intervention through three organizations: (1) the Mission d’Aménagement et d’Équipements des
 Terrains Urbains et Ruraux (Mission to Plan and Improve Urban and Rural Land, or MAETUR); (2) the Société
 Immobilière du Cameroun (Cameroon Real Estate Corporation, or SIC); and (3) the Crédit Foncier du Cameroun
 (Cameroon Land Credit Bank, or CFC). However, this system has met only a limited share of the demand. Despite
 government measures, it has produced less than 1 percent of all parcels—a supply that is further limited to the upper-
 middle classes, especially civil servants.
 Residents’ self-construction and self-marketing efforts created housing or parcels without central government or
 decentralized local government intervention. Land access has been organized in mainly informal ways: Customary
 authorities have developed the urban extensions, and de facto and legal landowners have increased the density of
 urban areas through the private rental market, the largest share of housing in Douala and Yaoundé today.
 During the past two decades, private property developers have appeared, initially in response to incentives provided
 by the central government, such as a property development decree and tax incentives for structural projects. Yet
 these developers’ interventions remain modest and lack visibility.


Box A.2: Housing Finance Trend in Zambia
In 2012, Zambia committed nearly US$700 million for infrastructure development across the country. With sustained
economic growth each year, FDI (foreign direct investment) and investment in the housing sector have led to job
creation and increased access to housing, retail real estate projects, and commercial buildings. Major infrastructure
projects are going on across the country—notably, Roma Park which includes both commercial and residential
components. From the supply side, there is a challenge of housing in many urban centers, especially in rapidly growing
cities in the provinces of Copperbelt and North-West, where mining operations have restarted. Moreover, and
according to research from UN Habitat, there is a deficit of 1.3 million housing units across the country, and the
construction of 46,000 units or more per year is recommended to fill the gap.
However, between 2001 and 2011, the construction rate was only 11,000 units. The major challenge in the real estate
sector in Zambia is the accessibility to units by low and middle income households, which is common in many African
countries. The two main housing institutions—the National Housing Authority and the Pension Scheme Authority—
promoted housing primarily for employees with medium and high incomes, excluding those in other categories. The
relative political stability of Zambia's economic growth stimulated by the mining industry and its booming middle
class generate continuing growth in demand for housing in major urban centers across the country. However, there is
still vast potential and opportunities to apply micro-finance as an effective tool to provide housing to people in the low
income bracket, who are too often overlooked.




                                                           26
Box A. 3: The Rental Market in Tanzania
In Tanzania, the formal and informal rental market is divided into several segments. Tanzanians employed in the formal
sector may rent rooms from $50 per month or a small apartment for $300 per month. Upper-class Tanzanians and
expatriates pay between $1,000 and $5,000 per month, depending on location and amenities. Paying a year’s rent in
advance is common. The rental market is a lucrative business. Investors generally buy several units or apartment
buildings at a cost of between $200,000 and $300,000. They rent units for $1,500–$5,000 per month, realizing a
positive return on investment within three to five years. Rentals in the informal sector and for lower-income brackets
often have even higher returns. In a typical scenario, the property owner’s family occupies one part of a housing unit
and rents out the other to another party. In low-income neighborhoods, three or four families commonly live under one
roof.
Mainly driven by new legislation, the Tanzanian real estate market has begun to change. Previously, financial
institutions were cautious about lending for real estate, since the laws related to foreclosure were unclear and offered
little protection to investors. Now the institutions are more active in real estate, since relevant laws provide greater
financial security. It is clear that the legislative and legal environment in Tanzania has stimulated the real estate market.
Currently, the deficit of housing stock in Tanzania is estimated at 3 million units with a value of US$80 billion. The
annual demand for housing in urban areas is estimated at around 200,000 units.
To fill the gap, the government gave lead authority to the National Housing Corporation (NHC) and mandated it to
build at least 15,000 units by the end of 2015. As of 2012, the NHC had mobilized nearly US$100 million of long-
term financing from local commercial banks and international finance institutions, for the construction of housing
units. By promoting participation of private business leaders and banks, the reform legislation helped stimulate growth
in the housing finance sector.
Since the legislative and legal environment began to provide security in transactions, much progress has been made in
the sector; as more and more banks introduce mortgage products as part of their lending. In addition, the mortgage
market is developing smoothly and the total amount of credit by the banking sector has reached around US$96 million.
The total number of mortgage loans grew rapidly from 1,889 in early 2013 to 2,784 at the end of December 2013.
Notably, the creation of the Tanzania Mortgage Refinancing Company (TMRC) in 2011 contributed significantly to
the growth and stability of the mortgage market in Tanzania. This institution provides attractive rates and promotes
good practices among both borrowers and banks. To date, the mortgage loans granted by the TMRC represent 11
percent of outstanding mortgages. As more borrowers benefit from the opportunities offered by TMRC liquidity,
mortgage credit in Tanzania will grow considerably.
The housing market in Tanzania provides a huge potential for growth, especially with the planned large-scale housing
currently being built by the NHC, and the growing demand for additional housing units. Tanzania’s rental market is
growing. However, beyond mortgages, there is also real potential in the micro-finance sector for housing, adding
opportunities for all Tanzanians to acquire housing.




                                                             27
    7. References
Arellano, M. & Bond, S. (1991). “Some tests of specification for panel data: Monte Carlo evidence and an
        application to employment equations.” The Review of Economic Studies, 58, pp. 277-297.
Atkinson, A. B. (1975), “The Economics of Inequality” (Oxford: Clarendon Press).
Badev, A., T. Beck, L. Vado & S. Walley (2014), “Housing finance across countries: New data and analysis,”
       World Bank Working Paper Series.
Beck, T., A. Demirgüç-Kunt & R. Levine (2004), “Finance, inequality, and poverty: Cross-country
       evidence.” NBER Working Paper No. 10979. Issued in December 2004.
Beck, T., S. Munzele Maimbo, I. Faye & T. Triki (2011), “Financing Africa: Through the crisis and beyond,”
        World Bank, Washington, DC.
Becker, G. S. (1975), “Human Capital,” NBER and Columbia University Press, New York.
Besley T, S. Coate, G. Lowry (1992). “The economics of RoSCAs,” Centre for International Studies,
       Discussion Paper No. 149. Princeton University, NJ.
Blundell, R. & S. Bond (1998). “Initial conditions and moment restrictions in dynamic panel data models.”
       Journal of Econometrics, 87(1), pp.115-143.
Bond, S., A. Hoeffler & J. Tample (2001), “GMM Estimation of Empirical Growth Models,” University of
       Oxford.
Buckley, R. & R. Madhusudhan (1984), “The Macroeconomics of Housing’s Role in the Economy: An
       International Analysis,” Presented to the American Real Estate and Urban Economics Association;
Buckley, R. (1996), “Housing Finance in Developing Countries,” McMillan, London.
Calderon & Serven (2008), “The Effects of Infrastructure Development on Growth and Income
       Distribution”, The World Bank Policy Research Working Paper (WPS3400).
Chen, J. & A. Zhu (2008), “The Relationship between Housing Investment and Economic Growth in China:
        A Panel Analysis Using Quarterly Provincial Data,” China National Social Science Foundation
        Working Paper.
Christiansen, L., J. De Weerdt & Y. Tod (2013), “Urbanization and poverty reduction - The role of rural
        diversification and secondary towns,” Policy Research Working Paper 6422.
Dübel, Hans-Joachim (2007), “Does housing finance promote economic and social development in
       emerging markets?,” Housing Finance Impact Study for International Finance Corporation.
Econsult Corporation (2009), “Potential economic and fiscal impacts of a Pennsylvania housing trust fund,”
       The Housing Alliance of Pennsylvania.
Egert, B. & D. Mihaljek (2007), “Determinants of house prices in Central and Eastern
       Europe,” Comparative Economic Studies, vol. 49(3), p.p. 367-88.
Erbas, S. & F. Nothaft (2002), “The role of affordable mortgages in improving living standards and
        stimulating growth: A survey of selected MENA countries,” IMF Working Paper.
Fox & Sohnesen (2012), “Household enterprises in Sub-saharan Africa – Why they matter for growth, jobs
       and livelihoods.” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper;
Freire, Mila, M. Gautier and O. Hassler (2006), “Review of Argentina’s housing sector: Options for
        affordable housing policy,” World Bank Working Paper



                                                   28
Guitierrez, C., C. Orecchia, P. Paci and P. Serneels (2007), “Does employment generation really matter for
        poverty reduction?” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 4432.
Haibin Z., (2006), “The structure of housing finance markets and house prices in Asia,” BIS Quarterly
       Review, December 2006.
Hangen, E. & J. Northrup, (2010), “Building homes Rhode Island: An analysis of economic impacts,”
       Housing Works R I.
Hongyu, L. Y. Park & Z. Siqi (2002), “The interaction between housing investment and economic growth
      in China,” International Real Estate Review, 5: 1, p.p. 40 – 60.
Jacoby, H. & E. Skoufias (1997), “Risk, financial markets, and human capital,” Review of Economic Studies,
        vol. 64, p.p. 311-335.
Jacoby, H. (1994), “Borrowing constraints and progress through school: Evidence from Peru,” Review of
        Economics and Statistics, vol. 76, 151-160.
Malpezzi, S. (1999), “Economic analysis of housing markets in developing and transition economies,”
       Urbanization in Transforming Economies, p. 1791-1864.
Montfort M., G. P. Seok, Y. Masafumi (2013), “Banking in Sub-Saharan Africa: The macroeconomic
       context,” European Investment Bank, January 2013.
Singh, R. & Y. Huang (2011), “Financial deepening and property rights: Evidence from Sub-Saharan Africa,”
        IMF Working Paper No. 11/196.
Tipple, A. G. (1994), “Employment from housing: A resource for rapidly growing urban populations,”
        Cities 11, No. 6, p. 373.
UN-HABITAT (2008), “The state of African Cities 2008: A framework for addressing urban challenges in
     Africa,” UN-HABITAT, Nairobi.
Uy, W. (2006), “Medium-Rise housing: The Philippine experience,” Presentation Paper for the 5th Asian
       Economic Forum.
World Bank (2013), “Harnessing urbanization to end poverty and boost prosperity in Africa: An action
       agenda for transformation,” Africa Region Sustainable Development N=81546, the World Bank.




                                                   29
