                                                   WPS7960


Policy Research Working Paper                     7960




  The Impact of Mining on Spatial Inequality
                    Recent Evidence from Africa

                                Tony Addison
                                Amadou Boly
                              Anthony Mveyange




Development Research Group
Poverty and Inequality Team
February 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 7960


  Abstract
 This paper investigates the relationship between mining and                        that mineral wealth can be a curse and a blessing. Further
 spatial inequality in Africa during 2001–12. The identifi-                         analysis suggests that these results largely depend on whether
 cation strategy is based on a unilateral causation between                         mining is active or closed, the scale of mining operations, the
 mining and district inequality. The findings show that when                        value of minerals extracted, and the nature of mining activ-
 minerals are aggregated, mining increases district inequality.                     ities—important dimensions for shaping mining policies
 But an analysis of individual minerals shows that mining                           aimed at bolstering socioeconomic development in Africa.
 affects district inequality positively and negatively, suggesting




  This paper is a product of the Poverty and Inequality Team, Development Research Group. It is part of a larger effort by
  the World Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions around
  the world. Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The authors may be
  contacted at amveyange@worldbank.org.




         The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
         issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
         names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
         of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
         its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                       Produced by the Research Support Team
                                     The impact of mining on spatial inequality

                                                    Recent evidence from Africa
                                Tony Addison,1 Amadou Boly,2 and Anthony Mveyange3




Keywords: Mineral resources, mining, spatial inequality, Africa
JEL classification: D63, L71, L72




                                                       
Acknowledgements: We thank the participants at the Centre for the Study of African Economies’ 2015
conference, held at the University of Oxford, for their constructive comments. We also wish to thank participants
in the 2017 seminar series at the Economic Social Research Foundation in Dar es Salaam for their insightful
comments. Anthony Mveyange acknowledges the funding received from the United Nations University-World
Institute for Development Economic Research (UNUWIDER) to support this study. This paper has been supported
by UNU-WIDER’s ‘Macro-economic management (MEM)’ project. The usual caveats apply.
1
  Chief economist and deputy director, the United Nations University World Institute for Economic Development
Research (UNU-WIDER), email: addison@wider.unu.edu.
2
  Principal research economist, the African Development Bank (AfDB), email: a.boly@afdb.org
3
  Economist, the World Bank Development Research Group (DECRG) and corresponding author, email:
amveyange@worldbank.org.

 
 

 

Introduction


Mineral wealth extraction and its impacts on development outcomes, especially in the
developing world, have received considerable attention in the economic development
literature. Recent studies have shown the impacts of mineral wealth extraction on economic
growth and development (Beny and Cook 2009; Papyrakis and Gerlagh 2004; Van der Ploeg
2011; Venables 2016), conflict and civil unrest (Collier and Hoeffler 1998, 2002, 2005; Lujala
2009; Van der Ploeg 2011), agricultural growth (Andersson et al, 2015; Chuhan-Pole et al.
2015), women’s employment (Kotsadam and Tolonen 2015), income and prices of goods
(Aragón and Rud 2013), and revenues, public spending, and living standards (Caselli and
Michaels 2013). Yet little is known about the relationship between mineral wealth and spatial
inequality in resource-rich countries in general, or in producing regions in particular (see e.g.,
Ross 2007),4 despite a widely held view that mineral-rich countries often exhibit large
inequalities, both vertical and horizontal (see e.g., Auty 2001; Ross 2007).5

This paper fills this gap in the literature by examining whether the presence of mineral deposits
and mining activities affects spatial inequality. Our main focus is on Africa, a continent
endowed with minerals and with recently growing mining activities (Beny and Cook 2009),
and where the lack of empirical evidence is persistent and somewhat rooted in the legacy of
unreliable and inconsistent data, especially at the local scale (Kim 2008). The analysis builds
on two important tenets: first, the theoretical explanations of the causes of spatial inequalities
that identify natural geographical advantages (including the presence of mineral wealth) as one
key candidate among others (see Kim 2008; Venables 2005); second, a unilateral causation
between mining and spatial inequality—the presence of mining deposits and activities
influences spatial inequality, and not vice versa—as an identification strategy. With the aid of
night-time lights data to measure inequality across space and time, and geocoded mine-level
data, we confine our analysis at the district level, effectively allowing us to investigate the
within-district inequality effects of mining activities across countries over time.

There were several reasons for our choice of districts as units of analysis. First, by focusing on
districts we systematically examined the nexus between mining and spatial inequality in
proximity to mines and over time. This is useful for untying the effects of mining on spatial
inequality at the subnational level: understanding how mining affects economic activities at
local scales, and identifying the drivers of spatial differences between mineral-rich and
mineral-poor countries—a needed ingredient for eliciting appropriate policy responses.
Second, the use of lower-level geographical administrative units allowed us to control for
unobserved country and regional differences, which naturally cannot be handled in a setting
where analysis is focused at the country level. In the context of our data, controlling for country
and regional fixed effects is important if we are to understand the dynamic effects of mining
                                                       
4
  Producing regions can typically face forced displacement, population pressure due to in-migration, or
environmental pollution and degradation (Akabzaa et al. 2007; Salami 2001), with little or no positive return in
terms of higher incomes or better living standards.
5
  Vertical inequality refers to inequality amongst individuals within countries or regions, while horizontal
inequality refers to inequality between countries or regions. These inequalities can create frustrations and
grievances in producing regions, leading to the so-called resource curse. In a worst-case scenario, attempts to gain
more control over natural resource wealth can degenerate into violent regional conflicts or secessionist
movements, as in the Democratic Republic of Congo, Indonesia, Myanmar, Nigeria, Sudan, or Yemen. For more
detail, see e.g., Bannon and Collier (2003), or Ross et al. (2012).  
                                                         2
 

 

activities on spatial inequality net of other confounding and unobserved country- and region-
specific characteristics, such as institutional structures and the quality of governance across
countries.

The empirical analysis is divided into two main parts. In the first part, we estimate the effects
of mining across the different minerals available in districts across countries over time. The
main goal here is to understand the overall impact of mining activities—regardless of the
individual minerals—on district inequality. The second part takes into account the individual
minerals available across districts. This approach allows us to disentangle the effects of
individual mineral commodities on district inequality. We argue that by separating the effects
of individual minerals, our study is able to precisely identify what types of minerals affect
spatial inequality, and by extension how they do so. To strengthen our empirical analysis, in
both cases we identified and exploited the different sources of exogenous variation (i.e. mining
status, mining scale, mining value, and the nature of mining activities) in mining activities at
the district level.

We document two key findings. First, when we aggregate the different minerals, mining
increased district inequality during 2001–2012. In fact, when we control for constant mineral
prices, the regression estimates show that district inequality (measured using lights-based Gini)
on average increases by 0.180 and 0.090 Gini points in districts with mineral deposits and
mining sites respectively, relative to those with none. The results remain robust even when we
use minerals’ annual average prices, with an average increase of 0.166 and 0.083 Gini points
for districts with mineral deposits and mining sites respectively.

Second, when we analyse individual minerals, the findings show that mining affected district
inequality both positively and negatively. On the one hand, the findings show significant
positive effects of mining on inequality for districts producing helium, garnet, diatomite, and
gold. Since gold is a high-value metal and its prices were steadily on the rise during 2001–12
(see Figure 1), the positive effect can be explained along the lines of Boschini et al. (2007).
However, the positive result for helium, garnet, and diatomite can be explained by the effect
of steady declines in the prices of these commodities during 2011–12 (see Figure 1), with the
underlying assumption that, ceteris paribus, price declines potentially led to an overall
reduction in income of mineral-rich districts (relative to districts with none), resulting in
increased inequality. On the other hand, the findings also show significant negative effects on
inequality for districts producing iron ore and nickel, whose prices were on a steady rise during
2001–12 (see Figure 2), suggesting that increases in district incomes potentially led to a
negative effect on overall district inequalities.

The findings are even more nuanced when we analyse the previously mentioned sources of
exogenous variations. This analysis revealed that in addition to the price effect described
above, the effects of mining on district inequality largely depended on whether mines were
active or closed, the scale of mining operations, the value of the minerals extracted, and the
nature of mining activities. For example, on the one hand, the results show statistically
significant increases in inequality in districts with active mines and engaged in the production
of low-value, large-scale, and transformational mining activities. On the other hand, the
findings depict a negative and statistically significant effect in districts with closed mines or
engaged in mineral extraction.


                                               3
 

 

The findings on individual minerals are equally revealing in terms of the effects of the
interaction between individual minerals’ prices and the mentioned sources of exogenous
variation. For example, our findings suggest that inequality increased significantly in districts
with active mines producing helium, garnet, tin, and gold, and decreased in districts with active
mines producing iron ore. For districts with closed mines, the results show that inequality
declined where, amongst others, diamond, cement, platinum, nickel, and tin were produced.
Also, the results indicate that inequality increased significantly in districts with low-value
minerals (i.e. helium and garnet) and high-value minerals (i.e. gold), and declined in districts
producing iron ore and nickel. Further, the positive effect remained for districts producing,
among others, helium, garnet, gold, lithium, and manganese at a large scale, while districts
engaged in the small-scale production of, for example, barite, bentonite, salt, and graphite
experienced declines in the levels of inequality. Finally, results based on the nature of mining
activities show closely similar findings.

In general, all the above results are robust both to different model specifications and to the
inclusion of various controls such as district, regional, and country fixed effects (which also
account for the differences in institutional structures, policies, and quality of governance),
rainfall, proxies for agricultural productivity, and districts’ spatial locations. Obviously, these
nuanced findings are uniquely interesting and can elicit different policy prescriptions. In
particular, for example, our finding that precious metals such as gold had statistically positive
effects on district inequality resonate with the predictions and findings of Boschini et al. (2007)
on the impacts of types of minerals and their appropriability for economic development
outcomes. Overall, the main conclusion we draw from these results, also echoing Van der Ploeg
(2011), is that mineral wealth and thus mining can indeed be both a curse and a blessing. But
whether it is a curse or a blessing largely depends on the types and values of the minerals, and
on a number of such important and interrelated factors as status of the mines, scale of
operations, nature of mining activities, and values of minerals extracted.

Our paper makes several contributions to the existing literature. We first respond to Ross’s
(2007: 238) call for additional research on the relationship between natural resources and
income inequality, an issue about which ‘surprisingly little is known’. As far as the mining-
spatial inequality nexus is concerned, our study is the first to our knowledge to offer an
extensive empirical investigation across a panel of countries and at lower-level geographical
administrative units in Africa. Further, our study contributes to a broader and controversial
literature on the causes of spatial inequality, particularly in developing countries. As Kim
(2008) and Venables (2005) assert, understanding how natural advantages (e.g., mineral
wealth) affect spatial inequality is important for explaining the spatial differences that emerge
as countries experience positive economic growth and development, as is the case in Africa. In
the same vein, our study resonates with ongoing policy discussions on understanding the link
between subnational regional development, spatial inclusion, and structural transformation in
Africa (AfDB et al. 2015). Finally, our analysis encompasses a wider geographical coverage—
2,182 districts across 653 regions in 38 African countries—thus providing evidence that is
more representative and useful for policy than studies with more restricted coverage.

The remainder of this paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 briefly reviews the existing
literature on the link between natural resources and socio-economic outcomes. Section 3
presents the data, a brief description of inequality estimation, and the summary statistics.


                                                4
 

 

Section 4 presents our empirical model. Section 5 discusses the main results. Section 6
concludes.


2         Related literature


The resource curse relates to the observation that natural-resource-rich countries tend to grow
less rapidly than natural-resource-poor countries; or more broadly, that resource-rich countries
tend to have worse development outcomes compared with resource-poor countries. This
finding is documented in Sachs and Warner’s (1995) seminal paper, as well as in a number of
subsequent studies (e.g., Arezki and Van der Ploeg 2011; Gylfason et al. 1999; Mehlum et al.
2006; Sachs and Warner 1997, 2001). Sachs and Warner (1995) use growth in per-capita GDP
as the dependent variable, and measure natural resource abundance using the share of primary-
product exports in GDP. They find that economies with a high ratio of natural resource exports
to GDP (in the base year, 1970) tended to grow slowly during the subsequent 20 years.

Ding and Field (2005) suggest a distinction between resource dependence and resource
abundance.6 Exports of primary resources as a share of GDP or of total exports—used in Sachs
and Warner (1995) and other studies—is viewed as measuring resource dependence rather than
resource abundance. Using the World Bank’s estimates of natural resource capital, Ding and
Field measure resource dependence as the share of natural resource capital in total capital, and
resource abundance as natural resource capital per capita. Their results indicate that resource
endowment has a positive impact on economic growth, whereas resource dependence has a
negative impact. Similarly, Brunnschweiler and Bulte (2008) find that resource dependence
does not affect growth, while resource abundance positively affects growth.

The previous two studies suggest that the direct impact of resource wealth on growth is not a
robust and generalizable phenomenon. However, there exist various ‘indirect’ channels
through which natural resource wealth can affect development outcomes. A first negative
impact of natural resource wealth relates to the so-called Dutch disease.7 While earlier studies
found no evidence of the Dutch disease in the manufacturing sector (see e.g., Gelb 1988;
Spatafora and Warner 1999), more recent empirical evidence has become available. Harding
and Venables (2016), using data on 41 resource exporters for 1970–2006, show that a dollar of
resource revenue leads to a decrease in non-resource exports by approximately 75 cents and an
increase in imports by 25 cents, with the manufacturing sector experiencing the largest
crowding-out effect. Similarly, Ismail (2010) finds results indicating that, in oil exporting
countries, a 10 per cent oil windfall is on average associated with a 3.4 per cent fall in value
added across manufacturing. Evidence of the Dutch disease is also found in Brazil, where oil


                                                       
6
  They point out that a resource-abundant country such as the United States is not resource-dependent (i.e. has a
small primary sector), while a resource-scarce country such as Burundi can be heavily dependent on primary
resources.
7
  Natural resource exports generate significant foreign reserves, resulting in exchange rate appreciation. Such
currency appreciation affects the international competitiveness of the traditional export sectors (agriculture or
manufacturing), potentially leading to their shrinking in favour of the natural resource sector and non-tradable
sector. This phenomenon is called the ‘Dutch disease’, as the discovery of natural gas in the North Sea caused the
manufacturing sector in the Netherlands to decline (see e.g., Ellman 1981). 
                                                          5
 

 

discoveries and exploitation led to service expansion and industry shrinkage (Caselli and
Michaels 2013).

A concentrated distribution of natural resource rents can increase inequality (between rich and
poor, or across regions of a country). For example, resource dependence is found to be
correlated with a larger Gini index of inequality (Gylfason and Zoega 2003), while Fum and
Hodler (2010) suggest that natural resources increase income inequality in ethnically divided
societies but not in ethnically homogenous societies. Increased inequality can lead to
frustration and social unrest, due for example to differences between actual and expected
benefits (Ross 2007), particularly in producing regions. In this regard, Collier and Hoeffler
(1998, 2002, 2005) show that natural resources significantly increase the chances of civil
conflict in a country. Diamonds (Lujala 2009), oil (Fearon 2005; Fearon and Laitin 2003;
Humphreys 2005; Ross 2004), and narcotics (Angrist and Kugler 2008) also pose the highest
risks of war.

Mehlum et al. (2006) find that the resource curse applies typically in countries with rent-seeker-
friendly institutions, but not in countries with producer-friendly institutions. Likewise,
Boschini et al. (2007) find evidence suggesting that resource-rich countries experience a curse
only when institutions are poor; in contrast, sufficiently good institutions can turn resource
abundance into a blessing. Papyrakis and Gerlagh (2004) also show that natural resource wealth
has a negative impact on growth, but does so through transmission channels such as investment,
corruption, openness, terms of trade, and schooling.

Finally, the literature suggests that the impact of resources differs according to their type.
Boschini et al. (2007) find results indicating that when countries are rich in diamonds and
precious metals, both the positive and negative effects of natural resources are larger. This
result can be explained by ‘appropriability’ characteristics (i.e. high value, easy storage, easy
transportation or smuggling, and quick sale), which make these types of natural resources more
prone to rent-seeking behaviour, corruption, and conflict. Easily appropriable point-source
resources, such as oil, diamonds, and minerals, are more likely to be harmful to institutional
quality and growth than diffuse resources such as agriculture (rice, wheat, and animals), whose
rents are spread throughout the economy (Auty 1997; Isham et al. 2005; Mavrotas et al. 2011;
Woolcook et al. 2001).

Most of the previous studies are cross-country analyses. A distinctive feature of our paper is
that we use panel data on mineral deposits to estimate inequality at district level during 2001–
2012, a period also characterized by relatively high growth in Africa. Gennaioli et al. (2014)
argue that there are large regional differences within countries that need to be understood; the
use of subnational panel data therefore accounts for intra- and inter-regional differences that
can confound estimates. From an estimation standpoint, our study is also free from omitted
variable bias emanating from the large unobservable differences that are usually present in
cross-country studies.8




                                                       
8
 Lederman and Maloney (2008) consider cross-country heterogeneity a key reason for the elusiveness of
empirical evidence on the resource curse.
                                                          6
 

 

3         Data and district inequality estimation


3.1       Data


We combine an array of data sources to construct a data set with the relevant important
variables for estimating the effects of mining activities on district inequality: the National
Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, National Geophysical Data Center (NOAA-
NGDC)9 for data on night-time lights intensity; the United States Geological Survey (USGS)10
for data on the spatial location of mineral deposits and mining activities in Africa and historical
US mineral prices; the United States Global Land Cover Facility (GLCF)11 for the Normalized
Difference Vegetation Index (NDVI)—a proxy for agricultural productivity. We also use
Tropical Applications of Meteorology using Satellite Data (TAMSAT)12 to extract data on
rainfall—a proxy for climatic shocks. Finally, we extract population data from the Gridded
Population of the World (GPW v4).13 Since our units of analysis are districts, the combined
data set constitutes three clustered levels—districts, regions, and countries.

NOAA-NGDC data include annual time-series night-time lights intensity data, which are
globally recorded across countries daily from 20:30 to 22:00 local time by a satellite orbiting
the earth. The use of this data set follows recent literature that attempts to circumvent the
absence of reliable and consistent subnational data (for a detailed discussion, see Chen and
Nordhaus 2011; Henderson et al. 2012), particularly in Africa.14 These data come in three main
formats: cloud-free, average visible, and stable light composites. We use the stable light
composites, which are clear of ephemeral events, background noise, summer light, and auroral
activities. Moreover, we remove gas flares to eliminate potential bias in our estimates.

USGS data provide spatial locations of mineral deposits, and details of the types of mineral
activities taking place across Africa (see Table 2 in Appendix 1 for the list of countries). These
include the status (active or closed) of the mines; the type of mining activity (extraction or
transformation); whether minerals of high or low value are extracted; whether the mining
operations are large or small scale. These characteristics present unique exogenous variation
that we exploit, as discussed in the empirical strategy. In general, we match USGS spatial
mineral15 data to 2,182 districts in 653 regions across 38 African countries. We measure
mineral wealth using a binary indicator for districts with mineral production. However, one
limitation of our study, as detailed in Section 5, is the lack of mine’s actual production, which
                                                       
9
  The data are available at: www.ngdc.noaa.gov/eog/dmsp/downloadV4composites.html (accessed 16 June 2014).
10
   The data are available at: minerals.usgs.gov/minerals/pubs/country/africa.html (accessed 5 July 2015).
11
   Sponsored by the University of Maryland, NASA, and Global Observation Forest and Land Cover Dynamics.
Available at: glcf.umd.edu/data/lc/ (accessed 30 December 2016).
12
   The data are available at: www.met.reading.ac.uk/~tamsat/cgi-bin/data/rfe.cgi (accessed 5 July 2015).
13
   Available at: beta.sedac.ciesin.columbia.edu/data/collection/gpw-v4 (accessed 23 August 2015).
14
   For example, Elvidge et al. (2009) use night light data to construct a global poverty map, while Elvidge et al.
(2012) develop a ‘night light development index’ to measure human development and track the distribution of
wealth and income across countries. Other studies have used light data to measure economic growth (Henderson
et al. 2012), income per capita (Alesina et al. 2015; Chen and Nordhaus 2011; Gennaioli et al. 2014; Hodler and
Raschky 2014; Michalopoulos and Papaioannou 2013), and more recently regional income inequality (Mveyange
2015).  
15
   Our constructed data set contains over 40 mineral types. Using the standard international trade classification
(SITC), we group these mineral types into 25 major types, as shown in Table 1 in Appendix 1.
                                                          7
 

 

would have been useful in accounting for total mineral production and revenues for an unbiased
estimates of mining activities on district inequality in Africa.

To partially address this limitation, we take advantage of the available time-series minerals
prices data and use them as numeraires for minerals at the district level across countries over
time. We thus use mineral prices data for the United States since 1900 available from USGS.16
These price data are recorded in constant prices and annual average prices. As detailed in the
empirical strategy, we use the constant prices to examine the main impacts of minerals’
constant unit dollar values on district inequality in Africa. We then use annual average prices
for robustness checks on our main results. Our analysis is strengthened by the inclusion of
mineral price data, since we are better able to account for the effects of mineral prices’ volatility
on spatial inequality in Africa.

GLCF data on NDVI17 were used to construct a measure of district-level vegetation, which has
been shown to be a good proxy for agricultural output (see e.g., Labus et al. 2002 Ren et al.
2008).18 High NDVI suggests a favourable vegetation landscape relative to low NDVI. NDVI
is handy as a proxy, because consistent data on agriculture productivity across all districts in
Africa are difficult to find. Obviously, district inequality is likely to be correlated with
agriculture—a dominant sector in Africa. Andres and Ramlogan-Dobson (2011) and Chong
(2004) assert that income distribution is relatively equally distributed across agriculture-
dependent economies. We therefore control for the district NDVI standard deviation to account
for this fact.

Using TAMSAT data, we constructed annual district rainfall averages and standard deviations
aggregated from monthly rainfall averages data. We use rainfall data in two ways: first, as a
control for climate variability, and second, as a proxy for agricultural productivity variations,
similar in spirit to Miguel, Satyanath, and Sergenti (2004).

Finally, we used Gridded Population of the World (GPW v4) data to construct data on district
population counts. At a grid cell resolution of 30 arc-minutes (approximately 1 km at the
equator), the GPW provides estimates of population count between 1990 and 2020 at a 5-year
interval. We extracted these data at the district level and followed Hodler and Raschky (2014)
to linearly interpolate the data to estimate population counts for the missing years, in turn
allowing us to have population counts for the period 2000–2015.

 

                                                       
16
   We refrained from using mineral prices data from the Global Economic Monitor (GEM) of the World Bank
because these do not cover all commodity categories in our sample, making the analysis less comparable.
However, when we compare a similar set of minerals prices from the GEM and USGS, the overall correlation is
0.93 (unreported), suggesting that the use of US mineral prices is not unreasonable.
17
   It is calculated as NDVI = (NIR - Red) / (NIR + Red), with NIR being near infrared (technical detail available
at: earthobservatory.nasa.gov/Features/MeasuringVegetation/measuring_vegetation_2.php, accessed 18
Novermber 2014). Similarly to Andersson et al. (2015), we also use the MODIS Land Cover Type product
(MCD12Q1) to extract the NDVI. These data are available for the period 2001–2012, and are provided at a 16-
day temporal resolution and a 250 m spatial resolution, making it possible to pair with other data at the district
level.
18
   For example, NDVI has been shown to be a good measure of vegetation greenness, primary productivity of
vegetation, and leaf area index. NDVI is also useful for evaluating the evolution of vegetation cover over time
(see Andersson et al. 2015 for details and more sources on technical studies in this area.) 
                                                          8
 

 

3.2       District inequality estimation and trends


To estimate district inequality using night-time lights data, we followed Mveyange (2015) to
calculate inequality indices for 2,182 districts in 653 regions across 38 countries in Africa. We
computed several measures of district inequality as outcome variables: Gini and the entropy
measures (mean logarithmic deviation (MLD) and Theil)). These measures have several
desirable properties, e.g., symmetry, mean independence, Pigou-Dalton transfer sensitivity,
and population size independence (Haughton and Khandker 2009). However, our main results
are based on Gini—a commonly and widely used measure of inequality.

To calculate Gini at the district level, we identified (based on geographical administrative units’
data from the Global Administrative Areas database19) and cut countries’ districts into 0.01
square decimal degree grid cells (about 1.1 km2 at the equator—an equivalent to the size of a
town or village). We then exploited the spatial and temporal variation of light intensity across
these grid cells to estimate average inequality at the district level across countries for all the
years between 2001 and 2012. We calculate Gini20 as follows:
                                                      ∑               ∗
                                                ∗                                                                          [1],

where i is grid cell rank order, n is total number of grid cells, yi is grid cell value light intensity
per capita, and P is grid cell population count. For the robustness checks we use the entropy21
measures of inequality and a measure of spatial inequality proposed by Bonet (2006).22

3.3       District inequality trends and summary statistics


Figure 3 plots the average trends of district light intensity Gini between 2001 and 2012. The
figure shows the variation across districts with no mining activities, with active mines, and
with closed mines. The figure suggests that overall there was a modest decline in spatial
inequality in Africa between 2001 and 2012. The figure also reveals a clear difference in spatial
inequality between districts with mining activities and those with none, inequality in the former
being higher by a considerable margin. When districts with mining activities are divided into
active mines and closed mines, the figure suggests that districts with closed mines experienced
relative higher inequality than districts with active mines.

Turning to the summary statistics, Table 3 describes the composition of the mining sites based
on the previously mentioned exogenous variations: status, scale, values, and types of mining
activities. Overall, the table shows that mining sites constitute 17.2 per cent of all 2,182 districts
                                                       
19 Available at: www.gadm.org/ (accessed 16 July 2014).
20 Similar to Damgaard and Weiner (2000).
21 MLD is calculated using the following formula:                           ∑                   and	           ∑               , where     is grid cell
value (i.e. light intensity per capita),             is the average grid cell lights, and        is the population size within the grid cells.
                         ,
22   Defined as               1 where,	 is country, 	 is district, is year,                 ,    is an average lights per capita at the district level,
                         ,
and       , is average lights per capita at the country level. Bonet (2006: 668) asserts that this measure of spatial inequality is
based on the concept of relative lights per capita, with perfect equality achieved with the equality of district and national
average lights per capita.
 
                                                                            9
 

 

in our sample during 2001–2012. Moreover, for the status of mining activities, the table shows
that out of the 17 per cent, active mines constitute about 15.3 per cent, and closed mines about
two per cent. Classifying the districts’ mining sites by scale of mining operations, the table
further shows that mining operations in Africa are predominantly large scale (about 16.2 per
cent), with small-scale operations constituting only one per cent. This is not surprising in a
sector that is capital intensive and on a continent where the mining sector has attracted
significant direct foreign investment in recent years. Whereas most of the operations are large
scale, the table shows that most of these districts’ operations are extractive industries (12.4 per
cent) and of low value (13.4 per cent). High-value minerals and transformation industries
constitute a small share—3.8 and 4.8 per cent respectively—of districts where mineral deposits
and mining activities are present or closed.

Table 4 reports the summary statistics for all variables of interest in our analysis. These
descriptive statistics cover the period 2001–2012. Overall, the table indicates that except for
Gini, rainfall, NDVI, and population sizes, the dispersion of average district MLD, Theil, and
mineral prices (in logarithms) varies quite considerably around their respective means. In the
next section we present our empirical strategy.


4           Empirical strategy


This section describes the empirical strategy we use to estimate the effects of mineral resources
on district inequality. The analysis relies on panel data across districts during 2001–2012. Since
the main covariates of interest are dummies, the first difference models of panel data analysis
are inappropriate. Thus the empirical framework uses linear fixed effect estimators (i.e. least
square dummy variable—LSDV) to model and estimate the effects of mining activities on
district inequality. One natural advantage of LSDV is its ability to address endogeneity
concerns. Given the hierarchical nature of our data, the use of LSDV is handy for capturing
confounding and unobserved country and regional fixed effects in addition to district fixed
effects, thus purging our estimates of any time-invariant unobservable biases. Our baseline
model thus takes the following forms:

        	     , , ,         , , ,           , , ,                ,   	       Τ   Ψ   Γ,        , , ,   	           [2]

    	        , , ,                  , , ,           , , ,                ,   	   Τ   Ψ    Γ,           , , ,   	   [3],

where DI stands for district inequality (measured using spatial lights Gini index), c, r, d, t and
m stand for country, region, district and time respectively, and i ∈ (c, r, d). Mine is a binary
indicator—1 if a district has mineral deposits, 0 otherwise. Intensity denotes the number of
mining sites available in a district in a given year. This model specification tests whether the
presence of mineral deposits and mining sites has any measurable effects on district inequality
in Africa. The coefficients of interest are α and ϑ, capturing the effects on district inequality of
mineral deposits’ and mining sites’ presence respectively. Following the propositions of the
resource curse literature, the underlying hypothesis of this specification is (α, ϑ) > 0: that is,
districts with mineral deposits and mining sites are likely to be more unequal relative to those
with none.


                                                            10
 

 

The vector Xc,r,d,t captures time-varying observables. As noted in the data section, our
specification takes into account several factors that would otherwise potentially bias our
coefficient estimates. These factors include a proxy for agricultural productivity (NDVI),
population size, a climatic variable (i.e. rainfall), and districts’ geographical locations
measured using absolute latitude. As noted previously, all these have a bearing on how mining
activities impact on spatial inequality at the district level. Moreover, it is also possible for the
estimates to be driven by lights emission in districts with active mining activities relative to
districts with fewer or no activities. To control for this potential upward bias, we also control
for total number of lit grid cell pixels in a district.

To explain whether mining has an impact on spatial inequality we also need to take into account
the effects of mineral prices. To account for mineral prices’ specific effects at the district level
we include Pricem,t, which proxies the district-level average minerals prices. As detailed later,
we note that a more robust way is to account for individual minerals’ specific prices in order
to understand the precise mechanisms underpinning the effects of mining on spatial inequality.
We also control for time fixed effects denoted by Τt, and district, regional, and country fixed
effects captured by Ψ. Finally, we control for country-year fixed effects (Γc,t) to capture year-
specific shocks to the countries in our sample.

District, regional, and country fixed effects capture unobserved differences such as decisions
to open mining sites, levels of economic activity, technology employed in the mining sector,
and other factors such as ethnicity, which as Fum and Hodler (2010) assert is also likely to
affect inequality. Country-year fixed effects account for observed and unobserved shocks, such
as privatization of the minerals sector, which has been rampant in Africa; the differences in the
types of investment incentive (e.g., royalties, taxes) offered to attract foreign investors and
boost mining activities; turbulent international market conditions such as volatile world
commodity prices; and countrywide institutional and policy changes that affect individual
countries over time. ϵc,r,d,t and εc,r,d,t are stochastic random error terms. To control for potential
intra-region and intra-district correlations, we cluster the standard errors at the country level in
all our model specifications, unless otherwise specified. Note also that we use similar notations
for model specifications unless stated otherwise.

The above specifications, however, only tell us what the effects are of mineral deposits’ and
mining sites’ presence on district inequality. They exclude such potential exogenous variations
as the status of mining (i.e. active and closed mines); the scale of mining (i.e. small and large
scale); values of minerals extracted (i.e. mines producing high- or low-value minerals); and the
nature of mining activities (i.e. whether the mines are involved in the extraction or
transformation of minerals). All these variations have the potential to explain how mining can
affect district inequality in Africa and thus elicit relevant policy responses. To account for all
these sources of exogenous variation, we respecify equation [2] as:

      	   , , ,       , , ,         , , ,             ,   Τ     Ψ     Γ,       , , ,             [4],

where j refers to the four different sources of exogenous variation defined above. Φ is a vector
of categorical variables coded as 0, 1, and 2, all meant to capture the above-mentioned
exogenous variations in mining activities. Thus 0 denotes the base (no mining). 1 and 2
separately but respectively denote either active or closed mines; small- or large-scale mines;
high- or low-value mining activities; and mining extraction or transformation. This extended
                                                 11
 

 

baseline specification allows us to evaluate whether, for example, the districts with active or
closed mines experience higher or lower inequality compared with districts with no mines. The
same logic also applies to the other sources of exogenous variation mentioned. The coefficient
of interest, which disentangles α in equation [2], is θj, with the underlying hypothesis, still
following the resource curse literature, being θj > 0. ν is an error term.

One advantage of equation [4] is that it brings into the analysis the mentioned exogenous
variation in mining activities, which is useful for explaining the mechanisms through which
mining activities can affect district inequality in Africa. However, the impact of mining
activities on district inequality is likely to be driven by the specific minerals commodities
available (Boschini et al. 2007). This latent effect cannot be captured by Pricem,t in equations
[2] and [4].

Obviously, controlling for minerals’ values is important to obtain unbiased estimates and
explain the mining-spatial inequality nexus. As noted in Section 3, our analysis, which relies
on USGS mineral data, suffers from the lack of data on mineral production at mining sites in
Africa. However, the available mineral prices data offer a possibility to circumvent this
limitation: the use of minerals unit prices as numeraires for minerals across districts where
mineral deposits and mining activities are available. For districts where mineral deposits and
mining activities are absent, we assign zero values in unit mineral prices. We therefore update
equation [4] slightly differently to take into account the idea of using mineral prices as
numeraires. The updated specification takes the following form:

                     	     , , ,                 , , ,   	 	             ,            , , ,      	

                                                          Τ        Ψ         Γ,          , , ,       	   [5]

where Mineralc,r,d,t denotes the dummies for the major mineral commodities types (see Table
2) available in our sample, and ωc,r,d,t is an error term. A unique feature of equation [5] is the
interaction term Mineralc,r,d,t Pricem,t, which underlies the use of minerals’ unit prices as
numeraires. In principle, equation [5] mimics the underlying structure of equation [2]: the
interaction term Mineralc,r,d,t Pricem,t captures coefficient estimates for all districts with
mineral numeraires relative to the base (non-numeraire) districts, effectively measuring the
effect of individual minerals’ unit values on district inequality in Africa. As an added value,
this specification makes it possible to attribute changes in district inequality to changes in
specific mineral numeraires, which is useful for identifying the specific types of mineral that
influence the dynamics of district inequality during the period 2001–2012. As above, the
underlying testable hypothesis is ψ > 0, suggesting that district inequality increases with
increasing mineral numeraires.

Understanding how specific mineral commodities affect district inequality in Africa is
undoubtedly necessary but not sufficient, especially if we are to understand the precise sources
of the effects. We thus extend equation [5] one step further to pin down the precise mechanisms
at work in the mining-spatial inequality nexus. The extended specification is of the following
form:

               	   , , ,                , , ,   	 	            ,   	 	        , , ,              , , ,


                                                  12
 

 

                                                   Τ     Ψ     Γ,       , , ,   		             [6]

where Φjc,r,d,t is the same as in equation [3], and ζc,r,d,t is a residual term. A key term of interest
is Mineralc,r,d,t Pricem,t 	Φjc,r,d,t, which shows the distribution of mineral numeraires by the
status, scale, value, and nature of district mining activities. The main advantage of equation [6]
is that it helps to untie the effects of mineral numeraires on district inequality by attempting to
identify where these effects originate. For example, we are bound to know if the effects on
district inequality are driven by active or closed mines, high- or low-value minerals, the scale
of mining activities, or the nature of mining activities (i.e. extraction or transformation). As
above, the underlying testable hypothesis is κ > 0.


5     Results


Table 5 reports our main results. Columns 1 and 2 show the estimates when regressions exclude
the mineral prices. Columns 3 and 4 show the estimates in which constant mineral prices are
included as price controls. Finally, in columns 5 and 6 we report the estimates when using
average annual mineral prices as price controls. Columns 5 and 6 are intuitively direct
sensitivity checks of the results in columns 3 and 4. Note that columns 1, 3, and 5 present the
results without the relevant controls (i.e. NDVI as a proxy for agricultural productivity
variations, rainfall, population sizes, and district geographical locations). Similarly, columns
2, 4, and 6 (which are also our main results) report the estimates with these controls.

Column 1 shows that the presence of mineral deposits [equation 2] and mining sites [equation
3] has positive impacts on the district lights Gini index when the analysis excludes the relevant
controls, with statistically significant coefficient sizes being 0.087 and 0.011 Gini point
increments. Even with the inclusion of the relevant controls, in column 2, the coefficient sizes,
although they drop slightly, remain positive and robust. Except for doubled coefficient sizes—
mainly explained by the inclusion of price controls—the estimates in columns 3 and 4, as well
as in columns 5 and 6, are not qualitatively different from those in columns 1 and 2. When
comparing the estimates based on constant prices (columns 3 and 4) with those based on
average annual prices (columns 5 and 6), Table 5 reports slightly lower coefficient estimates
for the latter than the former.

Note also that the R-squared drops moderately from 0.763 to 0.762 when price controls are
included. Columns 1 and 2 have more observations, because we capture the entire sample of
districts with mining activities. However, this is not the case when we include price controls,
because of the lack of mineral price data for some of the mineral commodities (see Table 2).
Taken together, the positive effects are unsurprising: ceteris paribus, the districts with natural
advantages in mineral deposits and mining sites are likely to create more jobs, generate more
income, and enjoy more gains from mining activities than districts with no minerals, eventually
widening the inequality gap across districts with and without mineral endowments. This
finding is consistent with the standard wisdom of the resource curse literature.

The positive effects of mineral deposits and mining intensity reported in Table 5 mask a myriad
of explanations as to the precise mechanisms through which mineral endowment and mining
intensity can increase inequality at the district level in Africa. To understand the mechanisms,
we estimate the baseline model using different sources of exogenous variation in mining
                                                 13
 

 

activities. That is, we use dummy variables to identify and exploit the status of mining activities
(i.e. active or closed); whether mining sites produce high- or low-value minerals; the scale
(small or large) of mining operations; and the types of mining activities (i.e. extraction or
transformation) (see equation [4]).

Table 6 reports the regressions showing the estimates for all the different sources of exogenous
variations in mining activities. The columns in Table 6 are organized similarly to those in Table
5. Columns 1 and 2 (which report the estimates without price controls) document statistically
significant positive effects of mining activities across all four sources of exogenous variation,
with slight declines in the coefficient sizes when relevant controls are included.

Worth noting are both the similarities and the stark differences in the coefficient sizes. For
example, whereas districts with active mines, large-scale mining operations, and low-value
mineral production tend to have similar coefficient sizes, this is not the case when we compare
the coefficient sizes for districts with closed mines or high-value minerals and districts engaged
in mineral transformation activities, which altogether are higher in magnitude—suggesting that
the effects of mining activities are indeed pronounced in these specific sources of variation.

The results change quite considerably when we include price controls in columns 3–6. First,
districts with closed mines and those engaged in mining extraction experience statistically
significant and large declines in their levels of inequality, while districts with small-scale
operations and those producing high-value minerals experience insignificant effects in their
levels of inequality. However, the estimates remain unchanged (i.e. positive and statistically
significant) for districts with active mines, districts with large-scale mining operations, and
districts producing low-value minerals. Evidently, these estimates suggest that the impact of
mining activities on district inequality largely depends on whether mines are active or closed,
mining operations are small or large scale, the minerals produced are of low or high value, and
the mining activities are extractive or transformational.

As mentioned previously, to further understand the mechanisms at work between mining
activities and district inequality, it is imperative that we identify and isolate the effects of
individual minerals. To do so, we investigate the effects of mineral numeraires on district
inequality (see equation [5]). Table 7 reports the regression estimates. Models 1 and 3 report
estimates without the relevant controls, while models 2 and 4 report the estimates with the
relevant controls.

As the table demonstrates, on the one hand, district inequality increases with the increase in
helium (produced in Kenya), garnet (produced in Algeria), and diatomite (produced in Kenya
and Mozambique) numeraires. The positive effect of helium and garnet is statistically
significant with both constant and average mineral prices, while that of diatomite is
insignificant with the former and borderline with the latter. On the other hand, the table also
shows that iron-ore-producing districts in Sierra Leone, South Africa, Tunisia, Zambia, and
Zimbabwe, as well as nickel-producing districts in Zimbabwe, overall experience declining
inequality relative to other districts producing other types of minerals. The coefficient estimates
for the other types of mineral numeraires are both negative (e.g., diamond, barite, bentonite,
clay, dolomite, fluorspar, salt, vermiculite, fluorine, graphite, cobalt, chromium, niobium
(columbium), tantalum, titanium, zirconium, tungsten, arsenic trioxide, lithium, manganese,
pyrophyllite, soda ash, sodium silicate, wollastonite, phosphate rock, phosphoric acid, and

                                                14
 

 

zinc) and positive (e.g., stones—crushed and dimension, limestone, gypsum, marble, silicon,
cement, platinum, and tin), but statistically insignificant.

Again, these results reinforce the notion that the effect of mining on district inequality is largely
dependent on the different types and prices of minerals produced. One interesting aspect of the
results in Table 7 is that high-value minerals such as diamond appear not to play a major role
in explaining district inequality in Africa. We investigate whether this is indeed the case in
subsequent analysis detailed below. Overall, in all the specifications, the R-squared remains
unchanged, while the coefficient sizes decline moderately with the inclusion of the relevant
controls.

Table 8 shows the estimates when the source of variation is the status (i.e. active or closed) of
mining activities. The results are, in general, quite revealing. On the one hand, the lights Gini
index increases in districts with active helium, garnet, and gold mining. If constant mineral
prices are used, the coefficient estimates for helium (0.126) and garnet (0.141) are statistically
significant, while those for gold (0.047) are marginally significant. On the other hand, the table
also reveals two results. First, when mines are closed down, district inequality declines quite
significantly. This is the case for minerals such as diamond (0.346), phosphate and phosphoric
acid (0.127), cement (0.008), platinum (0.056), nickel (0.158), and tin (0.029). Obviously, the
results suggest greater inequality declines in districts with closed-down diamond, nickel, and
phosphate and phosphoric acid mines. Second, active mining of iron ore (0.046) and tin (0.042)
significantly reduces districts’ inequality. Note that when we use the average mineral prices,
the coefficient estimates change slightly but remain robust, and the interpretation remains
qualitatively the same.

Tables 9–11 reveal more nuanced estimates capturing the effects of mineral numeraires based
on different sources of exogenous variation in mining activities). All the tables are organized
in the same way as Table 7.

Table 9 reports the estimates when the source of variation in equation [6] is the value (i.e. low
or high) of the minerals extracted. The results show that, on the one hand, the lights Gini index
increases in districts where both low-value minerals (i.e. helium and garnet) and high-value
minerals (i.e. gold) are mined. The statistically significant coefficients show that a point
increase in the value of mined helium, garnet, and gold increases district inequality by 0.126,
0.138, and 0.040 Gini points respectively if constant mineral prices are used, and by 0.137,
0.198, and 0.035 Gini points respectively if average mineral prices are used. On the other hand,
the mining of low-value minerals such as tin and nickel significantly depresses district
inequality. That is, if we use the constant mineral prices, district inequality declines by 0.045
and 0.037 Gini points for a point increase in the value (in logarithms) of mined tin and nickel
respectively. However, when we use the average mineral prices for the analysis, district
inequality declines by 0.155 and 0.139 for a point increase in the value (in logarithms) of mined
tin and nickel, respectively.

Table 10 reports the estimates when the source of variation is the scale (i.e. small or large) of
mining operations. On the one hand, the results show that the lights Gini index increases in
districts with both small-scale mining operations (i.e. for arsenic trioxide, lithium, manganese,
pyrophyllite, soda ash, sodium silicate, wollastonite, and gold) and large-scale mining
operations (i.e. for helium, garnet, and gold). The statistically significant coefficients show that

                                                 15
 

 

the increase in district inequality lies between 0.083 and 0.20 Gini points if constant prices are
used in the analysis, and between 0.071 and 0.193 Gini points if average prices are used instead,
for a point increase in the value of minerals in districts with both small- and large-scale mining
operations. Note also that despite its presence in both small- and large-scale operations, gold
mining has a consistent positive effect on district inequality. On the other hand, the results also
show two contrasting results. First, the lights Gini index significantly declines in districts
endowed with barite, bentonite, clay, dolomite, fluorspar, salt, vermiculite, fluorine, graphite,
cobalt, chromium, niobium (columbium), tantalum, titanium, zirconium, tungsten, and tin and
whose operations are small scale. Second, inequality also declines in districts with large-scale
operations engaged in the extraction of iron ore and nickel. In both cases, the estimated
inequality declines are in the range of 0.045–0.536 Gini points when constant prices are used
for analysis. A qualitatively similar result holds when we used the average mineral prices
instead.

Table 11 shows the estimates when the source of variation is the nature of the mining activities
(i.e. extractive or transformational). As above, we have two sets of contrasting results. In the
first set, the results show that districts engaged in extractive activities experience increases in
levels of inequality in the magnitude of 0.124, 0.141, 0.042, and 0.044 for helium, garnet, tin,
and gold respectively. Moreover, the results indicate that inequality increases in districts
engaged in transformational activities for minerals such as cement, diatomite, and platinum.
The magnitude of the increments in Gini points is 0.024, 0.204, and 0.069 respectively. The
second set of results report negative effects on district inequality. Similarly, there are two
subsets of these results. First, for the districts engaged in extractive mining activities, inequality
declines by 0.059, 0.170, and 0.154 Gini points for a point increase in the value of iron ore,
diatomite, and nickel respectively. Second, for districts engaged in transformational activities,
inequality declines are between 0.028 and 0.108 Gini points for minerals such as cobalt,
chromium, niobium (columbium), tantalum, titanium, zirconium, tungsten, arsenic trioxide,
lithium, manganese, pyrophyllite, soda ash, sodium silicate, wollastonite, diatomite, tin, and
gold. A noteworthy point is that the value of gold appears to have a differential impact on
district inequality: if extracted, it increases inequality, while when passed on for transformation
to final product it reduces inequality. All the discussed estimates are conditioned by using
constant mineral prices in the analysis. When we use the average mineral prices, the coefficient
estimates change slightly but remain robust, and the interpretation remains qualitatively the
same.

We also demonstrate the robustness of our main results by carrying out several sensitivity
checks. We first employ other different measures of district inequality to re-estimate all our
baseline models. Tables 12–20 report the results of our sensitivity checks. Second, we test our
results using a different modelling approach—the multilevel23 analysis suggested by Rabe-
Hesketh and Skrondal (2012). This check is ideal given the hierarchical nature of our data.


                                                       
23 With this approach, we modelled the hierarchical structure of the data to understand the differences in the main coefficient
estimates across countries, regions, and districts. Taking into account the time dimension of our hierarchical data, our
modelling goal was to fit a random slope model, which, using maximum likelihood, specifically estimated the standard
deviations in their respective random residuals (commonly known as unstructured variance covariance) within and between
countries, regions, and districts. Allowing for different slopes over time across districts, Rabe-Hesketh and Skrondal (2012)
also assert that this modelling strategy is useful to pin down the precise source of coefficient estimate differences, i.e. either
from the random slopes or from the variability in the variance components.
                                                               16
 

 

The results of our sensitivity tests are quite revealing, and show that our estimates are indeed
robust to other measures of spatial inequality. In our first test, the results are also robust to
using both constant and average mineral prices in the analysis. Of course, the magnitudes of
coefficients do change considerably across MLD, Theil, and relative lights per capita (RLP),
but the qualitative interpretations remain the same when compared with the baseline Gini.
Worth noting, however, is a change in the R-squared across these different specifications: from
0.763 on the baseline Gini to 0.627, 0.677, and 0.464 on MLD, Theil, and RLP respectively.
In our second test, when we model the data using multilevel analysis, although the magnitude
varies across the different specifications, the qualitative interpretation of the results
(unreported)24 remains the same and robust.

Overall, although the aggregated analysis suggests that mining activities increase spatial
inequality in favour of districts with natural advantages in mineral endowment, disaggregating
the analysis to accommodate individual minerals shows that changes in inequality within
districts and across countries are sensitive to the types of minerals and to whether mining
activities are active or closed, small or large scale, of low or high value, and extractive or
transformational. Based on these findings, we argue that mining activities can be both a curse
and a blessing.


6         Conclusions


This paper analysed the effects of mining activities on spatial inequality in 2,182 districts over
653 regions across 38 African countries. Our study employed novel spatial data enabling
analysis at the local scale. District inequality was measured using night light data from the
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Association’s National Geophysical Data Centre, while
mineral production data came from the United States Geological Survey.

Our study offers three main conclusions. First, when the analysis is aggregated, mining
activities significantly increase spatial inequality in Africa, a finding that is consistent with the
standard resource curse literature. Second, when the analysis is disaggregated to include
individual minerals, our findings suggest that mining activities impact on spatial inequality
both positively and negatively, with the effects varying quite considerably across different
minerals. This finding suggests that mineral wealth can be both a blessing and a curse. More
importantly, this finding—a unique contribution of this study—reinforces the idea that
disentangling the effects of individual minerals is more revealing of the effects of mining
activities on development outcomes, and thus is important for eliciting the relevant policy
responses.

Finally, our study shows that the effects of mining activities are leveraged by other important
forces that underpin mining operations. For example, our analysis suggests that the coefficients
of interest largely depend on whether mining activities are active or closed, small or large scale,
of low or high value, and extractive or transformational. We argue that these are also relevant
variables for informing appropriate policy responses aimed at addressing the nexus between
mining activities and spatial inequality in Africa.

                                                       
24   We have not reported these results here due to space constraints, but they are available from the authors upon request.
                                                                17
 

 

References

AfDB, OECD, and UNDP (2015). African Economic Outlook 2015: Regional Development
and Spatial Inclusion. Paris: OECD Publishing.

Akabzaa, T.M., S.J. Seyire, and K. Afriyie (2007). The Glittering Façade: Effects of Mining
Activities on Obuasi and its Surrounding Communities. Accra: Third World Network-Africa.

Alesina, A.F., S. Michalopoulos, and E. Papaioannou (2015). ‘Ethnic Inequality’. Journal of
Political Economy, 123(3): 547–724.

Andersson, M., O. Hall, N. Olén, and A. Tolonen (2015). ‘Does Large-Scale Gold Mining
Reduce Agricultural Growth? Case Studies from Burkina Faso, Ghana, Mali and Tanzania’.
Unpublished paper.

Andres, A.R., and C. Ramlogan-Dobson (2011). ‘Is Corruption Really Bad for Inequality?
Evidence from Latin America’. Journal of Development Studies, 47: 959–76.

Angrist, J.D., and A.D. Kugler (2008). ‘Rural Windfall or a New Resource Curse? Coca,
Income, and Civil Conflict in Colombia’. Review of Economics and Statistics, 90(2): 191–215.

Aragón, F.M., and J.P. Rud (2013). ‘Natural Resources and Local Communities: Evidence
from Peruvian Gold Mine’. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 5(2): 1–25.

Arezki, R., and F. Van der Ploeg (2011). ‘Do Natural Resources Depress Income Per Capita?’
Review of Development Economics, 15(3): 504–21.

Auty, R.M. (1997). ‘Natural Resource Endowment, the State and Development Strategy’.
Journal of International Development, 9(4): 651–63.

Auty, R.M. (ed.) (2001). Resource Abundance and Economic Development. Oxford: Oxford
University Press.

Bannon, I., and P. Collier (2003). Natural Resources and Violent Conflict: Options and
Actions. Washington, DC: World Bank.

Beny, L.N., and L.D. Cook (2009). ‘Metals or Management? Explaining Africa’s Recent
Economic Growth Performance.’ American Economic Review, 99(2): 268–74.

Bonet, R. (2006). ‘Fiscal Decentralization and Regional Income Disparities: Evidence from the
Colombian Experience’. Annals of Regional Science, 40: 661–76.

Boschini, A.D., J. Pettersson, and J. Roine (2007). ‘Resource Curse or Not: A Question of
Appropriability’. Scandinavian Journal of Economics, 109(3): 593–617.

Brunnschweiler, C.N., and E.H. Bulte (2008). ‘The Resource Curse Revisited and Revised: A
Tale of Paradoxes and Red Herrings’. Journal of Environmental Economics and Management,
55(3): 248–64.


                                             18
 

 

Caselli, F., and G. Michaels (2013). ‘Do Oil Windfalls Improve Living Standards? Evidence
from Brazil’. American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 5(1): 208–38.

Chen, X., and W.D. Nordhaus (2011). ‘Using Luminosity Data as a Proxy for Economic
Statistics’. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 108(21): 8589–94.

Chong, A. (2004). ‘Inequality, Democracy, and Persistence: Is There a Political Kuznets
Curve?’ Economics and Politics, 16: 189–212.

Chuhan-Pole, P., A.L. Dabalen, B.C. Land, A. Sanoh, G. Smith, A.K. Tolonen, F. Aragaon,
C.M.E. Andersson, O.D. Hall, K.A. Kotsadam, M. Lewin, and N. Olaon (2015).
Socioeconomic Impact of Mining on Local Communities in Africa. Washington, DC: World
Bank.

Collier, P., and A. Hoeffler (1998). ‘On Causes of Civil War’. Oxford Economic Papers, 50:
563–73.

Collier, P., and A. Hoeffler (2002). ‘On the Incidence of Civil War’. Journal of Conflict
Resolution, 46: 13–28.

Collier, P., and A. Hoeffler (2005). ‘Resource Rents, Governance, and Conflict’. Journal of
Conflict Resolution, 49(4): 625–33.

Damgaard, C., and J. Weiner (2000). ‘Describing Inequality in Plant Size or Fecundity’.
Ecology, 81(4): 1139–42.

Ding, N., and B.C. Field (2005). ‘Natural Resource Abundance and Economic Growths’. Land
Economics, 81(4): 496–502.

Ellman, M. (1981). ‘Natural Gas, Restructuring and Re-Industrialisation: The Dutch
Experience of Industrial Policy’. In T. Barker and V. Brailovsky (eds), Oil or Industry?
London: Academic Press.

Elvidge, C.D., D. Ziskin, K.E. Baugh, B.T. Tuttle, T. Ghosh, D.W. Pack, E.H. Erwin, and M.
Zhizhin (2009). ‘A Fifteen Year Record of Global Natural Gas Flaring Derived from Satellite
Data’. Energies, 2(3): 595–622.

Elvidge, C.D, K.E. Baugh, S.J. Anderson, P.C. Sutton, and T. Ghosh (2012). ‘The Night Light
Development Index (NLDI): A Spatially Explicit Measure of Human Development from
Satellite Data’. Social Geography, 7, 23–35.

Fearon, J.D. (2005). ‘Primary Commodity Exports and Civil War’. Journal of Conflict
Resolution, 49(4): 483–507.

Fearon, J.D., and D.D. Laitin (2003). ‘Ethnicity, Insurgency, and Civil War’. American
Political Science Review, 97(1): 75–90.

Fum, R.M., and R. Hodler (2010). ‘Natural Resources and Income Inequality: The Role of
Ethnic Divisions’. Economics Letters, 107(3): 360–3.

                                            19
 

 

Gelb, A.H. (1988). Oil Windfalls: Blessing or Curse? Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Gennaioli, N., R. La Porta, F.L. de Silanes, and A. Shleifer (2014). ‘Growth in Regions’.
Journal of Economic Growth, 19: 259–309.

Gylfason, T., T.T. Herbertsson, and G. Zoega (1999). ‘A Mixed Blessing’. Macroeconomic
Dynamics, 3(2): 204–25.

Gylfason, T., and G. Zoega (2003). ‘Inequality and Economic Growth: Do Natural Resources
Matter?’ In T. Eicher and S. Turnovsky (eds), Inequality and Growth: Theory and Policy
Implications. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Harding, T., and A.J. Venables (2016). ‘The Implications of Natural Resource Exports for Non-
Resource Trade’. IMF Economic Review, 64(2): 268–302.

Haughton, J.H., and S.R. Khandker (2009). Handbook on Poverty and Inequality. Washington,
DC: World Bank.

Henderson, J.V., A. Storeygard, and D.N. Weil (2012). ‘Measuring Economic Growth from
Outer Space’. American Economic Review, 102(2): 994–1028.

Hodler, R., and P.A. Raschky (2014). ‘Regional Favoritism’. Quarterly Journal of Economics,
129(2): 995–1033.

Humphreys, M. (2005). ‘Natural Resources, Conflict, and Conflict Resolution: Uncovering the
Mechanisms’. Journal of Conflict Resolution, 49(4): 508–37.

Isham, J., M. Woolcock, L. Pritchett, and G. Busby (2005). ‘The Varieties of Resource
Experience: Natural Resource Export Structures and the Political Economy of Economic
Growth’. World Bank Economic Review, 19(2): 141–74.

Ismail, K. (2010). ‘The Structural Manifestation of the “Dutch Disease”: The Case of Oil
Exporting Countries’. Working Paper 10/103. Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund.

Kim, S. (2008). ‘Spatial Inequality and Economic Development: Theories, Facts, and Policies’.
In M. Spence, P.C. Annez, and R.M. Buckely (eds), Urbanization and Growth. Washington,
DC: World Bank.

Kotsadam, A., and A. Tolonen (2015). ‘African Mining, Gender, and Local Employment’.
Policy Research Working Paper 7251. Washington, DC: World Bank.

Labus, M.P., G.A. Nielsen, R.L. Lawrence, R. Engel, and D.S. Long (2002). ‘Wheat Yield
Estimates Using Multi-Temporal NDVI Satellite Imagery’. International Journal of Remote
Sensing, 23(20): 4169–80.

Lederman, D., and W. Maloney (2008). ‘In Search of the Missing Resource Curse’. Economía,
9(1): 1–57.

Lujala, P. (2009). ‘Deadly Combat Over Natural Resources: Gems, Petroleum, Drugs, and the
Severity of Armed Civil Conflict’. Journal of Conflict Resolution, 53(1): 50–71.
                                             20
 

 

Mavrotas, G., S.M. Murshed, and S. Torres (2011). ‘Natural Resource Dependence and
Economic Performance in the 1970–2000 Period’. Review of Development Economics, 15(1):
124–38.

Mehlum, H., K. Moene, and R. Torvik (2006). ‘Institutions and the Resource Curse’. Economic
Journal, 116(508): 1–20.

Michalopoulos, S., and E. Papaioannou (2013). ‘National Institutions and Subnational
Development in Africa’. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 129(1): 151–213.

Miguel, E., S. Satyanath, and E. Sergenti (2004). ‘Economic Shocks and Civil Conflict: An
Instrumental Variables Approach’. Journal of Political Economy, 112: 725–53.

Mveyange, A. (2015). ‘Night Lights and Regional Income Inequality in Africa’. Working
Paper 2015/85. Helsinki: UNU-WIDER.

Papyrakis, E., and R. Gerlagh (2004). ‘The Resource Curse Hypothesis and its Transmission
Channels’. Journal of Comparative Economics, 32(1): 181–93.

Rabe-Hesketh, S., and A. Skrondal (2012). Multilevel and Longitudinal Modeling Using Stata.
3rd Edn, Vol. 1. Texas: Stata Press.

Ren, J., Z. Chen, Q. Zhou, and H. Tang (2008). ‘Regional Yield Estimation for Winter Wheat
with MODIS-NDVI Data in Shandong, China’. International Journal of Applied Earth
Observation and Geoinformation, 10(4): 403–13.

Ross, M.L. (2004). ‘What Do We Know About Natural Resources and Civil War?’ Journal of
Peace Research, 41(3): 337–56.

Ross, M.L. (2007). ‘How Mineral-Rich States Can Reduce Inequality’. In M. Humphreys, J.
Sachs, and J.E. Stiglitz (eds), Escaping the Resource Curse. New York: Cambridge University
Press.

Ross, M.L., P. Lujala, and S.A. Rustad (2012). ‘Horizontal Inequality, Decentralizing the
Distribution of Natural Resource Revenues, and Peace’. In P. Lujala and S.A. Rustad (eds),
High-Value Natural Resources and Post-Conflict Peacebuilding. London: Earthscan.

Sachs, J.D., and A.M. Warner (1995). ‘Natural Resource Abundance and Economic Growth’.
Working Paper 5398. Cambridge, MA: NBER.

Sachs, J.D., and A.M. Warner (1997). ‘Natural Resource Abundance and Economic Growth’.
Cambridge, MA: Center for International Development and Harvard Institute for International
Development, Harvard University.

Sachs, J.D., and A.M. Warner (2001). ‘The Curse of Natural Resources’. European Economic
Review, 45(4–6): 827–38.

Salami, M.B. (2001). ‘Environmental Impact Assessment Policies, their Effectiveness or
Otherwise for Mining Sector Environmental Management in Africa in Mining Development
and Social Conflicts in Africa’. Accra: Third World Network-Africa.
                                              21
 

 

Spatafora, N., and A.M. Warner (1999). ‘Macroeconomic Effects of Terms-of-Trade Shocks:
The Case of Oil-Exporting Countries’. Policy Research Working Paper 1410. Washington, DC:
World Bank.

Van der Ploeg, F. (2011). ‘Natural Resources: Curse or Blessing?’ Journal of Economic
Literature, 49(2): 366–420.

Venables, A.J. (2005). ‘Spatial Disparities in Developing Countries: Cities, Regions, and
International Trade’. Journal of Economic Geography, 5(1): 39–61.

Venables A.J. (2016). ‘Using Natural Resources for Development: Why Has It Proven So
Difficult?’ Journal of Economic Perspectives, 30(1): 161–84.

Woolcock, M., L. Pritchett, and J. Isham (2001). ‘The Social Foundations of Poor Economic
Growth in Resource-Rich Countries’. In R.M. Auty (ed.), Resource Abundance and Economic
Development. Oxford: Oxford University Press.



Figure 1: Minerals price trends




Source: authors’ construction (based on United States Geological Survey (USGS) data).




                                                     22
 

 

Figure 2: Minerals prices trends




Source: authors’ construction (based on USGS data).

Figure 3: Average lights Gini trends in Africa, 2001–2012

                  .5




                  .4
    Lights Gini




                  .3




                  .2
                       2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012

                                                  Year

                                No Mines         Active Mines        Closed Mines
                                95% CI           95% CI              95% CI


Source: author’s construction.

                                                      23
 

 

Table 1: List of countries
    Algeria                     Djibouti                        Mauritania                   South Africa
    Angola                      Ethiopia                        Morocco                      Sudan
    Benin                       Gabon                           Mozambique                   Tanzania
    Botswana                    Gambia                          Namibia                      Togo
    Burundi                     Guinea-Bissau                   Niger                        Tunisia
    Cameroon                    Kenya                           Nigeria                       Uganda
    Chad                        Liberia                         Rwanda                       Zambia
    Côte d’Ivoire               Madagascar                      Senegal                      Zimbabwe
    Congo                       Malawi                          Sierra Leone
    Democratic Republic of      Mali                            Somalia
    Congo
Source: USGS data.

 Table 2: Names of mineral commodities and their SITC codes by district, region, and country
of production
    Name*      SITC   Commodity names              Price   Districts    Regions   Countries of production
               code                                data

    SITC_1     120    Helium                       Yes     1            1         Algeria
    SITC_2     264    Garnet (industrial)          Yes     1            1         Kenya
    SITC_3     273    Stones (crushed,             Yes     23           22        Algeria, Angola, Ethiopia, Madagascar,
                      dimension), limestone,                                      Malawi, Mauritania, Mozambique,
                      gypsum, marble, and                                         Rwanda, South Africa, Sudan, Tunisia,
                      silicon                                                     Uganda, and Zambia
    SITC_4     274    Sulphur                      Yes     13           12        Ethiopia, Kenya, Malawi, Namibia,
                                                                                  South Africa, Zambia, and Zimbabwe

    SITC_5     277    Diamond                      Yes     27           17        Angola, Botswana, Cameroon, Liberia,
                                                                                  Namibia, Sierra Leone, South Africa,
                                                                                  Tanzania, and Zimbabwe
    SITC_6     278    Barite, bentonite, clay,     Yes     42           35        Algeria, Botswana, Chad, Djibouti,
                      dolomite, fluorspar,                                        Ethiopia, Kenya, Madagascar, Morocco,
                      graphite, salt,                                             Mozambique, Namibia, South Africa,
                      vermiculite, fluorine, and                                  Tanzania, Tunisia, Uganda, and
                      graphite                                                    Zimbabwe
    SITC_7     281    Iron ore                     Yes     12           10        Sierra Leone, South Africa, Tunisia,
                                                                                  Zambia, and Zimbabwe
    SITC_8     283    Copper                       Yes     27           18        Algeria, Democratic Republic of Congo,
                                                                                  Mauritania, Morocco, Namibia, Nigeria,
                                                                                  Republic of Congo, South Africa,
                                                                                  Zambia, and Zimbabwe
    SITC_9     287    Cobalt, chromium,            Yes     18           17        Botswana, Burundi, Ethiopia, Gambia,
                      niobium (columbium),                                        Madagascar, Mozambique, Nigeria,
                      tantalum, titanium,                                         Rwanda, Sierra Leone, South Africa,
                      zirconium, and tungsten                                     Uganda, and Zimbabwe
    SITC_10    522    Arsenic trioxide, lithium,   Yes     13           11        Chad, Cote d’Ivoire, Kenya, Morocco,
                      manganese, pyrophyllite,                                    Namibia, South Africa, Zambia, and
                      soda ash, sodium silicate,                                  Zimbabwe
                      and wollastonite
    SITC_11    523    Phosphate rock, and          Yes     8            6         Malawi, South Africa, Tanzania, Togo,
                      phosphoric acid                                             and Tunisia


                                                           24
 

 
    SITC_12     661      Cement                     Yes     52       48          Algeria, Angola, Benin, Burundi,
                                                                                 Cameroon, Chad, Democratic Republic
                                                                                 of Congo, Ethiopia, Gabon, Kenya,
                                                                                 Liberia, Malawi, Mauritania, Morocco,
                                                                                 Mozambique, Niger, Nigeria, Republic
                                                                                 of Congo, Senegal, Sierra Leone,
                                                                                 Somalia, South Africa, Sudan,
                                                                                 Tanzania, Togo, Tunisia, and Zimbabwe
    SITC_13     662      Diatomite                  Yes     2        2           Kenya and Mozambique
    SITC_14     681      Platinum                   Yes     8        7           Botswana, Ethiopia, South Africa, and
                                                                                 Zimbabwe
    SITC_15     683      Nickel                     Yes     1        1           Zimbabwe
    SITC_16     686      Zinc                       Yes     2        2           Algeria and South Africa
    SITC_17     687      Tin                        Yes     6        6           Nigeria, Rwanda, and Uganda
    SITC_18     971      Gold                       Yes     35       26          Algeria, Burundi, Cote d’Ivoire,
                                                                                 Ethiopia, Kenya, Liberia, Mali,
                                                                                 Republic of Congo, South Africa,
                                                                                 Tanzania, Uganda, Zambia, and
                                                                                 Zimbabwe
    SITC_19     282**    Steel                      No      16       14          Kenya, Mozambique, Nigeria, South
                                                                                 Africa, Sudan, and Uganda
    SITC_20     289**    Gemstones                  No      13       10          Botswana, Ethiopia, Madagascar,
                                                                                 Mozambique, and Rwanda
    SITC_21     321**    Coal                       No      37       22          Botswana, Burundi, Ethiopia, Malawi,
                                                                                 Morocco, Mozambique, Niger, Nigeria,
                                                                                 South Africa, Tanzania, Zambia, and
                                                                                 Zimbabwe
    SITC_22     525**    Uranium                    No      2        2           Namibia and Niger
    SITC_23     663**    Chromite                   No      8        6           South Africa, Sudan, and Zimbabwe
    SITC_24     684**    Aluminium, ammonia,        No      5        5           Cameroon, Mozambique, Nigeria, and
                         and bauxite                                             South Africa
    SITC_25     728**    Asbestos                   No      4        3           South Africa
    Subtotal                                                376      304
    Base        999      No commodities             n.a.    1806     349
    Total                                                   2182     653

* Names assigned by authors for purposes of analysis and ease of understanding of results. ** These commodities
were dropped from the regressions that included mineral prices; this explains the differences in the numbers of
countries in the regression tables.
Source: authors’ construction (based on USGS data).

Table 3: Mining sites by districts in Africa, 2001–2012
     Status of mining activities
                                Status    No mine     Active mines        Closed mines          Total
     Mineral deposits           No        1806        0                   0                     1806        82.8%
                                Yes       0           333                 43                    376         17.2%
                                Total     1806        333                 43                    2182        100%
                                          82.8%       15.3%               2.0%                  100%
     Scale of mining operations
                                Status    No mine     Large-scale         Small-scale           Total
     Mineral deposits           No        1806        0                   0                     1806        82.8%
                                Yes       0           354                 22                    376         17.2%

                                                            25
 

 
                              Total      1806            354                    22                  2182      100%
                                         82.8%           16.2%                  1.0%                100%
     Extracted minerals’ value
                              Status     No mine         High value             Low value           Total
     Mineral deposits         No         1806            0                      0                   1806      82.8%
                              Yes        0               83                     293                 376       17.2%
                              Total      1806            83                     293                 2182      100%
                                         82.8%           3.8%                   13.4%               100%
     Types of mining activities
                              Status     No mine         Extraction             Transformation      Total
     Mineral deposits         No         1806            0                      0                   1806      82.8%
                              Yes        0               271                    105                 376       17.2%
                              Total      1806            271                    105                 2182      100%
                                         82.8%           12.4%                  4.8%                100%

Source: authors’ calculation (based on USGS data).

Table 4: Summary statistics


                                                     Obs.              Mean             Std dev.     Min.          Max.
    Gini index                                       21433             0.256            0.200        0.0           0.940
    Mean logarithmic deviation                       21433             0.271            0.334        0.0           4.353
    Theil index                                      21433             0.247            0.331        0.0           7.289
    Sen index                                        21433             0.072            0.778        0.0           43.545
    Std dev. rainfall (mm)                           26014             4.538            4.617        0.0           88.428
    Std dev. NDVI                                    26014             0.826            1.532        0.0           7.838
    Log(Population)                                  26014             11.173           1.425        3.651         15.931
    Log(Constant prices)                             23745             1.051            3.239        0.0           17.424
    Log(Average prices)                              23745             1.078            3.301        0.0           17.767

Notes: (1) The table shows descriptive statistics across a sample of 2,247 districts across 39 countries in Africa during 2001–
2012. (2) Inequality indicators are at the district level and measured using night-time light intensity. (3) The number of
observations varies because some districts have observations with zero light intensity. (4) Constant (measured at constant 1998
US dollars) and average (measured as annual averages) prices come from USGS. (5) NDVI stands for Normalized Difference
Vegetation Index, a proxy for agricultural productivity.
Source: authors’ calculations.



Table 5: The effects of mineral deposits’ and mining sites’ presence on lights Gini index
Dependent variable: district lights Gini index
                                                  No prices              Constant mineral prices    Average mineral prices
                                       Model 1          Model 2         Model 3      Model 4       Model 5     Model 6
    Equation [2]:
    Deposits [1=present]               0.087***        0.081***         0.190***        0.180***   0.176***      0.166***
                                       [0.000]         [0.004]          [0.048]         [0.048]    [0.043]       [0.043]
    Equation [3]:
    Mining sites                       0.011***        0.010***         0.095***        0.090***   0.088***      0.083***
                                       [0.000]         [0.001]          [0.024]         [0.024]    [0.021]       [0.022]
    Log(Prices)                                                         0.005           0.005      0.007         0.007
                                                                        [0.009]         [0.009]    [0.008]       [0.008]
    Fixed effects                      Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes        Yes           Yes

                                                                  26
 

 
    Controls                            No              Yes              No            Yes             No              Yes
    N                                   20703           20703            19298         19298           19298           19298
    R-squared                           0.763           0.763            0.762         0.762           0.762           0.762
    Countries                           38              38               38            38              38              38
Notes: (1) The table shows the regression results for a sample of 2,182 districts in 653 regions across 38 countries in Africa
during 2001–2012. (2) The regressions use the presence of mineral deposits and mining sites to explain spatial-temporal
variations in lights Gini. (3) Gini index is at the district level and measured using night-time light intensity. (4) The standard
errors, clustered at the country level, are in the brackets. (5) Prices (measured at constant 1998 US dollars and as annual
averages) come from USGS. (6) Fixed effects include time fixed effects, district fixed effects, regional fixed effects, country
fixed effects, and country-year fixed effects. (7) Controls include a proxy for agricultural productivity, rainfall, population
sizes, lights pixels lit, and district geographical locations (measured in absolute latitudes). * p < 0.10. ** p < 0.05. *** p < 0.01.
Source: authors’ estimations.

Table 6: The effects of mining activities on lights Gini index

Dependent variable: district lights Gini index
                                                 No Prices               Constant mineral prices        Average mineral prices
                                      Model 1           Model 2         Model 3      Model 4          Model 5      Model 6
    Active mines                      0.087***          0.081***        0.190***     0.180***         0.176***     0.166***
                                      [0.000]           [0.004]         [0.048]      [0.048]          [0.043]      [0.043]

    Closed mines                      0.314***         0.313***         -0.193**      -0.191**        -0.213***       -0.211***
                                      [0.000]          [0.005]          [0.071]       [0.072]         [0.063]         [0.064]
    High-value minerals               0.144***         0.135***         0.063         0.054           0.022           0.014
                                      [0.000]          [0.006]          [0.158]       [0.157]         [0.135]         [0.135]

    Low-value minerals                0.087***         0.081***         0.190***      0.180***        0.176***        0.166***
                                      [0.000]          [0.004]          [0.048]       [0.048]         [0.043]         [0.043]
    Small-scale mines                  0.144***        0.135***         0.063         0.054           0.022           0.014
                                      [0.000]          [0.006]          [0.158]       [0.157]         [0.135]         [0.135]

    Large-scale mines                  0.087***        0.081***         0.190***      0.180***        0.176***        0.166***
                                       [0.000]         [0.004]          [0.048]       [0.048]         [0.043]         [0.043]
    Mineral extraction                0.087***         0.081***         -0.444***     -0.448***       -0.462***       -0.465***
                                      [0.000]          [0.004]          [0.061]       [0.061]         [0.054]         [0.055]

    Mineral transformation            0.215***         0.203***         0.190***      0.180***        0.176***        0.166***
                                      [0.000]          [0.012]          [0.048]       [0.048]         [0.043]         [0.043]
    Log(Prices)                                                         0.005         0.005           0.007           0.007
                                                                        [0.009]       [0.009]         [0.008]         [0.008]
    Fixed effects                     Yes               Yes             Yes           Yes             Yes             Yes
    Controls                          No                Yes             No            Yes             No              Yes
    N                                 20703             20703           19298         19298           19298           19298
    R-squared                         0.763             0.763           0.762         0.762           0.762           0.762
    Countries                         38                38              38            38              38              38


Notes: (1) The table shows the regression results for a sample of 2,182 districts in 653 regions across 38 countries in Africa
during 2001–2012. (2) The regressions use the presence of active and closed mining activities to explain spatial-temporal
variations in inequality measures. (3) Gini index is at the district level and measured using night-time light intensity. (4) The
standard errors, clustered at the country level, are in the brackets. (5) Prices (measured at constant 1998 US dollars and as
annual averages) come from USGS. (6) Fixed effects include time fixed effects, district fixed effects, regional fixed effects,
country fixed effects, and country-year fixed effects. (7) Controls include a proxy for agricultural productivity, rainfall,
population sizes, lights pixels lit, and district geographical locations (measured in absolute latitudes). (8) High-value refers to
mining sites where high-value minerals are extracted, whereas low-value refers to places where low-value minerals are
extracted. (9) Small-scale refers to sites with artisanal mining activities, while large-scale refers to sites where large-scale
mining activities are taking place. (10) Mineral extraction refers to mining sites where extractive mining activities are taking
place, and mineral transformation refers to sites where the value addition of raw minerals is performed. * p < 0.10. ** p < 0.05.
*** p < 0.01.


Source: authors’ estimations.


                                                                   27
 

 

Table 7: The effects of mineral prices on lights Gini index

Dependent variable: district lights Gini Index
                                           Constant mineral prices                                 Average mineral prices
                               Model 1         S.E.         Model 2       S.E.        Model 3       S.E.         Model 4       S.E.
    SITC_1 x log(Price)        0.131***        [0.001]      0.126***      [0.006]     0.149***      [0.001]      0.137***      [0.014]
    SITC_2 x log(Price)        0.137***        [0.007]      0.138***      [0.008]     0.195***      [0.008]      0.198***      [0.011]
    SITC_3 x log(Price)        0.013           [0.089]      0.014         [0.089]     0.022         [0.085]      0.023         [0.085]
    SITC_5 x log(Price)        -0.006          [0.049]      -0.005        [0.049]     -0.007        [0.062]      -0.006        [0.062]
    SITC_6 x log(Price)        -0.086          [0.080]      -0.085        [0.078]     0.026         [0.062]      0.025         [0.062]
    SITC_7 x log(Price)        -0.045***       [0.010]      -0.045***     [0.010]     -0.037***     [0.008]      -0.037***     [0.008]
    SITC_9 x log(Price)        -0.003          [0.020]      -0.003        [0.019]     -0.002        [0.019]      -0.002        [0.019]
    SITC_10 x log(Price)       -0.047          [0.057]      -0.048        [0.056]     -0.039        [0.045]      -0.039        [0.044]
    SITC_11 x log(Price)       -0.051          [0.031]      -0.051        [0.032]     -0.046        [0.028]      -0.046        [0.029]
    SITC_12 x log(Price)       0.013           [0.009]      0.013         [0.009]     0.014         [0.009]      0.014         [0.009]
    SITC_13 x log(Price)       0.017           [0.143]      0.016         [0.143]     0.750*        [0.416]      0.747*        [0.419]
    SITC_14 x log(Price)       0.005           [0.019]      0.005         [0.018]     0.033         [0.032]      0.033         [0.031]
    SITC_15 x log(Price)       -0.155***       [0.003]      -0.155***     [0.003]     -0.139***     [0.003]      -0.139***     [0.003]
    SITC_16 x log(Price)       -0.110          [0.106]      -0.111        [0.104]     -0.098        [0.092]      -0.099        [0.091]
    SITC_17 x log(Price)       0.001           [0.027]      0.001         [0.027]     0.004         [0.025]      0.004         [0.026]
    Fixed effects              Yes                          Yes                       Yes                        Yes
    Controls                   No                           Yes                       No                         Yes
    N                          19298                        19298                     19298                      19298
    R-squared                  0.763                        0.763                     0.763                      0.763
    Countries                  38                           38                        38                         38

Notes: (1) The table shows the regression results for a sample of 2,182 districts in 653 regions across 38 countries in Africa
during 2001–2012. (2) The regressions use the presence of mining activities to explain spatial-temporal variations in lights
Gini. (3) Gini index is at the district level and measured using night-time light intensity. (4) The standard errors, clustered at
the country level, are in the brackets. (5) Prices (measured at constant 1998 US dollars and as annual averages) come from
USGS. (6) Fixed effects include time fixed effects, district fixed effects, regional fixed effects, country fixed effects, and
country-year fixed effects. (7) Controls include a proxy for agricultural productivity, rainfall, population sizes, lights pixels
lit, and district geographical locations (measured in absolute latitudes). (8) SITC_1: helium. (9) SITC_2: garnet (industrial).
(10) SITC_3: stones (crushed, dimension), limestone, gypsum, marble, and silicon. (11) SITC_5: diamond. (12) SITC_6:
barite, bentonite, clay, dolomite, fluorspar, graphite, salt, vermiculite, fluorine, and graphite. (13) SITC_7: iron ore. (14)
SITC_9: cobalt, chromium, niobium (columbium), tantalum, titanium, zirconium, and tungsten. (15) SITC_10: arsenic
trioxide, lithium, manganese, pyrophyllite, soda ash, sodium silicate, and wollastonite. (16) SITC_11: phosphate rock and
phosphoric acid. (17) SITC_12: cement. (18) SITC_13: diatomite. (19) SITC_14: platinum. (20) SITC_15: nickel. (21)
SITC_16:        zinc.   (22)     SITC_17:       tin.  *    p    <     0.10.     **    p    <      0.05.   ***    p     <     0.01.
Source: authors’ estimations.


Table 8: The effects of mining activities on lights Gini index
Dependent variable: district lights Gini index
                                                      Constant mineral prices                                 Average mineral prices
                                       Model 1         S.E.       Model 2           S.E.          Model 3      S.E.      Model 4     S.E.
    SITC_1 x Active x log(Price)       0.132***          [0.001]     0.126***       [0.006]       0.149***     [0.001]       0.137***    [0.015]
    SITC_2 x Active x log(Price)       0.140***          [0.005]     0.141***       [0.006]       0.197***     [0.006]       0.201***    [0.010]
    SITC_3 x Active x log(Price)       0.013             [0.089]     0.014          [0.089]       0.022        [0.085]       0.023       [0.085]
    SITC_5 x Active x log(Price)       0.026             [0.037]     0.027          [0.037]       0.031        [0.048]       0.032       [0.048]
    SITC_5 x Closed x log(Price)       -0.346***         [0.002]     -0.346***      [0.002]       -0.407***    [0.002]       -0.407***   [0.002]
    SITC_6 x Active x log(Price)       -0.063            [0.091]     -0.063         [0.089]       0.003        [0.065]       0.003       [0.065]


                                                                     28
 

 
    SITC_6 x Closed x log(Price)     -0.286        [0.176]     -0.282        [0.177]      0.195***     [0.050]    0.190***     [0.051]
    SITC_7 x Active x log(Price)     -0.046***     [0.011]     -0.046***     [0.010]      -0.039***    [0.009]    -0.039***    [0.009]
    SITC_9 x Active x log(Price)     -0.003        [0.019]     -0.003        [0.019]      -0.003       [0.019]    -0.003       [0.019]
    SITC_10 x Active x log(Price)    -0.047        [0.057]     -0.048        [0.056]      -0.039       [0.044]    -0.039       [0.044]
    SITC_11 x Active x log(Price)    -0.037        [0.026]     -0.037        [0.026]      -0.034       [0.023]    -0.034       [0.023]
    SITC_11 x Closed x log(Price)    -0.127***     [0.001]     -0.127***     [0.002]      -0.115***    [0.001]    -0.115***    [0.001]
    SITC_12 x Active x log(Price)    0.015         [0.010]     0.015         [0.010]      0.016        [0.010]    0.016        [0.010]
    SITC_12 x Closed x log(Price)    -0.009***     [0.003]     -0.008***     [0.002]      -0.006***    [0.001]    -0.005***    [0.001]
    SITC_13 x Active x log(Price)    0.017         [0.143]     0.016         [0.143]      0.751*       [0.415]    0.748*       [0.418]
    SITC_14 x Active x log(Price)    0.009         [0.020]     0.010         [0.019]      0.038        [0.035]    0.038        [0.034]
    SITC_14 x Closed x log(Price)    -0.056***     [0.002]     -0.056***     [0.002]      -0.035***    [0.003]    -0.035***    [0.003]
    SITC_15 x Closed x log(Price)    -0.158***     [0.002]     -0.158***     [0.003]      -0.142***    [0.002]    -0.142***    [0.003]
    SITC_16 x Closed x log(Price)    -0.110        [0.105]     -0.111        [0.104]      -0.098       [0.092]    -0.099       [0.091]
    SITC_17 x Active x log(Price)    0.042***      [0.005]     0.042***      [0.005]      0.042***     [0.003]    0.042***     [0.003]
    SITC_17 x Closed x log(Price)    -0.028***     [0.000]     -0.029***     [0.001]      -0.024***    [0.000]    -0.024***    [0.001]
    SITC_18 x Active x log(Price)    0.047*        [0.025]     0.047*        [0.025]      0.040*       [0.021]    0.041*       [0.021]
    SITC_18 x Closed x log(Price)    0.001         [0.015]     0.001         [0.014]      0.001        [0.013]    0.001        [0.013]
    Fixed effects                    Yes                       Yes                        Yes                     Yes
    Controls                         No                        Yes                        No                      Yes
    N                                19298                     19298                      19298                   19298
    R-squared                        0.763                     0.763                      0.763                   0.763
    Countries                        38                        38                         38                      38

Notes: (1) The table shows the regression results for a sample of 2,182 districts in 653 regions across 38 countries in Africa
during 2001–2012. (2) The regressions use the presence of active and closed mining activities to explain spatial-temporal
variations in inequality and welfare measures. (3) Gini index is at the district level and measured using night-time light
intensity. (4) The standard errors, clustered at the country level, are in the brackets. (5) Constant (measured at constant 1998
US dollars) and average (measured as annual averages) prices come from USGS. (6) Fixed effects include time fixed effects,
district fixed effects, regional fixed effects, country fixed effects, and country-year fixed effects. (7) Controls include a proxy
for agricultural productivity, rainfall, population sizes, lights pixels lit, and district geographical locations (measured in
absolute latitudes). (8) SITC_1: helium. (9) SITC_2: garnet (industrial). (10) SITC_3: stones (crushed, dimension), limestone,
gypsum, marble, and silicon. (11) SITC_5: diamond. (12) SITC_6: barite, bentonite, clay, dolomite, fluorspar, graphite, salt,
vermiculite, fluorine, and graphite. (13) SITC_7: iron ore. (14) SITC_9: cobalt, chromium, niobium (columbium), tantalum,
titanium, zirconium, and tungsten. (15) SITC_10: arsenic trioxide, lithium, manganese, pyrophyllite, soda ash, sodium silicate,
and wollastonite. (16) SITC_11: phosphate rock and phosphoric acid. (17) SITC_12: cement. (18) SITC_13: diatomite. (19)
SITC_14: platinum. (20) SITC_15: nickel. (21) SITC_16: zinc. (22) SITC_17: tin. (23) SITC_18: gold. * p < 0.10. ** p < 0.05.
*** p < 0.01.


Source: authors’ estimations.

 

 




                                                               29
 

 
Table 9: The effects of minerals’ value on lights Gini index
Dependent variable: district lights Gini index
                                                       Constant mineral prices                            Average mineral prices
                                           Model 1      S.E.        Model 2      S.E.        Model 3       S.E.       Model 4       S.E.
    SITC_1 x Low value x log(Price)        0.131***     [0.001]     0.126***     [0.006]     0.149***      [0.001]    0.137***      [0.014]
    SITC_2 x Low value x log(Price)        0.137***     [0.007]     0.138***     [0.008]     0.195***      [0.008]    0.198***      [0.011]
    SITC_3 x Low value x log(Price)        0.013        [0.089]     0.014        [0.089]     0.022         [0.085]    0.023         [0.085]
    SITC_5 x High value x log(Price)       -0.006       [0.049]     -0.005       [0.049]     -0.007        [0.062]    -0.006        [0.062]
    SITC_6 x Low value x log(Price)        -0.086       [0.080]     -0.085       [0.078]     0.026         [0.062]    0.025         [0.062]
    SITC_7 x Low value x log(Price)        -0.045***    [0.010]     -0.045***    [0.010]     -0.037***     [0.008]    -0.037***     [0.008]
    SITC_9 x Low value x log(Price)        -0.003       [0.020]     -0.003       [0.019]     -0.002        [0.019]    -0.002        [0.019]
    SITC_10 x Low value x log(Price)       -0.047       [0.057]     -0.048       [0.056]     -0.039        [0.045]    -0.039        [0.044]
    SITC_11 x Low value x log(Price)       -0.051       [0.031]     -0.051       [0.032]     -0.046        [0.028]    -0.046        [0.029]
    SITC_12 x Low value x log(Price)       0.013        [0.009]     0.013        [0.009]     0.014         [0.009]    0.014         [0.009]
    SITC_13 x Low value x log(Price)       0.017        [0.143]     0.016        [0.143]     0.750*        [0.416]    0.747*        [0.419]
    SITC_14 x High value x log(Price)      0.005        [0.019]     0.005        [0.018]     0.033         [0.032]    0.033         [0.031]
    SITC_15 x Low value x log(Price)       -0.155***    [0.003]     -0.155***    [0.003]     -0.139***     [0.003]    -0.139***     [0.003]
    SITC_16 x Low value x log(Price)       -0.110       [0.106]     -0.111       [0.104]     -0.098        [0.092]    -0.099        [0.091]
    SITC_17 x Low value x log(Price)       0.001        [0.027]     0.001        [0.027]     0.004         [0.025]    0.004         [0.026]
    SITC_18 x High value x log(Price)      0.040**      [0.018]     0.040**      [0.018]     0.034**       [0.016]    0.035**       [0.016]
    Fixed effects                          Yes                      Yes                      Yes                      Yes
    Controls                               No                       Yes                      No                       Yes
    N                                      19298                    19298                    19298                    19298
    R-squared                              0.763                    0.763                    0.763                    0.763
    Countries                              38                       38                       38                       38

Notes: (1) The table shows the regression results for a sample of 2,182 districts in 653 regions across 38 countries in Africa during
2001–2012. (2) The regressions use the classification of minerals’ value to explain spatial-temporal variations in inequality. (3)
Gini index is at the district level and measured using night-time light intensity. (4) The standard errors, clustered at the country
level, are in the brackets. (5) Constant (measured at constant 1998 US dollars) and average (measured as annual averages) prices
come from USGS. (6) High value refers to mining sites where high-value minerals are extracted, whereas low value refers to places
where low-value minerals are extracted. (7) Fixed effects include time fixed effects, district fixed effects, regional fixed effects,
country fixed effects, and country-year fixed effects. (8) Controls include a proxy for agricultural productivity, rainfall, population
sizes, lights pixels lit, and district geographical locations (measured in absolute latitudes). (9) SITC_1: helium. (10) SITC_2: garnet
(industrial). (11) SITC_3: stones (crushed, dimension), limestone, gypsum, marble, and silicon. (12) SITC_5: diamond. (13)
SITC_6: barite, bentonite, clay, dolomite, fluorspar, graphite, salt, vermiculite, fluorine, and graphite. (14) SITC_7: iron ore. (15)
SITC_9: cobalt, chromium, niobium (columbium), tantalum, titanium, zirconium, and tungsten. (16) SITC_10: arsenic trioxide,
lithium, manganese, pyrophyllite, soda ash, sodium silicate, and wollastonite. (17) SITC_11: phosphate rock and phosphoric acid.
(18) SITC_12: cement. (19) SITC_13: diatomite. (20) SITC_14: platinum. (21) SITC_15: nickel. (22) SITC_16: zinc. (23)
SITC_17: tin. (24) SITC_18: gold. * p < 0.10. ** p < 0.05. *** p < 0.01.
Source: authors’ estimations.

Table 10: The effects of the scale of mining activities on lights Gini index
Dependent variable: district light Gini index
                                                       Constant mineral prices                              Average mineral prices
                                           Model 1      S.E.       Model 2         S.E.        Model 3       S.E.      Model 4            S.E.
    SITC_1 x Large scale x log(Price)      0.132***     [0.001]    0.126***        [0.006]     0.150***      [0.001]   0.137***           [0.014]
    SITC_2 x Large scale x log(Price)      0.133***     [0.005]    0.134***        [0.007]     0.189***      [0.007]   0.193***           [0.010]
    SITC_3 x Large scale x log(Price)      0.011        [0.089]    0.012           [0.089]     0.020         [0.086]   0.021              [0.085]

                                                                  30
 

 
    SITC_5 x Small scale x log(Price)      -0.105         [0.063]        -0.103       [0.065]    -0.116        [0.087]     -0.113           [0.090]
    SITC_5 x Large scale x log(Price)      0.002          [0.054]        0.002        [0.054]    0.001         [0.068]     0.001            [0.068]
    SITC_6 x Small scale x log(Price)      -0.536***      [0.005]        -0.536***    [0.005]    -1.177***     [0.004]     -1.173***        [0.004]
    SITC_6 x Large scale x log(Price)      -0.076         [0.082]        -0.076       [0.080]    0.051         [0.059]     0.051            [0.059]
    SITC_7 x Large scale x log(Price)      -0.045***      [0.010]        -0.045***    [0.010]    -0.037***     [0.008]     -0.037***        [0.008]
    SITC_9 x Small scale x log(Price)      -0.065***      [0.001]        -0.066***    [0.002]    -0.067***     [0.000]     -0.067***        [0.002]
    SITC_9 x Large scale x log(Price)      0.005          [0.020]        0.005        [0.020]    0.006         [0.019]     0.006            [0.019]
    SITC_10 x Small scale x log(Price)     0.200***       [0.003]        0.200***     [0.003]    0.156***      [0.002]     0.157***         [0.002]
    SITC_10 x Large scale x log(Price)     -0.063         [0.059]        -0.063       [0.059]    -0.052        [0.046]     -0.052           [0.045]
    SITC_11 x Large scale x log(Price)     -0.051         [0.031]        -0.051       [0.032]    -0.046        [0.028]     -0.046           [0.029]
    SITC_12 x Large scale x log(Price)     0.013          [0.009]        0.013        [0.009]    0.014         [0.009]     0.014            [0.009]
    SITC_13 x Large scale x log(Price)     0.015          [0.143]        0.014        [0.143]    0.751*        [0.415]     0.748*           [0.418]
    SITC_14 x Large scale x log(Price)     0.005          [0.019]        0.005        [0.018]    0.034         [0.032]     0.034            [0.031]
    SITC_15 x Large scale x log(Price)     -0.156***      [0.003]        -0.156***    [0.003]    -0.140***     [0.003]     -0.140***        [0.003]
    SITC_16 x Large scale x log(Price)     -0.110         [0.106]        -0.112       [0.105]    -0.098        [0.092]     -0.099           [0.091]
    SITC_17 x Small scale x log(Price)     -0.231***      [0.001]        -0.230***    [0.002]    -0.242***     [0.001]     -0.241***        [0.002]
    SITC_17 x Large scale x log(Price)     0.003          [0.027]        0.002        [0.028]    0.005         [0.025]     0.005            [0.026]
    SITC_18 x Small scale x log(Price)      0.082***      [0.023]         0.083***    [0.023]     0.070***     [0.020]      0.071***        [0.020]
    SITC_18 x Large scale x log(Price)     0.034*         [0.019]        0.034*       [0.019]    0.029*        [0.017]     0.030*           [0.017]
    Fixed effects                          Yes                           Yes                     Yes                       Yes
    Controls                               No                            Yes                     No                        Yes
    N                                      19298                         19298                   19298                     19298
    R-squared                              0.763                         0.763                   0.763                     0.763
    Countries                              38                            38                      38                        38
Notes: (1) The table shows the regression results for a sample of 2,182 districts in 653 regions across 38 countries in Africa during
2001–2012. (2) The regressions use the scale of district mining operations to explain spatial-temporal variations in inequality. (3)
Gini index is at the district level and measured using night-time light intensity. (4) The standard errors, clustered at the country
level, are in the brackets. (5) Constant (measured at constant 1998 US dollars) and average (measured as annual averages) prices
come from USGS. (6) Small scale refers to sites with artisanal mining activities, while large scale refers to sites where large-scale
mining activities are taking place. (7) Fixed effects include time fixed effects, district fixed effects, regional fixed effects, country
fixed effects, and country-year fixed effects. (8) Controls include a proxy for agricultural productivity, rainfall, population sizes,
lights pixels lit, and district geographical locations (measured in absolute latitudes). (9) SITC_1: helium. (10) SITC_2: garnet
(industrial). (11) SITC_3: stones (crushed, dimension), limestone, gypsum, marble, and silicon. (12) SITC_5: diamond. (13)
SITC_6: barite, bentonite, clay, dolomite, fluorspar, graphite, salt, vermiculite, fluorine, and graphite. (14) SITC_7: iron ore. (15)
SITC_9: cobalt, chromium, niobium (columbium), tantalum, titanium, zirconium, and tungsten. (16) SITC_10: arsenic trioxide,
lithium, manganese, pyrophyllite, soda ash, sodium silicate, and wollastonite. (17) SITC_11: phosphate rock and phosphoric acid.
(18) SITC_12: cement. (19) SITC_13: diatomite. (20) SITC_14: platinum. (21) SITC_15: nickel. (22) SITC_16: zinc. (23)
SITC_17: tin. (24) SITC_18: gold. * p < 0.10. ** p < 0.05. *** p < 0.01.
Source: authors’ estimations.

Table 11: The effects of the nature of mining activities on lights Gini index
Dependent variable: district lights Gini index
                                                       Constant mineral prices                               Average mineral prices
                                          Model 1       S.E.       Model 2           S.E.       Model 3       S.E.      Model 4        S.E.
    SITC_1 x Extraction x log(Price)      0.130***      [0.001]      0.124***        [0.006]    0.148***      [0.001]    0.135***      [0.014]
    SITC_2 x Extraction x log(Price)      0.140***      [0.005]      0.141***        [0.007]    0.196***      [0.006]    0.200***      [0.011]
    SITC_3 x Extraction x log(Price)      0.015         [0.120]      0.016           [0.119]    0.065         [0.099]    0.066         [0.098]
    SITC_3 x Transform x log(Price)       0.003         [0.097]      0.004           [0.097]    -0.069        [0.106]    -0.068        [0.104]
    SITC_5 x Extraction x log(Price)      -0.006        [0.049]      -0.006          [0.049]    -0.007        [0.062]    -0.007        [0.062]
    SITC_6 x Extraction x log(Price)      -0.095        [0.080]      -0.093          [0.078]    0.034         [0.066]    0.033         [0.066]
    SITC_6 x Transform x log(Price)       0.116*        [0.067]      0.091           [0.059]    -0.168***     [0.018]    -0.171***     [0.017]
    SITC_7 x Extraction x log(Price)      -0.059***     [0.013]      -0.059***       [0.013]    -0.049***     [0.011]    -0.049***     [0.011]
    SITC_7 x Transform x log(Price)       0.026         [0.033]      0.026           [0.033]    0.022         [0.029]    0.022         [0.028]

                                                                    31
 

 
    SITC_9 x Extraction x log(Price)       0.003        [0.019]     0.003           [0.019]     0.004       [0.019]    0.004         [0.018]
    SITC_9 x Transform x log(Price)        -0.109***    [0.001]     -0.108***       [0.001]     -0.099***   [0.001]    -0.098***     [0.001]
    SITC_10 x Extraction x log(Price)      -0.043       [0.068]     -0.043          [0.068]     -0.037      [0.055]    -0.038        [0.055]
    SITC_10 x Transform x log(Price)       -0.068**     [0.030]     -0.069**        [0.030]     -0.041*     [0.024]    -0.041*       [0.024]
    SITC_11 x Extraction x log(Price)      -0.070       [0.043]     -0.071          [0.043]     -0.064      [0.039]    -0.065        [0.039]
    SITC_11 x Transform x log(Price)       -0.003       [0.103]     -0.002          [0.105]     -0.001      [0.095]    -0.000        [0.096]
    SITC_12 x Extraction x log(Price)      -0.019       [0.023]     -0.019          [0.023]     -0.018      [0.021]    -0.018        [0.021]
    SITC_12 x Transform x log(Price)       0.024**      [0.010]     0.024**         [0.010]     0.025**     [0.011]    0.025**       [0.011]
    SITC_13 x Extraction x log(Price)      -0.170***    [0.007]     -0.170***       [0.008]     1.293***    [0.003]    1.294***      [0.003]
    SITC_13 x Transform x log(Price)       0.205***     [0.006]     0.204***        [0.006]     0.203***    [0.004]    0.196***      [0.009]
    SITC_14 x Extraction x log(Price)      -0.008       [0.011]     -0.007          [0.011]     0.016       [0.022]    0.016         [0.021]
    SITC_14 x Transform x log(Price)       0.070***     [0.001]     0.069***        [0.001]     0.127***    [0.001]    0.124***      [0.002]
    SITC_15 x Extraction x log(Price)      -0.154***    [0.003]     -0.154***       [0.003]     -0.138***   [0.003]    -0.138***     [0.003]
    SITC_16 x Extraction x log(Price)      -0.110       [0.106]     -0.112          [0.104]     -0.098      [0.092]    -0.099        [0.091]
    SITC_17 x Extraction x log(Price)      0.042***     [0.005]     0.042***        [0.005]     0.042***    [0.003]    0.043***      [0.003]
    SITC_17 x Transform x log(Price)       -0.028***    [0.000]     -0.028***       [0.001]     -0.024***   [0.000]    -0.024***     [0.001]
    SITC_18 x Extraction x log(Price)      0.044**      [0.019]     0.044**         [0.019]     0.038**     [0.016]    0.038**       [0.016]
    SITC_18 x Transform x log(Price)       -0.054***    [0.001]     -0.053***       [0.001]     -0.047***   [0.000]    -0.047***     [0.000]
    Fixed effects                          Yes                      Yes                         Yes                    Yes
    Controls                               No                       Yes                         No                     Yes
    N                                      19298                    19298                       19298                  19298
    R-squared                              0.763                    0.763                       0.763                  0.763
    Countries                              38                       38                          38                     38

Notes: (1) The table shows the regression results for a sample of 2,182 districts in 653 countries across 38 countries in Africa during
2001–2012. (2) The regressions use the nature of mining activities to explain spatial-temporal variations in inequality. (3) Gini
index is at the district level and measured using night-time light intensity. (4) The standard errors, clustered at the country level,
are in the brackets. (5) Constant (measured at constant 1998 US dollars) and average (measured as annual averages) prices come
from USGS. (6) Extraction refers to mining sites where extractive mining activities are taking place, and transform refers to sites
where value addition to raw minerals is performed. (7) Fixed effects include time fixed effects, district fixed effects, regional fixed
effects, country fixed effects, and country-year fixed effects. (8) Controls include a proxy for agricultural productivity, rainfall,
population sizes, lights pixels lit, and district geographical locations (measured in absolute latitudes). (9) SITC_1: helium. (10)
SITC_2: garnet (industrial). (11) SITC_3: stones (crushed, dimension), limestone, gypsum, marble, and silicon. (12) SITC_5:
diamond. (13) SITC_6: barite, bentonite, clay, dolomite, fluorspar, graphite, salt, vermiculite, fluorine, and graphite. (14) SITC_7:
iron ore. (15) SITC_9: cobalt, chromium, niobium (columbium), tantalum, titanium, zirconium, and tungsten. (16) SITC_10:
arsenic trioxide, lithium, manganese, pyrophyllite, soda ash, sodium silicate, and wollastonite. (17) SITC_11: phosphate rock and
phosphoric acid. (18) SITC_12: cement. (19) SITC_13: diatomite. (20) SITC_14: platinum. (21) SITC_15: nickel. (22) SITC_16:
zinc. (23) SITC_17: tin. (24) SITC_18: gold. * p < 0.10. ** p < 0.05. *** p < 0.01.
Source: authors’ estimations.

Table 12: The effects of mineral deposits’ and mining sites’ presence on district inequality
                                            Constant mineral prices                              Average mineral prices
                                Gini         MLD        Theil       RLP              Gini        MLD       Theil       RLP
    Equation [2]:
    Deposits [1=present]        0.180***     0.277***    0.206**        17.504***    0.166***    0.255***   0.178**     17.240***
                                [0.048]      [0.095]     [0.091]        [2.040]      [0.043]     [0.085]    [0.082]     [1.914]
    Equation [3]:
    Mining sites                0.090***     0.139***    0.103**        8.752***     0.083***    0.127***   0.089**     8.620***


                                                                   32
 

 
                                 [0.024]     [0.047]      [0.046]        [1.020]       [0.022]       [0.043]       [0.041]    [0.957]
    Log(Prices)                  0.005       -0.003       0.003          -0.045        0.007         0.001         0.008      0.006
                                 [0.009]     [0.017]      [0.018]        [0.049]       [0.008]       [0.014]       [0.015]    [0.059]
    Fixed effects                Yes         Yes          Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes        Yes
    Controls                     Yes         Yes          Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes           Yes        Yes
    N                            19298       19298        19298          23745         19298         19298         19298      23745
    R-squared                    0.762       0.625        0.676          0.463         0.762         0.625         0.676      0.463
    Countries                    38          38           38             38            38            38            38         38

Notes: (1) The table shows the regression results for a sample of 2,182 districts in 653 regions across 38 countries in Africa during
2001–2012. (2) The regressions use the presence of mineral deposits and mining sites to explain spatial-temporal variations in
lights Gini. (3) All inequality indicators are at the district level and measured using night-time light intensity. (4) The standard
errors, clustered at the country level, are in the brackets. (5) MLD stands for mean logarithmic deviation, and RLP stands for
relative lights per capita. (6) Constant (measured at constant 1998 US dollars) and average (measured as annual averages) prices
come from USGS. (7) Fixed effects include time fixed effects, district fixed effects, regional fixed effects, country fixed effects,
and country-year fixed effects. (8) Controls include a proxy for agricultural productivity, rainfall, population sizes, lights pixels lit,
and district geographical locations (measured in absolute latitudes). * p < 0.10. ** p < 0.05. *** p < 0.01.
Source: authors’ estimations.

Table 13: The effects of the status of mining activities on district inequality
                                              Constant mineral prices                                  Average mineral prices
                                 Gini         MLD         Theil       RLP                Gini          MLD        Theil       RLP
    Active mines [1=Active]      0.180***     0.277***      0.206**        17.504***     0.166***      0.255***       0.178**     17.240***
                                 [0.048]      [0.095]       [0.091]        [2.040]       [0.043]       [0.085]        [0.082]     [1.914]
    Closed mines [2=Closed]      -0.191**     -0.463***     -0.407***      -4.435***     -0.211***     -0.496***      -0.447***   -4.822***
                                 [0.072]      [0.129]       [0.141]        [1.014]       [0.064]       [0.112]        [0.124]     [1.209]
    Log(Prices)                  0.005        -0.003        0.003          -0.045        0.007         0.001          0.008       0.006
                                 [0.009]      [0.017]       [0.018]        [0.049]       [0.008]       [0.014]        [0.015]     [0.059]
    Fixed effects                Yes          Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes         Yes
    Controls                     Yes          Yes           Yes            Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes         Yes
    N                            19298        19298         19298          23745         19298         19298          19298       23745
    R-squared                    0.762        0.625         0.676          0.463         0.762         0.625          0.676       0.463
    Countries                    38           38            38             38            38            38             38.         38

Notes: (1) The table shows the regression results for a sample of 2,182 districts in 653 regions across 38 countries in Africa during
2001–2012. (2) The regressions use the presence of active and closed mining activities to explain spatial-temporal variations in
inequality and welfare measures. (3) All inequality indicators are at the district level and measured using night-time light intensity.
(4) The standard errors, clustered at the country level, are in the brackets. (5) MLD stands for mean logarithmic deviation, and RLP
stands for relative lights per capita. (6) Constant (measured at constant 1998 US dollars) and average (measured as annual averages)
prices come from USGS. (7) Fixed effects include time fixed effects, district fixed effects, regional fixed effects, country fixed
effects, and country-year fixed effects. (8) Controls include a proxy for agricultural productivity, rainfall, population sizes, lights
pixels lit, and district geographical locations (measured in absolute latitudes). * p < 0.10. ** p < 0.05. *** p < 0.01.
Source: authors’ estimations.




                                                                    33
 

 
Table 14: The effects of the scale of mining activities on district inequality
                                              Constant mineral prices                             Average mineral prices
                                   Gini        MLD        Theil       RLP              Gini       MLD        Theil       RLP
    Small-scale mines              0.054       0.184        0.072       3.851***       0.014       0.113        -0.011      3.001***
                                   [0.157]     [0.285]      [0.301]     [1.154]        [0.135]     [0.240]      [0.257]     [0.985]
    Large-scale mines              0.180***    0.277***     0.206**     17.504***      0.166***    0.255***     0.178**     17.240***
                                   [0.048]     [0.095]      [0.091]     [2.040]        [0.043]     [0.085]      [0.082]     [1.914]
    Log(Prices)                    0.005       -0.003       0.003       -0.045         0.007       0.001        0.008       0.006
                                   [0.009]     [0.017]      [0.018]     [0.049]        [0.008]     [0.014]      [0.015]     [0.059]
    Fixed effects                  Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes            Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes
    Controls                       Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes            Yes         Yes          Yes         Yes
    N                              19298       19298        19298       23745          19298       19298        19298       23745
    R-squared                      0.762       0.625        0.676       0.463          0.762       0.625        0.676       0.463
    Countries                      38          38           38          38             38          38           38          38

Notes: (1) The table shows the regression results for a sample of 2,182 districts in 653 regions across 38 countries in Africa during
2001–2012. (2) The regressions exploit the scale of mining operations to explain spatial-temporal variations in district inequality.
(3) All inequality indicators are at the district level and measured using night-time light intensity. (4) The standard errors, clustered
at the country level, are in the brackets. (5) MLD stands for mean logarithmic deviation, and RLP stands for relative lights per
capita. (6) Constant (measured at constant 1998 US dollars) and average (measured as annual averages) prices come from USGS.
(7) Small-scale refers to sites with artisanal mining activities, while large-scale refers to sites where large-scale mining activities
are taking place. (8) Fixed effects include time fixed effects, district fixed effects, regional fixed effects, country fixed effects, and
country-year fixed effects. (9) Controls include a proxy for agricultural productivity, rainfall, population sizes, lights pixels lit, and
district geographical locations (measured in absolute latitudes). * p < 0.10. ** p < 0.05. *** p < 0.01.
Source: authors’ estimations.

Table 15: The effects of minerals’ value on district inequality
                                               Constant mineral prices                             Average mineral prices
                                   Gini         MLD        Theil       RLP             Gini        MLD        Theil       RLP
    High-value minerals            0.054        0.184        0.072       3.851***      0.014        0.113        -0.011      3.001***
                                   [0.157]      [0.285]      [0.301]     [1.154]       [0.135]      [0.240]      [0.257]     [0.985]
    Low-value minerals             0.180***     0.277***     0.206**     17.504***     0.166***     0.255***     0.178**     17.240***
                                   [0.048]      [0.095]      [0.091]     [2.040]       [0.043]      [0.085]      [0.082]     [1.914]
    Log(Prices)                    0.005        -0.003       0.003       -0.045        0.007        0.001        0.008       0.006
                                   [0.009]      [0.017]      [0.018]     [0.049]       [0.008]      [0.014]      [0.015]     [0.059]
    Fixed effects                  Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes
    Controls                       Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes           Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes
    N                              19298        19298        19298       23745         19298        19298        19298       23745
    R-squared                      0.762        0.625        0.676       0.463         0.762        0.625        0.676       0.463
    Countries                      38           38           38          38            38           38           38          38

Notes: (1) The table shows the regression results for a sample of 2,182 districts in 653 regions across 38 countries in Africa during
2001–2012. (2) The regressions exploit the value of minerals to explain spatial-temporal variations in district inequality. (3) All
inequality indicators are at the district level and measured using night-time light intensity. (4) The standard errors, clustered at the
country level, are in the brackets. (5) MLD stands for mean logarithmic deviation, and RLP stands for relative lights per capita. (6)
Constant (measured at constant 1998 US dollars) and average (measured as annual averages) prices come from USGS. (7) High-
value refers to mining sites where high-value minerals are extracted, whereas low-value refers to places where low-value minerals
are extracted. (8) Fixed effects include time fixed effects, district fixed effects, regional fixed effects, country fixed effects, and
country-year fixed effects. (9) Controls include a proxy for agricultural productivity, rainfall, population sizes, lights pixels lit, and
district geographical locations (measured in absolute latitudes). * p < 0.10. ** p < 0.05. *** p < 0.01.
                                                                   34
 

 
Source: authors’ estimations.




Table 16: The effects of the nature of mining activities on district inequality.
                                             Constant mineral prices                                 Average mineral prices
                                Gini         MLD         Theil            RLP          Gini          MLD        Theil            RLP
    Mineral extraction          -0.448***    -0.603***   -0.530***        -3.395***    -0.465***     -0.630***  -0.564***        -3.726***
                                [0.061]      [0.111]     [0.118]          [0.741]      [0.055]       [0.096]    [0.104]          [0.907]
    Mineral transformation      0.180***     0.277***    0.206**          17.504***    0.166***      0.255***   0.178**          17.240***
                                [0.048]      [0.095]     [0.091]          [2.040]      [0.043]       [0.085]    [0.082]          [1.914]
    Log(Prices)                 0.005        -0.003      0.003            -0.045       0.007         0.001      0.008            0.006
                                [0.009]      [0.017]     [0.018]          [0.049]      [0.008]       [0.014]    [0.015]          [0.059]
    Fixed effects               Yes          Yes         Yes              Yes          Yes           Yes        Yes              Yes
    Controls                    Yes          Yes         Yes              Yes          Yes           Yes        Yes              Yes
    N                           19298        19298       19298            23745        19298         19298      19298            23745
    R-squared                   0.762        0.625       0.676            0.463        0.762         0.625      0.676            0.463
    Countries                   38           38          38               38           38            38         38               38
Notes: (1) The table shows the regression results for a sample of 2,182 districts in 653 countries across 38 countries in Africa during
2001–2012. (2) The regressions exploit the nature of mining activities to explain spatial-temporal variations in district inequality.
(3) All inequality indicators are at the district level and measured using night-time light intensity. (4) The standard errors, clustered
at the country level, are in the brackets. (5) MLD stands for mean logarithmic deviation, and RLP stands for relative lights per
capita. (6) Constant (measured at constant 1998 US dollars) and average (measured as annual averages) prices come from USGS.
(7) Mineral extraction refers to mining sites where extractive mining activities are taking place, and mineral transformation refers
to sites where value addition to raw minerals is performed. (8) Fixed effects include time fixed effects, district fixed effects, regional
fixed effects, country fixed effects, and country-year fixed effects. (9) Controls include a proxy for agricultural productivity,
rainfall, population sizes, lights pixels lit, and district geographical locations (measured in absolute latitudes). * p < 0.10. ** p <
0.05. *** p < 0.01.
Source: authors’ estimations.

Table 17: The effects of the status of mining activities by mineral type on district inequality
                                                     Constant mineral prices                                Average mineral prices
                                       Gini          MLD         Theil           RLP          Gini          MLD        Theil            RLP
    SITC_1 x Active x log(Price)       0.126***      0.207***    0.105***        9.333***     0.137***      0.201***   0.109***         13.313***
                                       [0.006]       [0.020]     [0.014]         [1.080]      [0.015]       [0.047]    [0.035]          [2.704]
    SITC_2 x Active x log(Price)       0.141***      0.296***    0.366***        0.404***     0.201***      0.560***   1.332***         0.025
                                       [0.006]       [0.016]     [0.016]         [0.131]      [0.010]       [0.017]    [0.024]          [0.188]
    SITC_3 x Active x log(Price)       0.014         -0.178      0.020           -0.873       0.023         -0.160     -0.045           -0.261
                                       [0.089]       [0.223]     [0.129]         [0.808]      [0.085]       [0.194]    [0.161]          [0.882]
    SITC_5 x Active x log(Price)       0.027         0.065       -0.002          0.611        0.032         0.081      0.008            0.619
                                       [0.037]       [0.067]     [0.081]         [1.044]      [0.048]       [0.087]    [0.106]          [1.153]
    SITC_5 x Closed x log(Price)       -0.346***     -0.821***   -0.570***       -0.796***    -0.407***     -0.976***  -0.673***        -0.911***
                                       [0.002]       [0.003]     [0.004]         [0.068]      [0.002]       [0.004]    [0.005]          [0.080]
    SITC_6 x Active x log(Price)       -0.063        -0.099      0.050           -7.762       0.003         -0.020     0.012            0.404
                                       [0.089]       [0.135]     [0.168]         [6.670]      [0.065]       [0.095]    [0.091]          [1.054]
    SITC_6 x Closed x log(Price)       -0.282        -0.412**    -0.610**        -1.658       0.190***      0.331**    0.279***         2.558**
                                       [0.177]       [0.152]     [0.246]         [1.341]      [0.051]       [0.135]    [0.089]          [1.015]
    SITC_7 x Active x log(Price)       -0.046***     -0.160***   -0.069***       -0.065       -0.039***     -0.135***  -0.058***        -0.049
                                       [0.010]       [0.032]     [0.023]         [0.138]      [0.009]       [0.028]    [0.019]          [0.118]
    SITC_9 x Active x log(Price)       -0.003        -0.018      -0.012          0.182*       -0.003        -0.019     -0.009           0.176*
                                       [0.019]       [0.036]     [0.040]         [0.104]      [0.019]       [0.034]    [0.041]          [0.101]
    SITC_10 x Active x log(Price)      -0.048        -0.090      -0.131          -0.562       -0.039        -0.076     -0.105           -0.481*
                                                                   35
 

 
                                       [0.056]      [0.132]       [0.184]      [0.336]       [0.044]       [0.106]      [0.150]       [0.274]
    SITC_11 x Active x log(Price)      -0.037       -0.087*       -0.022       -0.269**      -0.034        -0.079*      -0.019        -0.241*
                                       [0.026]      [0.044]       [0.042]      [0.132]       [0.023]       [0.040]      [0.038]       [0.121]
    SITC_11 x Closed x log(Price)      -0.127***    -0.234***     -0.276***    0.801***      -0.115***     -0.207***    -0.255***     0.721***
                                       [0.002]      [0.004]       [0.004]      [0.159]       [0.001]       [0.003]      [0.003]       [0.147]
    SITC_12 x Active x log(Price)      0.015        0.029         0.030        0.082         0.016         0.029        0.031         0.080
                                       [0.010]      [0.020]       [0.019]      [0.051]       [0.010]       [0.020]      [0.020]       [0.050]
    SITC_12 x Closed x log(Price)      -0.008***    -0.038***     -0.006       -1.502**      -0.005***     -0.029***    0.006         -1.532**
                                       [0.002]      [0.013]       [0.040]      [0.698]       [0.001]       [0.010]      [0.041]       [0.689]
    SITC_13 x Active x log(Price)      0.016        -0.316        -0.166       0.487         0.748*        1.097***     1.018**       0.334
                                       [0.143]      [0.667]       [0.418]      [0.426]       [0.418]       [0.323]      [0.390]       [0.290]
    SITC_14 x Active x log(Price)      0.010        0.048***      0.005        0.394***      0.038         0.090**      0.062         0.655***
                                       [0.019]      [0.011]       [0.049]      [0.137]       [0.034]       [0.039]      [0.066]       [0.148]
    SITC_14 x Closed x log(Price)      -0.056***    -0.251***     -0.094***    -0.344***     -0.035***     -0.208***    -0.066***     -0.249***
                                       [0.002]      [0.003]       [0.004]      [0.026]       [0.003]       [0.006]      [0.008]       [0.044]
    SITC_15 x Closed x log(Price)      -0.158***    -0.379***     -0.225***    -0.091***     -0.142***     -0.346***    -0.202***     -0.086**
                                       [0.003]      [0.005]       [0.005]      [0.032]       [0.003]       [0.005]      [0.006]       [0.036]
    SITC_16 x Closed x log(Price)      -0.111       -0.362        -0.229       0.581*        -0.099        -0.325       -0.206        0.675*
                                       [0.104]      [0.300]       [0.188]      [0.288]       [0.091]       [0.268]      [0.169]       [0.385]
    SITC_17 x Active x log(Price)      0.042***     0.083***      0.037***     0.012         0.042***      0.083***     0.038***      0.002
                                       [0.005]      [0.009]       [0.005]      [0.452]       [0.003]       [0.006]      [0.004]       [0.390]
    SITC_17 x Closed x log(Price)      -0.029***    -0.190***     -0.041***    0.035         -0.024***     -0.163***    -0.034***     0.033
                                       [0.001]      [0.003]       [0.003]      [0.532]       [0.001]       [0.003]      [0.003]       [0.460]
    SITC_18 x Active x log(Price)      0.047*       0.087*        0.053        -0.134        0.041*        0.074*       0.045         -0.114
                                       [0.025]      [0.045]       [0.045]      [0.147]       [0.021]       [0.039]      [0.039]       [0.128]
    SITC_18 x Closed x log(Price)      0.001        -0.049        0.033**      0.208         0.001         -0.045       0.026*        0.190
                                       [0.014]      [0.050]       [0.015]      [0.184]       [0.013]       [0.045]      [0.014]       [0.158]
    Fixed effects                      Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes
    Controls                           Yes          Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes           Yes
    N                                  19298        19298         19298        23745         19298         19298        19298         23745
    R-squared                          0.763        0.628         0.677        0.464         0.763         0.628        0.677         0.463
    Countries                          38           38            38           38            38            38           38            38

Notes: (1) The table shows the regression results for a sample of 2,182 districts in 653 regions across 38 countries in Africa during
2001–2012. (2) The regressions exploit the status of mining activities to explain spatial-temporal variations in inequality and
welfare measures. (3) All inequality indicators are at the district level and measured using night-time light intensity. (4) The
standard errors, clustered at the country level, are in the brackets. (5) Constant (measured at constant 1998 US dollars) and average
(measured as annual averages) prices come from USGS. (6) Fixed effects include time fixed effects, district fixed effects, regional
fixed effects, country fixed effects, and country-year fixed effects. (7) Controls include a proxy for agricultural productivity,
rainfall, population sizes, lights pixels lit, and district geographical locations (measured in absolute latitudes). (8) SITC_1: helium.
(9) SITC_2: garnet (industrial). (10) SITC_3: stones (crushed, dimension), limestone, gypsum, marble, and silicon. (11) SITC_4:
sulphur. (12) SITC_5: diamond. (13) SITC_6: barite, bentonite, clay, dolomite, fluorspar, graphite, salt, vermiculite, fluorine, and
graphite. (14) SITC_7: iron ore. (15) SITC_8: copper. (16) SITC_9: cobalt, chromium, niobium (columbium), tantalum, titanium,
zirconium, and tungsten. (17) SITC_10: arsenic trioxide, lithium, manganese, pyrophyllite, soda ash, sodium silicate, and
wollastonite. (18) SITC_11: phosphate rock and phosphoric acid. (19) SITC_12: cement. (20) SITC_13: diatomite. (21) SITC_14:
platinum. (22) SITC_15: nickel. (23) SITC_16: zinc. (24) SITC_17: tin. (25) SITC_18: gold. * p < 0.10. ** p < 0.05. *** p < 0.01.
Source: authors’ estimations.




                                                                  36
 

 
Table 18: The effects of the scale of mining activities by mineral type on district inequality
                                                        Constant mineral prices                              Average mineral prices
                                           Gini         MLD             Theil       RLP          Gini        MLD         Theil        RLP
    SITC_1 x Large scale x log(Price)      0.126***     0.206***        0.105***    9.326***     0.137***    0.202***    0.110***     13.289***
                                           [0.006]      [0.019]         [0.014]     [1.085]      [0.014]     [0.046]     [0.034]      [2.714]
    SITC_2 x Large scale x log(Price)      0.134***     0.280***        0.359***    0.456***     0.193***    0.543***    1.324***     0.147
                                           [0.007]      [0.021]         [0.019]     [0.132]      [0.010]     [0.021]     [0.027]      [0.205]
    SITC_3 x Large scale x log(Price)      0.012        -0.179          0.016       -0.844       0.021       -0.163      -0.046       -0.268
                                           [0.089]      [0.225]         [0.129]     [0.805]      [0.085]     [0.194]     [0.160]      [0.880]
    SITC_5 x Small scale x log(Price)      -0.103       -0.150          -0.451      -0.122       -0.113      -0.141      -0.533       -0.141
                                           [0.065]      [0.224]         [0.398]     [0.141]      [0.090]     [0.312]     [0.502]      [0.156]
    SITC_5 x Large scale x log(Price)      0.002        -0.002          -0.020      0.581        0.001       -0.002      -0.015       0.589
                                           [0.054]      [0.102]         [0.096]     [1.142]      [0.068]     [0.129]     [0.125]      [1.265]
    SITC_6 x Small scale x log(Price)      -0.536***    -0.010          -0.159***   0.703        -1.173***   -1.565***   -1.135***    0.526
                                           [0.005]      [0.013]         [0.009]     [3.941]      [0.004]     [0.013]     [0.009]      [2.979]
    SITC_6 x Large scale x log(Price)      -0.076       -0.132          -0.018      -7.390       0.051       0.058       0.068        0.621
                                           [0.080]      [0.120]         [0.158]     [6.261]      [0.059]     [0.097]     [0.088]      [1.064]
    SITC_7 x Large scale x log(Price)      -0.045***    -0.156***       -0.069***   -0.074       -0.037***   -0.131***   -0.058***    -0.058
                                           [0.010]      [0.030]         [0.023]     [0.142]      [0.008]     [0.025]     [0.019]      [0.119]
    SITC_9 x Small scale x log(Price)      -0.066***    -0.173***       -0.147***   0.467        -0.067***   -0.180***   -0.147***    0.453
                                           [0.002]      [0.003]         [0.003]     [0.401]      [0.002]     [0.003]     [0.003]      [0.390]
    SITC_9 x Large scale x log(Price)      0.005        0.003           0.006       0.134        0.006       0.002       0.008        0.130
                                           [0.020]      [0.033]         [0.042]     [0.101]      [0.019]     [0.030]     [0.043]      [0.097]
    SITC_10 x Small scale x log(Price)     0.200***     0.185***        0.168***    -1.229***    0.157***    0.157***    0.136***     -0.932***
                                           [0.003]      [0.006]         [0.007]     [0.272]      [0.002]     [0.004]     [0.005]      [0.205]
    SITC_10 x Large scale x log(Price)     -0.063       -0.108          -0.151      -0.529       -0.052      -0.091      -0.122       -0.461
                                           [0.059]      [0.141]         [0.196]     [0.339]      [0.045]     [0.114]     [0.160]      [0.280]
    SITC_11 x Large scale x log(Price)     -0.051       -0.110**        -0.060      -0.135**     -0.046      -0.099**    -0.054       -0.122**
                                           [0.032]      [0.051]         [0.069]     [0.060]      [0.029]     [0.046]     [0.064]      [0.052]
    SITC_12 x Large scale x log(Price)     0.013        0.022           0.027       -0.079       0.014       0.023       0.030        -0.085
                                           [0.009]      [0.018]         [0.017]     [0.112]      [0.009]     [0.018]     [0.018]      [0.113]
    SITC_13 x Large scale x log(Price)     0.014        -0.324          -0.169      0.466        0.748*      1.096***    1.016**      0.298
                                           [0.143]      [0.667]         [0.421]     [0.441]      [0.418]     [0.323]     [0.390]      [0.308]
    SITC_14 x Large scale x log(Price)     0.005        0.027           -0.003      0.338**      0.034       0.071       0.053        0.580***
                                           [0.018]      [0.029]         [0.048]     [0.154]      [0.031]     [0.043]     [0.062]      [0.169]
    SITC_15 x Large scale x log(Price)     -0.156***    -0.372***       -0.224***   -0.094***    -0.140***   -0.339***   -0.201***    -0.085**
                                           [0.003]      [0.006]         [0.007]     [0.032]      [0.003]     [0.006]     [0.007]      [0.038]
    SITC_16 x Large scale x log(Price)     -0.112       -0.363          -0.230      0.582*       -0.099      -0.326      -0.207       0.671*
                                           [0.105]      [0.300]         [0.188]     [0.288]      [0.091]     [0.268]     [0.169]      [0.386]
    SITC_17 x Small scale x log(Price)     -0.230***    -0.413***       -0.205***   -1.130***    -0.241***   -0.434***   -0.213***    -0.982***
                                           [0.002]      [0.003]         [0.003]     [0.238]      [0.002]     [0.003]     [0.004]      [0.207]
    SITC_17 x Large scale x log(Price)     0.002        -0.073          -0.007      0.264        0.005       -0.058      -0.003       0.225
                                           [0.028]      [0.105]         [0.031]     [0.314]      [0.026]     [0.094]     [0.029]      [0.268]
    SITC_18 x Small scale x log(Price)     0.083***     0.136*          0.138*      -0.389       0.071***    0.114*      0.116*       -0.351
                                           [0.023]      [0.080]         [0.079]     [0.393]      [0.020]     [0.067]     [0.068]      [0.352]
    SITC_18 x Large scale x log(Price)     0.034*       0.056*          0.037       -0.032       0.030*      0.048*      0.031        -0.023

                                                                   37
 

 
                                            [0.019]       [0.030]        [0.039]     [0.112]       [0.017]       [0.026]      [0.034]        [0.096]
    Fixed effects                           Yes           Yes            Yes         Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes            Yes
    Controls                                Yes           Yes            Yes         Yes           Yes           Yes          Yes            Yes
    N                                       19298         19298          19298       23745         19298         19298        19298          23745
    R-squared                               0.763         0.627          0.677       0.464         0.763         0.627        0.677          0.463
    Countries                               38            38             38          38            38            38           38             38

Notes: (1) The table shows the regression results for a sample of 2,182 districts in 653 regions across 38 countries in Africa during
2001–2012. (2) The regressions use the scale of district mining operations to explain spatial-temporal variations in inequality. (3)
All inequality indicators are at the district level and measured using night-time light intensity. (4) The standard errors, clustered at
the country level, are in the brackets. (5) Constant (measured at constant 1998 US dollars) and average (measured as annual
averages) prices come from USGS. (6) Small scale refers to sites with artisanal mining activities, while large scale refers to sites
where large-scale mining activities are taking place. (7) Fixed effects include time fixed effects, district fixed effects, regional fixed
effects, country fixed effects, and country-year fixed effects. (8) Controls include a proxy for agricultural productivity, rainfall,
population sizes, lights pixels lit, and district geographical locations (measured in absolute latitudes). (9) SITC_1: helium. (10)
SITC_2: garnet (industrial). (11) SITC_3: stones (crushed, dimension), limestone, gypsum, marble, and silicon. (12) SITC_4:
sulphur. (13) SITC_5: diamond. (14) SITC_6: barite, bentonite, clay, dolomite, fluorspar, graphite, salt, vermiculite, fluorine, and
graphite. (15) SITC_7: iron ore. (16) SITC_8: copper. (17) SITC_9: cobalt, chromium, niobium (columbium), tantalum, titanium,
zirconium, and tungsten. (18) SITC_10: arsenic trioxide, lithium, manganese, pyrophyllite, soda ash, sodium silicate, and
wollastonite. (19) SITC_11: phosphate rock and phosphoric acid. (20) SITC_12: cement. (21) SITC_13: diatomite. (22) SITC_14:
platinum. (23) SITC_15: nickel. (24) SITC_16: zinc. (25) SITC_17: tin. (26) SITC_18: gold. * p < 0.10. ** p < 0.05. *** p < 0.01.
Source: authors’ estimations.

Table 19: The effects of minerals’ value by mineral type on district inequality
                                                       Constant mineral prices                                Average mineral prices
                                          Gini         MLD         Theil           RLP          Gini          MLD        Theil           RLP
    SITC_1 x Low value x log(Price)       0.126***     0.206***    0.105***        9.326***     0.137***      0.201***   0.109***        13.285***
                                          [0.006]      [0.019]     [0.014]         [1.086]      [0.014]       [0.046]    [0.034]         [2.715]
    SITC_2 x Low value x log(Price)       0.138***     0.286***    0.367***        0.432***     0.198***      0.551***   1.334***        0.112
                                          [0.008]      [0.018]     [0.018]         [0.125]      [0.011]       [0.018]    [0.026]         [0.197]
    SITC_3 x Low value x log(Price)       0.014        -0.177      0.019           -0.851       0.023         -0.160     -0.044          -0.269
                                          [0.089]      [0.223]     [0.128]         [0.805]      [0.085]       [0.193]    [0.160]         [0.878]
    SITC_5 x High value x log(Price)      -0.005       -0.012      -0.050          0.504        -0.006        -0.011     -0.051          0.511
                                          [0.049]      [0.095]     [0.093]         [1.002]      [0.062]       [0.121]    [0.120]         [1.112]
    SITC_6 x Low value x log(Price)       -0.085       -0.129      -0.020          -7.041       0.025         0.023      0.044           0.624
                                          [0.078]      [0.118]     [0.155]         [5.969]      [0.062]       [0.101]    [0.089]         [1.016]
    SITC_7 x Low value x log(Price)       -0.045***    -0.156***   -0.067***       -0.074       -0.037***     -0.131***  -0.057***       -0.059
                                          [0.010]      [0.030]     [0.024]         [0.140]      [0.008]       [0.025]    [0.020]         [0.118]
    SITC_9 x Low value x log(Price)       -0.003       -0.018      -0.012          0.182*       -0.002        -0.018     -0.009          0.175*
                                          [0.019]      [0.036]     [0.040]         [0.104]      [0.019]       [0.034]    [0.041]         [0.100]
    SITC_10 x Low value x log(Price)      -0.048       -0.090      -0.131          -0.571       -0.039        -0.076     -0.105          -0.492*
                                          [0.056]      [0.132]     [0.184]         [0.339]      [0.044]       [0.106]    [0.150]         [0.277]
    SITC_11 x Low value x log(Price)      -0.051       -0.109**    -0.060          -0.136**     -0.046        -0.099**   -0.054          -0.123**
                                          [0.032]      [0.051]     [0.069]         [0.060]      [0.029]       [0.046]    [0.063]         [0.052]
    SITC_12 x Low value x log(Price)      0.013        0.022       0.027           -0.080       0.014         0.023      0.029           -0.085
                                          [0.009]      [0.018]     [0.018]         [0.113]      [0.009]       [0.018]    [0.018]         [0.114]
    SITC_13 x Low value x log(Price)      0.016        -0.319      -0.164          0.459        0.747*        1.095***   1.015**         0.298
                                          [0.143]      [0.666]     [0.421]         [0.438]      [0.419]       [0.325]    [0.392]         [0.305]
    SITC_14 x High value x log(Price)     0.005        0.026       -0.002          0.349**      0.033         0.069      0.054           0.584***
                                          [0.018]      [0.029]       [0.048]       [0.143]      [0.031]       [0.043]      [0.062]       [0.165]
    SITC_15 x Low value x log(Price)      -0.155***    -0.371***     -0.222***     -0.099***    -0.139***     -0.338***    -0.199***     -0.090**
                                          [0.003]      [0.005]       [0.007]       [0.031]      [0.003]       [0.005]      [0.007]       [0.037]
    SITC_16 x Low value x log(Price)      -0.111       -0.363        -0.230        0.581*       -0.099        -0.326       -0.207        0.670*
                                          [0.104]      [0.300]       [0.188]       [0.288]      [0.091]       [0.268]      [0.169]       [0.386]

                                                                    38
 

 
    SITC_17 x Low value x log(Price)           0.001          -0.076         -0.008          0.021          0.004            -0.060           -0.004        0.015
                                               [0.027]        [0.103]        [0.030]         [0.421]        [0.026]          [0.093]          [0.028]       [0.362]
    SITC_18 x High value x log(Price)          0.040**        0.066**        0.050           -0.087         0.035**          0.056**          0.043         -0.073
                                               [0.018]        [0.030]        [0.037]         [0.131]        [0.016]          [0.026]          [0.032]       [0.113]
    Fixed effects                              Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes              Yes              Yes           Yes
    Controls                                   Yes            Yes            Yes             Yes            Yes              Yes              Yes           Yes
    N                                          19298          19298          19298           23745          19298            19298            19298         23745
    R-squared                                  0.763          0.627          0.676           0.464          0.763            0.627            0.676         0.463
    Countries                                  38             38             38              38             38               38               38            38

Notes: (1) The table shows the regression results for a sample of 2,182 districts in 653 regions across 38 countries in Africa during 2001–2012. (2)
The regressions use the classification of minerals’ value to explain spatial-temporal variations in inequality. (3) All inequality indicators are at the
district level and measured using night-time light intensity. (4) The standard errors, clustered at the country level, are in the brackets. (5) Constant
(measured at constant 1998 US dollars) and average (measured as annual averages) prices come from USGS. (6) High value refers to mining sites
where high-value minerals are extracted, whereas low value refers to places where low-value minerals are extracted. (7) Fixed effects include time
fixed effects, district fixed effects, regional fixed effects, country fixed effects, and country-year fixed effects. (8) Controls include a proxy for
agricultural productivity, rainfall, population sizes, lights pixels lit, and district geographical locations (measured in absolute latitudes). (9) SITC_1:
helium. (10) SITC_2: garnet (industrial). (11) SITC_3: stones (crushed, dimension), limestone, gypsum, marble, and silicon. (12) SITC_4: sulphur.
(13) SITC_5: diamond. (14) SITC_6: barite, bentonite, clay, dolomite, fluorspar, graphite, salt, vermiculite, fluorine, and graphite. (15) SITC_7:
iron ore. (16) SITC_8: copper. (17) SITC_9: cobalt, chromium, niobium (columbium), tantalum, titanium, zirconium, and tungsten. (18) SITC_10:
arsenic trioxide, lithium, manganese, pyrophyllite, soda ash, sodium silicate, and wollastonite. (19) SITC_11: phosphate rock and phosphoric acid.
(20) SITC_12: cement. (21) SITC_13: diatomite. (22) SITC_14: platinum. (23) SITC_15: nickel. (24) SITC_16: zinc. (25) SITC_17: tin. (26)
SITC_18: gold. * p < 0.10. ** p < 0.05. *** p < 0.01.

Source: authors’ estimations.

Table 20: The effects of the nature of mining activities by mineral type on district inequality
                                                               Constant mineral prices                                            Average mineral prices
                                              Gini             MLD         Theil               RLP               Gini             MLD         Theil               RLP
    SITC_1 x Extraction x log(Price)          0.124***         0.205***         0.104***       9.266***          0.135***         0.199***          0.107***      13.299***
                                              [0.006]          [0.018]          [0.013]        [1.068]           [0.014]          [0.044]           [0.033]       [2.713]
    SITC_2 x Extraction x log(Price)          0.141***         0.301***         0.366***       0.444***          0.200***         0.549***          1.321***      0.089
                                              [0.007]          [0.020]          [0.013]        [0.118]           [0.011]          [0.028]           [0.019]       [0.184]
    SITC_3 x Extraction x log(Price)          0.016            -0.171           0.063          -0.351            0.066            -0.077            0.080         0.178
                                              [0.119]          [0.270]          [0.159]        [1.141]           [0.098]          [0.248]           [0.164]       [0.843]
    SITC_3 x Transform x log(Price)           0.004            -0.201           -0.091         -1.250            -0.068           -0.338*           -0.310*       -0.871
                                              [0.097]          [0.222]          [0.129]        [0.974]           [0.104]          [0.176]           [0.179]       [1.774]
    SITC_5 x Extraction x log(Price)          -0.006           -0.013           -0.050         0.482             -0.007           -0.012            -0.051        0.515
                                              [0.049]          [0.095]          [0.093]        [0.978]           [0.062]          [0.121]           [0.120]       [1.106]
    SITC_6 x Extraction x log(Price)          -0.093           -0.137           -0.084         -1.495            0.033            0.036             0.057         0.022
                                              [0.078]          [0.117]          [0.118]        [1.512]           [0.066]          [0.107]           [0.095]       [0.729]
    SITC_6 x Transform x log(Price)           0.091            0.083            1.458          -145.355          -0.171***        -0.273*           -0.270***     16.046
                                              [0.059]          [0.150]          [1.102]        [113.332]         [0.017]          [0.143]           [0.020]       [14.116]
    SITC_7 x Extraction x log(Price)          -0.059***        -0.189***        -0.088***      -0.149            -0.049***        -0.159***         -0.074***     -0.123
                                              [0.013]          [0.035]          [0.031]        [0.112]           [0.011]          [0.029]           [0.026]       [0.097]
    SITC_7 x Transform x log(Price)           0.026            0.003            0.035          0.249             0.022            0.003             0.029         0.228
                                              [0.033]          [0.092]          [0.024]        [0.547]           [0.028]          [0.078]           [0.021]       [0.474]
    SITC_9 x Extraction x log(Price)          0.003            -0.008           -0.000         0.209*            0.004            -0.009            0.002         0.201*
                                              [0.019]          [0.036]          [0.041]        [0.113]           [0.018]          [0.035]           [0.042]       [0.108]


                                                                           39
 

 
    SITC_9 x Transform x log(Price)      -0.108***     -0.169***        -0.197***   -0.457***    -0.098***      -0.156***     -0.180***    -0.425***
                                         [0.001]       [0.003]          [0.002]     [0.098]      [0.001]        [0.003]       [0.002]      [0.094]
    SITC_10 x Extraction x log(Price)    -0.043        -0.092           -0.164      -0.741*      -0.038         -0.080        -0.135       -0.660*
                                         [0.068]       [0.165]          [0.229]     [0.409]      [0.055]        [0.136]       [0.190]      [0.338]
    SITC_10 x Transform x log(Price)     -0.069**      -0.083           0.024       0.273        -0.041*        -0.053        0.030        0.208
                                         [0.030]       [0.277]          [0.060]     [0.295]      [0.024]        [0.214]       [0.044]      [0.219]
    SITC_11 x Extraction x log(Price)    -0.071        -0.150**         -0.107*     0.070        -0.065         -0.135**      -0.098*      0.080
                                         [0.043]       [0.070]          [0.054]     [0.161]      [0.039]        [0.064]       [0.050]      [0.151]
    SITC_11 x Transform x log(Price)     -0.002        -0.010           0.055       -0.714*      -0.000         -0.009        0.053        -0.702*
                                         [0.105]       [0.164]          [0.191]     [0.356]      [0.096]        [0.150]       [0.174]      [0.350]
    SITC_12 x Extraction x log(Price)    -0.019        -0.015           -0.009      0.116        -0.018         -0.015        -0.008       0.104
                                         [0.023]       [0.026]          [0.013]     [0.089]      [0.021]        [0.025]       [0.011]      [0.090]
    SITC_12 x Transform x log(Price)     0.024**       0.035            0.039       -0.151       0.025**        0.036         0.042*       -0.157
                                         [0.010]       [0.024]          [0.024]     [0.145]      [0.011]        [0.024]       [0.025]      [0.152]
    SITC_13 x Extraction x log(Price)    -0.170***     -1.185***        -0.717***   1.062***     1.294***       1.522***      1.526***     0.664***
                                         [0.008]       [0.012]          [0.012]     [0.147]      [0.003]        [0.006]       [0.007]      [0.188]
    SITC_13 x Transform x log(Price)     0.204***      0.553***         0.382***    0.125*       0.196***       0.665***      0.499***     -0.140
                                         [0.006]       [0.019]          [0.012]     [0.072]      [0.009]        [0.014]       [0.014]      [0.095]
    SITC_14 x Extraction x log(Price)    -0.007        0.016            -0.028      0.313*       0.016          0.053         0.021        0.357**
                                         [0.011]       [0.032]          [0.042]     [0.161]      [0.021]        [0.039]       [0.042]      [0.131]
    SITC_14 x Transform x log(Price)     0.069***      0.077***         0.125***    0.958***     0.124***       0.157***      0.226***     1.671***
                                         [0.001]       [0.003]          [0.003]     [0.164]      [0.002]        [0.006]       [0.005]      [0.326]
    SITC_15 x Extraction x log(Price)    -0.154***     -0.370***        -0.221***   -0.123***    -0.138***      -0.336***     -0.198***    -0.094**
                                         [0.003]       [0.005]          [0.007]     [0.043]      [0.003]        [0.005]       [0.007]      [0.039]
    SITC_16 x Extraction x log(Price)    -0.112        -0.363           -0.229      0.549*       -0.099         -0.326        -0.207       0.671*
                                         [0.104]       [0.300]          [0.188]     [0.275]      [0.091]        [0.268]       [0.169]      [0.387]
    SITC_17 x Extraction x log(Price)    0.042***      0.083***         0.037***    0.161        0.043***       0.083***      0.038***     0.137
                                         [0.005]       [0.009]          [0.005]     [0.408]      [0.003]        [0.006]       [0.004]      [0.361]
    SITC_17 x Transform x log(Price)     -0.028***     -0.190***        -0.040***   -0.635***    -0.024***      -0.163***     -0.034***    -0.556***
                                         [0.001]       [0.003]          [0.003]     [0.156]      [0.001]        [0.003]       [0.002]      [0.138]
    SITC_18 x Extraction x log(Price)    0.044**       0.068**          0.052       -0.083       0.038**        0.057**       0.044        -0.076
                                         [0.019]       [0.032]          [0.039]     [0.129]      [0.016]        [0.027]       [0.034]      [0.117]
    SITC_18 x Transform x log(Price)     -0.053***     0.033***         -0.001      -0.080***    -0.047***      0.027***      -0.002**     -0.090***
                                         [0.001]       [0.002]          [0.001]     [0.021]      [0.000]        [0.001]       [0.001]      [0.021]
    Fixed effects                        Yes           Yes              Yes         Yes          Yes            Yes           Yes          Yes
    Controls                             Yes           Yes              Yes         Yes          Yes            Yes           Yes          Yes
    N                                    19298         19298            19298       23745        19298          19298         19298        23745
    R-squared                            0.763         0.627            0.677       0.471        0.763          0.627         0.677        0.463
    Countries                            38            38               38          38           38             38            38           38

Notes: (1) The table shows the regression results for a sample of 2,182 districts in 653 countries across 38 countries in Africa during
2001–2012. (2) The regressions use the nature of mining activities to explain spatial-temporal variations in inequality. (3) All
inequality indicators are at the district level and measured using night-time light intensity. (4) The standard errors, clustered at the
country level, are in the brackets. (5) Constant (measured at constant 1998 US dollars) and average (measured as annual averages)
prices come from USGS. (6) Extraction refers to mining sites where extractive mining activities are taking place, and transform
refers to sites where value addition to raw minerals is performed. (7) Fixed effects include time fixed effects, district fixed effects,
regional fixed effects, country fixed effects, and country-year fixed effects. (8) Controls include a proxy for agricultural
productivity, rainfall, population sizes, lights pixels lit, and district geographical locations (measured in absolute latitudes). (9)
                                                                   40
 

 
SITC_1: helium. (10) SITC_2: garnet (industrial). (11) SITC_3: stones (crushed, dimension), limestone, gypsum, marble, and
silicon. (12) SITC_4: sulphur. (13) SITC_5: diamond. (14) SITC_6: barite, bentonite, clay, dolomite, fluorspar, graphite, salt,
vermiculite, fluorine, and graphite. (15) SITC_7: iron ore. (16) SITC_8: copper. (17) SITC_9: cobalt, chromium, niobium
(columbium), tantalum, titanium, zirconium, and tungsten. (18) SITC_10: arsenic trioxide, lithium, manganese, pyrophyllite, soda
ash, sodium silicate, and wollastonite. (19) SITC_11: phosphate rock and phosphoric acid. (20) SITC_12: cement. (21) SITC_13:
diatomite. (22) SITC_14: platinum. (23) SITC_15: nickel. (24) SITC_16 zinc. (25) SITC_17: tin. (26) SITC_18: gold. * p < 0.10.
** p < 0.05. *** p < 0.01.


Source: authors’ estimations.




                                                              41
