                                                        WPS7914


Policy Research Working Paper                          7914




                          Dodging Bullets
         The Heterogeneous Effect of Political Violence
                     on Greenfield FDI

                                 Caroline T. Witte
                                Martijn J. Burger
                              Elena I. Ianchovichina
                                 Enrico Pennings




Middle East and North Africa Region
Office of the Chief Economist
December 2016
Policy Research Working Paper 7914


  Abstract
 The relationship between political violence and greenfield                         non-resource-related greenfield foreign direct investment,
 foreign direct investment is contingent on the type of vio-                        but not with resource-related greenfield foreign direct invest-
 lence, characteristics of the investment-receiving sector,                         ment. The insensitivity to political conflict of multinational
 and extent to which the investing firm is geographically                           firms in the resource sector is associated with the high prof-
 diversified. This paper presents an analysis with a dynamic                        itability of natural resource extraction and the companies’
 fixed effects model for a panel of 90 developing countries                         geographic constraints on location choice during the period
 from 2003 to 2012. The analysis shows that nationwide                              of estimation. In the non-resource sector, the less geographi-
 political conflict is negatively associated with total and                         cally diversified firms are most sensitive to the risk of conflict.




  This paper is a product of the Office of the Chief Economist, Middle East and North Africa Region. It is part of a larger
  effort by the World Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions
  around the world. Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The authors
  may be contacted atwitte@ese.eur.nl, mburger@ese.eur.nl, eianchovichina@worldbank.org, or pennings@ese.eur.nl.




         The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
         issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
         names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
         of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
         its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                       Produced by the Research Support Team
                                                               Dodging Bullets:

 The Heterogeneous Effect of Political Violence on Greenfield FDI

    Caroline T. Witte, Martijn J. Burger, Elena I. Ianchovichina, and Enrico Pennings




Keywords: Political Violence, Foreign Direct Investment (FDI), Political Conflict, Economic

Geography


JEL codes: F21, F23, P48, O13, D74, R3



                                                            

  Caroline T. Witte is a PhD Candidate in the Department of Applied Economics, Erasmus University,
Rotterdam, Erasmus Research Institute of Management (ERIM), P.O. Box 1738, 3000 DR Rotterdam, the
Netherlands, Tel: +31 (0) 10 4088907. Email: witte@ese.eur.nl.

  Martijn J. Burger is an assistant professor in the Department of Applied Economics, Erasmus University,
Rotterdam, Tinbergen Institute and Erasmus Research Institute of Management (ERIM), P.O. Box 1738, 3000
DR Rotterdam, the Netherlands, Tel: +31 (0) 10 4089579, Fax: +31 (0)10 4089141. E-mail:
mburger@ese.eur.nl. URL: http://www.mjburger.net.

  Elena I. Ianchovichina is the lead economist at the Chief Economist Office, Middle East and North Africa
Region, the World Bank, 1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA, Tel.: +1 202 458 8910, E-mail:
eianchovichina@worldbank.org.

  Enrico Pennings is a full professor in the Department of Applied Economics, Erasmus University, Rotterdam,
Tinbergen Institute and Erasmus Research Institute of Management (ERIM), P.O. Box 1738, 3000 DR
Rotterdam, the Netherlands, Tel: +31 (0) 10 4082166, Fax: +31(0)10 4089141, Email: pennings@ese.eur.nl.
 
 


1. INTRODUCTION

Although research on business in emerging and developing economies has flourished over the last

decade (Meyer & Peng, 2016), there has been relatively little focus on the effect of political violence

on multinational enterprise (MNE) strategy. This lack of attention is surprising because in terms of

value more than 13% of all greenfield investments flowing to developing countries in the period from

2003-2012 went to countries experiencing a political conflict with at least 25 battle-related deaths per

year, and nearly 5% went to countries experiencing a war (fDi Markets, 2013). Recent research on the

topic acknowledges that many multinational enterprises own subsidiaries in areas prone to political

conflict, and focuses on how firms can meet the challenges posed by this threat. Oetzel and Getz (2012)

study how stakeholders affect the tactics MNEs use to strategically respond to conflict, whereas Bader

and Schuster (2015) focus on the role of networks to eliminate the negative effect of terrorist threats on

the wellbeing of expatriates. However, few studies explore the mechanisms that attract MNEs to these

fragile states in the first place (Czinkota, Knight, Liesch & Steen, 2010; Driffield, Crotty & Jones,

2013).

         Whereas the reasons for MNEs’ entry into areas marred by political violence remain largely

unknown, a considerable number of studies published in International Business (IB) and political

economy journals have tried to answer the question of whether total foreign direct investment (FDI)

inflows are in the least affected by political violence. On a conceptual level, scholars tend to agree that

political violence may have a detrimental effect on expected returns, reducing the propensity to invest.

Nevertheless, the empirical results remain inconclusive. Nigh (1985) establishes that political violence

in developing countries has a negative effect on U.S. manufacturing FDI, and Abadie and Gardeazabal

(2008) show that terrorism has a large negative effect on inward FDI flows relative to Gross Domestic

Product (GDP). Asiedu (2006) finds that in African countries, the number of coups, riots, and

assassinations is negatively associated with the ratio of net FDI flows to GDP. However, in an earlier

paper on the determinants of FDI in developing countries, she infers that the average number of

assassinations and revolutions does not significantly influence FDI inflows (Asiedu, 2002). Li (2006)

also concludes that the occurrence of unanticipated interstate wars has a negative influence on FDI, but

he finds no significant association between FDI and intrastate wars or terrorist incidents, which

                                                    2 
 
 


represent most of the political violence incidents since the end of the Cold War (Pettersson &

Wallensteen, 2015). In contrast to Li (2006), Busse and Hefeker (2007) find that civil war negatively

affects FDI, whereas interstate war has no effect on FDI. Several other scholars find no relationship

between political violence and FDI (Biglaiser & DeRouen, 2007; Li & Vashchilko, 2010; Oetzel & Oh,

2014), whereas Biglaiser and DeRouen (2006) and Asiedu and Lien (2011) find a positive relationship

between FDI and conflict.

        There are several explanations for these heterogeneous and seemingly contradictory findings

in the literature on political violence and FDI. First, the relationship between political violence and FDI

is contingent upon the type of violence. Building on the literature classifying different types of risk

(Miller, 1992; Oetzel & Oh, 2014), we develop the argument that the effect of political violence depends

upon the extent to which violence poses a continuous risk to business activities. Risk is considered to

be continuous if it is persistent and foreseeable, whereas discontinuous risk refers to events that are

episodic and difficult to anticipate (Oetzel & Oh, 2014; Ramanujam, 2003). In contrast to Oetzel & Oh

(2014), we conceptualize country risk as a continuum on which, at one end, persistent risks such as

corruption and expropriation risk are continuous risks; and at the other end, less-predictable hazards,

for example, terrorist attacks, pose discontinuous risks to MNEs. Political conflict falls in the middle;

it is less predictable and persistent than corruption but more continuous than terrorism. Following Li

(2006), we argue that a certain level of predictability is required for firms to adjust their location choice

process; hence, only the types of violence that pose a relatively continuous risk may affect firms’

location choice strategies. In addition, the geography of political violence matters because political

conflicts that are geographically concentrated or localized in one part of the country are likely to pose

less risk to an MNE investing in that country than political conflicts that are non-localized and are

instead spread throughout the entire country.

        Second, the relationship between political violence and FDI depends upon characteristics of

the FDI-receiving industry and firm-level attributes. Industries differ in the degree to which investments

yield economic rents. When expected returns are high, MNEs are willing to take additional risk to

capture these rents and are hence more likely to invest in countries affected by political violence.

Moreover, sectors differ in terms of geographic constraints on investment activity due to the availability

                                                     3 
 
 


of resources only in certain locations. Particularly when resources or inputs are scarce, the presence of

limited investment opportunities might result in the insensitivity of FDI to political violence. In this

paper, we test whether these mechanisms could drive MNEs to conflict areas, using data from the

natural resource industry, a sector in which rents can be exceptionally high and location choice is

significantly restricted. Finally, the ability of the MNE to diversify or absorb the potential downward

shock of political violence moderates the relationship between political conflict and FDI.

Geographically diversified MNEs are considerably less affected by political violence than relatively

undiversified MNEs, present in only a small number of countries.




Figure 1: Pie charts depicting the number of deaths due to terrorist attacks (START, 2015) (left‐
hand side) and conflict (UCDP/PRIO, 2015) (right‐hand side) for the period 2003‐2012  

        This paper is linked to the extensive literature on FDI and external sources of risk, notably

political violence (Abadie & Gardeazabal, 2008; Driffield et al., 2013; Li & Vashchilko, 2010; Oetzel

& Oh, 2014; Oh & Oetzel, 2016) and political institutions (e.g., Burger, Ianchovichina, & Rijkers, 2016;

Feinberg & Gupta, 2009; Globerman & Shapiro, 2003; Henisz & Delios, 2001; Meyer, Estrin, Bhaumik

& Peng, 2009; Peng, Wang & Jiang, 2008). It builds on the work of Burger et al. (2016), which analyzes

sectoral heterogeneity with respect to the relationship between political risk and FDI in the Arab World

before and during the Arab Spring. We extend the analysis to a set of 90 developing countries.

Developed economies are excluded because political violence is foremost a developing country

phenomenon (see Figure 1). In contrast to Burger et al. (2016), who focus on political instability, this

study explores the effects of political violence, defined as ‘collective attacks within a political

community against the political regime, its actors – including competing political groups as well as

incumbents – or its policies’ (Gurr, 1970, p. 3-4). Instances of political violence include civil wars,

                                                   4 
 
 


territorial disputes, acts of terrorism and genocides; cases of criminal behavior are not considered

political violence (Kalyvas, 2013). Political violence is different from political risk and instability,

because, whereas political risk poses a relatively continuous risk, political violence is more

discontinuous. In addition, political risk is generally conceptualized as uncertainty about government

policy, which affects MNEs indirectly, whereas political violence is foremost associated with the direct

effect of capital destruction. Instead of considering political violence as one homogeneous category, we

study the different manifestations of political violence (political conflict, terrorism, state terror, and

assassination) separately, recognizing the complex nature of the phenomenon.

        In addition, this paper relates to the literature on the strategy tripod perspective (Peng, Wang &

Jiang, 2008; Peng, Sun, Pinkham & Chen, 2009). Since the conception of the institution-based view of

international strategy that, combined with the Resource-Based View and the industry approach, forms

the tripod of strategy, several studies have focused on the effect of institutions on international strategy

and the interaction with the Resource-Based View (e.g. Darendelli & Hill, 2016; Goerzen, Sapp &

Delios, 2010; Holburn & Zelner, 2010). Yet, this literature largely overlooks the interrelations with the

industry-based view – a significant gap given the evidence that the sector in which an MNE operates

matters for its location choice decisions in countries with weak institutions (Burger et al., 2016; Driffield

et al., 2013; Garcia-Canal & Guillén, 2008; Ramos & Ashby, 2013). Nevertheless, there is no theory

on the mechanisms that explain these heterogeneous effects. We build on the existing literature

identifying the underlying mechanisms that differentiate sectors and analyzing the interrelations

between industry-level mechanisms and the other two legs of the strategy tripod.

        We also contribute to the existing IB and economic geography literature by developing a theory

that uncovers the mechanisms behind the heterogeneous relationship between political violence and

FDI, testing several hypotheses that help explain the mixed results of previous studies. In our study, we

bring together the notions of space, place, and organization, a previously identified and emerging topic

in IB (Beugelsdijk et al., 2010). We incorporate the spatial context in three different ways. First, we

consider the geographic scope of political violence, arguing that the effect of violence on inward FDI

depends critically upon the extent to which firms can opt for a location in which the risk of attacks is

minimized. Second, we develop the concept of geographical constraints on location choice, referring

                                                     5 
 
 


to the limitations on the location choice process resulting from requirements for inputs, which are

exclusive, specific and irregularly dispersed across space, and we show that these constraints can

moderate the effect of risk on location choice. Third, we show that the ability to absorb discontinuous

risk depends on the geographic diversification of a firm.

        In our study, we establish that there is considerable heterogeneity in MNEs’ investment

responses to political conflict in developing countries. This heterogeneity reflects differences in the type

of violence, industry characteristics, notably high rents and geographic constraints on location choice,

and differences in the extent of a multinational’s geographic diversification. We find empirical evidence

that conflicts have a negative effect on FDI in manufacturing and services but no effect on resource-

related FDI; this finding holds for nationwide conflicts and not for localized conflicts. Finally, we show

that the negative effect of conflict on total greenfield FDI stems from the sensitivity of relatively

undiversified MNEs’ to political conflict. Most other types of political violence have no effect on any

type of greenfield FDI, but the onset of a large war has a sizable negative effect on all types of greenfield

FDI.

        These findings inform the strategies of MNEs with a nuanced and much needed understanding

of the effects of political violence and the risks it poses to their businesses in the context of a significant

rise in the incidence of politically violent events around the world in recent years (Ianchovichina, 2016).

Oetzel and Oh (2016) argue that because political violence is less continuous and hence more difficult

to anticipate than political risk, the implications for firm strategy differ from those relevant to MNEs

dealing with political risk. We show that the continuity of the risk posed by political violence is indeed

an important factor influencing MNEs’ entry strategy into developing countries marred by political

violence. Other factors, which influence an MNE’s sensitivity to risk, include the sector characteristics,

the MNE’s exposure to violence and the ability of firms to diversify risk. Finally, our results suggest

that political violence does not necessarily depress earnings and put off investors; thinking otherwise is

too simplistic. The paper shows that for geographically diversified MNEs entering a country in conflict

may even be profitable.

        Several policy implications emerge from this analysis. First, because conflict-related risks vary

by sector and conflict type, it is imperative to collect and examine disaggregated greenfield investment

                                                      6 
 
 


and conflict data when analyzing FDI in fragile developing countries. Second, institutions offering

investment guarantees must recognize the differential exposure and sensitivity of MNEs to conflict

when pricing risk. Third, FDI to resource-rich, conflict-affected countries can hamper rather than

facilitate countries’ efforts to escape the conflict-resource trap. FDI flows to fragile countries are mostly

financing resource projects, deepening resource dependence and thus threatening prospects for

successful peace building (Doyle and Sambanis, 2000). Hence, the efforts of fragile developing

countries to diversify and attract FDI into manufacturing and services sectors must be accompanied by

efforts to improve political stability, governance, transparency, and institutional quality.

        The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents a review of the previous

literature, a theoretical framework building on the risk and economic geography literature, and several

hypotheses, which are tested in section 4. Section 3 presents the econometric framework and the data.

Section 4 discusses estimation issues and the main empirical results, and section 5 presents additional

analysis exploring the robustness of the results. Section 6 discusses the mechanisms at play in the case

of the oil and gas sector. Section 7 provides a summary of the findings and suggestions for future

research.



                 2. LITERATURE REVIEW AND THEORETICAL FRAMEWORK

A large strand of the IB and economics literature has analyzed the role of risk in internationalization

decisions (e.g., Agarwal & Ramaswami, 1992; Kogut & Chang, 1996; Pennings & Sleuwaegen, 2004;

Rivoli & Salorio, 1996). Most of the theory explaining and classifying risk and uncertainty can be traced

back to the work of Frank Knight (1921). According to Knight, risk applies to situations in which an

informed agent can make a reasonable judgment on the probability of the event occurring; as such, risk

differs from pure uncertainty in which these probabilities are unknown. Miller (1992) distinguishes

three main sources of business risk: the general environment, the industry, and the firm itself. A large

body of literature is focused on one specific type of environmental risk, namely political risk (e.g.,

Brunetti & Weder, 1998; Burger et al., 2016; Darandeli & Hill, 2016; Henisz, 2000; Kobrin, 1979;

Miller, 1992; Schneider and Frey, 1985). Although several definitions of political risk exist (Kobrin,



                                                     7 
 
 


1979), the concept is most often defined as the risk that a sovereign government might change ‘the rules

of the game’ to which firms ought to adhere (Butler & Joaquin, 1998).

        The IB literature has traditionally analyzed the effect of three types of political risk on

multinationals’ location choice decisions: corruption (Brouthers, Gao & McNicol, 2008; Cuervo-

Cazurra, 2006; Habib & Zurawicki, 2002), absence of political constraints (García-Canal & Guillén,

2008; Henisz, 2000; Holburn & Zelner, 2010) and expropriation risk (Duanmu, 2014; Kobrin, 1984).

The average effect of all three types of political risk on FDI is consistently found to be negative,

although large differences exist depending upon the resources available to the firm. For example,

Holburn and Zelner (2010) find that the effect of weak constitutional constraints on MNEs’ location

choice is dependent upon whether the multinational acquired relevant political capabilities in its home

environment, whereas Duanmu (2014) demonstrates that the strength of the home country’s political

influence can moderate the effect of expropriation risk on FDI. Finally, Goerzen, Sapp and Delios

(2010) show that experience in the host country positively affects the returns to FDI in environments

with high political risk.

        Similar to the studies mentioned above, we focus on risk deriving from the environment,

specifically, the level of risk resulting from political violence. This risk is closely related to political

risk because it also leads to ambiguity concerning government policy. During episodes of major political

violence, a host government is more likely to change existing regulations or unexpectedly impose new

ones, thus raising the cost of doing business once the MNE enters a market and incurs sunk costs (Li,

2006). These regulatory changes can include breach of contract, limiting repatriation of profits,

exchange controls, embargoes, and other restrictive trade policies (Li & Vashchilko, 2010). However,

political risk is different from political violence because political violence can also lead to extensive

destruction of both human and physical capital due to fighting between government and rebel groups,

or terror acts (Bodea & Elbadawi, 2008). In addition, whereas corruption, expropriation risk and

political constraints are generally persistent over time, political violence can consist of singular

incidents or short episodes of conflict, making it more difficult to predict accurately political violence

than other forms of political risk. 1 For example, few predicted the Arab Spring uprisings in 2010

(Gausse, 2011).

                                                     8 
 
 


        The above discussion links to the distinction between risk and uncertainty in which the

difference between the two concepts is whether the probability of an event occurring is known. Because

it is unlikely that managers know the exact probabilities with which political violence affects their

business activities, it seems straightforward to conclude that political violence generates uncertainty

instead of risk. However, in reality, managers attempt to approximate the odds of such events (albeit

with a margin of error) and, when doing so, they inevitably convert uncertainty into risk. Still, their

ability to convert uncertainty into risk depends largely on the process underlying the risk.

        Discontinuous risk of infrequent and episodic events is closer to pure uncertainty than

continuous, Knightian risk of predictable events. The distinction between these two types of risk was

made by Oetzel and Oh (2014), who built on the work by Ramanujam (2003). Following this distinction,

political violence poses a more discontinuous risk than do most forms of political risk; hence, the

occurrence of political violence confers less information about the event reoccurring.



The Multiple Facets of Political Violence and FDI

Although political violence can pose large risks to subsidiaries, the results of empirical inquiries into

the relationship between FDI and political violence are inconsistent (Asiedu, 2011; Biglaiser &

DeRouen, 2007; Dai et al., 2013; Driffield et al., 2013). A plausible explanation for these inconsistent

findings is that the effect depends upon the type of political violence. Different types of violence (e.g.,

terrorism, conflict, and assassinations) not only have different effects on business activities but also

differ in terms of the nature of the risk they pose. Following Oetzel and Oh’s (2014) distinction between

continuous and discontinuous risk, we recognize that (i) political violence poses a less continuous risk

than do some types of political risk, such as corruption or the lack of constitutional constraints; and (ii)

within the category of political violence, there remains substantial heterogeneity in terms of risk

continuity. Whereas Oetzel and Oh (2014) presume that the effects of continuous and discontinuous

risk are similar, we argue otherwise. In the case of a discontinuous risk, the event occurring does not

directly affect the probability of reoccurrence; therefore, it most likely hardly affects risk assessment

and ultimately location choice strategy.



                                                     9 
 
 


     Figure 2 illustrates our classification of political violence based on two dimensions: the continuity

of the political risk and its level of impact on the MNE’s operations. Both high level of impact and high

degree of risk continuity are necessary conditions for political violence to affect location choice. First,

we recognize that the impact of political violence must be high to affect location choice. Political

conflicts (e.g. international wars and civil conflict) and terrorism,2 placed in the right-side panel of

Figure 2, are high-impact events. They can lead to significant negative shocks to earnings because of

property damage, death and injury of employees, destruction of required infrastructure, disruptions in

the supply chain, and an increase in the cost of trade (Bodea & Elbadaw, 2008; Li & Vashchilko, 2010).

Moreover, because of nationalistic sentiments, consumers might be reluctant to purchase products from

a foreign firm, if it is a subsidiary of a company located in a country hostile to the host. This reluctance

reduces the expected profitability of a subsidiary, particularly in the case of market-seeking FDI. As a

result, the pay-off to an investment in a conflict-affected country is subject to a large one-sided risk,

making FDI into such countries less attractive.

     Political terror, defined as “violations of physical or personal integrity rights carried out by a state”

(Wood & Gibney, 2010, p. 369), rarely directly affects an MNE’s earnings, although in rare cases, an

MNE’s involvement in countries known for a lack of respect for human rights results in consumer

boycotts in the home country (Driffield et al., 2013). Therefore, political terror is considered to be a

relatively low impact event and it is placed in the left-side panel of Figure 2. Similarly, there is little

reason to expect that political assassinations 3 affect an MNE’s investment decision as they have a

limited effect on a subsidiary’s operations. Hence, this type of event also belongs in the left-side panel

of Figure 2.

        Second, the risk of political violence has to be relatively continuous to affect location choice.

In other words, the underlying event needs to be fairly persistent and predictable. Assassinations can be

characterized as discontinuous because they are irregular and almost by definition difficult to predict;

the success of an assassination depends upon an element of surprise. Similarly, following Oetzel and

Oh (2014), we characterize terrorism as a discontinuous risk because isolated incidents tend to be

uncommon and non-persistent. Some countries are more prone to attract terrorists, but the actual

occurrence of terrorism is difficult to anticipate, making this type of violence more discontinuous than

                                                     10 
 
 


political conflict and terror. Oetzel and Oh’s study also showed that a recent terrorist attack does not

significantly affect the probability of entry, confirming our statement that a certain level of continuity

is a necessary condition for political violence to have a direct effect on location choice strategies.

Finally, political terror, placed in the bottom left corner of Figure 2, poses continuous risk. This type of

violence tends to be persistent and relatively predictable based on political trends, the quality of

institutions, and the past prevalence of torture, extrajudicial killings, and political imprisonment.


                 Type of impact                           Level of impact
                 Type of risk                  Low                             High
                 Discontinuous/        Assassinations              Terrorism
    Continuity




                 Intermittent
                 Continuous                          Political conflict (e.g.,
                                       Political Terror
                                                     civil conflict or interstate
                                                     war)
Figure 2: Different types of political violence, organized by level of impact and continuity



                  Political conflict is defined as “a contested incompatibility that concerns government and/or

territory where the use of armed force occurs between two parties, of which at least one is the

government of a state” by Pettersson and Wallensteen (2015, p. 1). War that causes at least 1,000 battle-

related deaths per year is a specific case of political conflict. Conflict poses a continuous risk due to its

persistent properties and relatively predictable nature. Political leaders often reveal parts of their

military strategy in speeches, electoral statements, or political manifests. Moreover, after the onset of a

political conflict, a manager is likely to readjust the risk perception of an investment because the

probability of future battles is high. In other words, the incidence of battles conveys information about

the probability of their impact on business activities and hence enables an updated risk assessment.

Given that political conflict poses a continuous risk and at the same time has a high level of impact, we

expect that particularly this type of political violence is negatively associated with the location choice

decisions of MNEs. Thus, in the remainder of this paper, we focus on political conflict and formulate

our first hypothesis.




                                                             11 
 
 


H1: Total greenfield FDI flows in developing countries are negatively associated with political

conflict.

Conflict heterogeneity: Geographic Scope

Although we expect that political conflict is negatively associated with FDI inflows, we also expect that

this relationship is heterogeneous. The geographic scope of political conflict within a country can

moderate the relationship between political conflict and FDI. Geographic scope refers to the extent to

which the conflict is concentrated in one part of the country, where the scope is smallest in conflicts

concentrated in only one province and largest in nationwide conflicts. In a subnational analysis, Dai et

al. (2013) find that the likelihood of foreign subsidiaries’ survival is negatively associated with their

geographic exposure to conflict. Likewise, it can be expected that the sensitivity of MNEs to political

conflict depends upon the extent to which they can limit their exposure to fighting. In countries affected

by conflict with a relatively small scope, localized in one part of the country, MNEs can limit their

exposure by locating elsewhere within the same country. This is not possible in countries marred by

nationwide conflict. Therefore, a conflict with a small scope is likely to pose less risk to MNEs investing

in that country than is violence with a large scope, prevalent in all areas of the country (Figure 3).


    Type of political conflict                          Geographic scope
                   Type of sector        Localized/limited
                                                                    Nationwide/wide scope
                                               scope
                   None                 Less sensitive             More sensitive
    Geographic
    constraints




                   Severe               Not sensitive              Not sensitive

Figure 3: MNE’s sensitivity to political conflict: geography considerations


                  In addition, the goals of rebels fighting in remote or geographically confined areas tend to be

different from the goals of groups participating in nationwide conflicts. Buhaug and Gates (2002)

showed that geographically contained conflicts are more likely than nationwide conflicts to concern a

territorial incompatibility because separatist groups are often active in their area of interest, whereas

nationwide conflicts often involve a party contesting the national government. The second type of




                                                             12 
 
 


conflict is more likely to lead to a change in government and hence create additional political risk.

Consequently, we can formulate our second hypothesis.


H2: The effect of a political conflict on total greenfield FDI flows to a developing country depends on

the geographic scope of the conflict, so that total greenfield FDI flows are less sensitive to a localized

than to a nationwide political conflict.



Sector heterogeneity: Geographic constraints and economic rents

It is likely that the effect of political conflict on FDI is dependent upon industry characteristics (Driffield

et al., 2013). We focus on two industry characteristics: geographic constraints on location choice and

economic rents. First, FDI in some industries may be insensitive to political conflict because its set of

location choices is restricted by requirements on inputs, which are exclusive, specific and irregularly

dispersed across space (Figure 3). Only a limited number of locations can satisfy the criteria of an MNE

that would like to invest abroad (Dunning & Narula, 2004; Narula & Bellak, 2009; Buckley et al., 2007;

Mataloni Jr., 2011), particularly when the economic activities of the firm require high asset specificity

(Burger et al., 2013). If assets are scarce and only available in a limited set of locations, MNEs have

geographical constraints on their location choice.

        With geographic constraints on location choice, the acquisition of a first-mover advantage

(Lieberman & Montgomery, 1988) increases in importance. First-mover advantages, defined as the

advantage of firms investing first over those that invest later, can arise from three sources: technological

leadership, buyer switching costs, and pre-emption of rivals’ acquisition of assets. Whereas

technological leadership and, to a lesser extent, buyer switching costs are currently determined in

increasingly global markets, first-mover advantages due to the acquisition of assets are specific to a

geographical area. As a result, location choice strategies play an important role in obtaining this type of

advantage; this is particularly true for MNEs that are geographically constrained in their location choice.

By being first in acquiring a license to operate in a location rich in scarce assets, the MNE preempts

rival firms from accessing these assets (Lieberman & Montgomery, 1988), significantly affecting its




                                                      13 
 
 


profits. Smit and Trigeorgis (2004) show that if by investing a firm can obtain strategic advantages over

its rivals, investing is the optimal action even when uncertainty is high.

        Natural resource MNEs are particularly dependent upon specific scarce assets; thus, they are

geographically constrained in their location. These firms might invest in a location despite the presence

of political conflict to secure access and acquire the rents associated with a first-mover advantage

(Mason & Weeds, 2010; Smit & Trigeorgis, 2004). As a result, MNEs active in the resource sector

should be less sensitive to political conflict than MNEs in sectors in which location choice is less

restricted. We refer to the effect of limited investment opportunities as the geographic-constraints

mechanism.

        Second, FDI flows may not be sensitive to conflict if the returns on an investment are

sufficiently high to counteract the negative effect of the increased risk associated with conflict. In this

paper, we focus on the natural-resource industry, in which returns to investment can be especially high

in times of commodity booms (Kolstad & Wiig, 2009). During resource booms, large rents increase the

value of a project and hence increase the probability of investment despite high risk due to war. We

refer to the effect of economic rents on the responsiveness of FDI to political conflict as the economic-

rent mechanism. As the geographic-constraints and the economic-rent mechanisms are expected to be

the main factors that differentiate the sensitivity of resource-related and non-resource-related FDI to

political conflict, we formulate our third hypothesis.


H3: Resource-related greenfield FDI flows are less negatively associated with political conflict in

developing countries than non-resource-related greenfield FDI flows.



Sector heterogeneity: Geographic scope of conflict

The geographical constraints on location choice interact with the geographic scope of conflict (Figure

3). MNEs are constrained in their location choice by local resource availability, and not all locations

are suitable for all types of investments because they lack the appropriate specialized location

advantages (Mataloni Jr., 2011; Burger, Van der Knaap, & Wall, 2013). Particularly, for investments

in the resource sector, the number of potential locations is limited given the very specific location


                                                    14 
 
 


requirements with respect to the presence of natural resources. If an MNE is limited in its location

choice, it might not have the option to locate its subsidiaries away from political conflict, and we expect

that the firm is not sensitive to conflict, irrespective of its geographic scope. Hence, firms active in the

resource sector might be unable to locate their operations in a safe area that is far away from a localized

conflict, whereas MNEs active in non-resource industries might have several investment options within

the same country and thus can choose a safer location. Therefore, in cases of localized conflict, resource

MNEs might have fewer opportunities to circumvent areas where fighting is concentrated than firms

that are less constrained in their location choices. Accordingly, we formulate the following hypothesis:


H4: The moderating effect of the geographic scope of conflict is larger for non-resource-related

greenfield FDI flows than for resource-related greenfield FDI flows in developing countries.



Firm heterogeneity: MNE’s ability to absorb risk through geographic diversification

Political violence tends to be exogenous to actions of investors (Li, 2006). It poses a type of uncertainty

that can only be resolved with the passage of time and hence there is limited room for subsidiaries to

implement strategies reducing the level of political violence. In a firm-level analysis Oetzel and Oh

(2016) confirm this, showing that experience with political conflict does not influence MNEs

investment response to new disasters. Garcia-Canal and Guillén (2008) even found that firms that have

invested in a high-risk economy in the past develop an aversion against entering countries with similarly

high levels of risk.

        Nevertheless, whereas MNEs might not be able to influence the level of political violence faced

by the MNE, the impact of political violence on a firm’s internationalization strategy is likely to depend

on firm-specific resources, particularly the firm’s ability to absorb and diversify risks. Rugman (1976)

already demonstrated that in the case of imperfectly correlated national economic fluctuations an MNE

faces less risk than a comparable firm selling goods in one market alone because the number of

subsidiaries in the MNE’s portfolio reduces the variance of the overall portfolio of subsidiary results

(Kogut & Kulatilaka, 1994). Several studies confirmed that geographic diversification improves firms’

risk-return performance (Kim, Hwang & Burgers, 1993; Qian, 1996; Qian & Li, 1998). Following these


                                                    15 
 
 


findings, we expect that the degree of an MNE’s geographic diversification will reduce the negative

effect of the risks posed by political violence on earnings.

           In addition, real options theory posits that geographic diversification confers firms the option

to transfer production to another subsidiary in the case of unanticipated events (Kogut & Kulatilaka,

1994; Lee & Makhija, 2009; Li & Rugman, 2007). Accordingly, MNEs present in a relatively large

number of countries can minimize the effect of downside risks on earnings. Both the option value and

the value of diversification are largest when unanticipated events are not globally correlated (Belderbos,

Tong & Wu, 2014). Because political violence tends to be limited to one or at most a few countries, this

condition is typically satisfied. Hence, geographically diversified firms seem better able to absorb risks

posed by political conflict than relatively undiversified MNEs. Accordingly, we expected that conflict

has a smaller effect on their expected earnings, increasing the probability that more diversified firms

invest in countries characterized by a high conflict risk relative to MNEs that are less diversified. Oetzel

and Oh (2014) find evidence that the impact of terrorism on FDI is moderated by international

diversification, albeit using it merely as a control variable. We therefore hypothesize the following:


H5: Greenfield FDI flows from more geographically diversified MNEs are less negatively associated

with political conflict than greenfield FDI flows from less geographically diversified MNEs.



                                    3. METHODOLOGY AND DATA

Our economic model departs from the assumption that the decision to invest in a foreign subsidiary is

a function of both expected returns and perceived uncertainty (e.g., Wheeler and Mody, 1992; Meon

and Sekkat, 2012). Therefore, we assume that MNEs evaluate each investment opportunity individually

and invest if the expected payoff exceeds a certain cutoff value. Hence, our model represents a positive

sum economy in which an investment made in one country does not directly affect the amount of FDI

in other territories. Guimaraes, Figueirdo and Woodward (2003) show that in models with only location-

level determinants such as ours, the assumption behind the location decision does not directly affect the

results.

       We estimate the following sector-specific, reduced-form dynamic investment model:


                                                     16 
 
 


                	∝   ∝                 	∝   	        ∝          	   	   	   	   	      ,      (1)


The model links the greenfield foreign direct investment, FDIist , flowing into country i in sector s in

year t with a range of variables underpinning perceived uncertainty and expected returns. These

variables include lagged FDI in sector s; political violence indicator Pi(t-1) for country i in the previous

year; a set of control variables Xi(t-1) , which capture conditions that might confound the relationship

between political violence and greenfield FDI; a set of country dummies μi for time-invariant country

characteristics; and a vector of time dummies μt.

        The country fixed effects capture time-fixed heterogeneity, controlling for effects such as

country size, resource endowments, culture, ethno-linguistic fractionalization, as well as institutions

because institutions change very slowly over time. Moreover, the country fixed effects control for

unobserved heterogeneity, limiting the risk of self-selection bias. We thus consider only within country

variation, that is, whether a country attracts less FDI when its level of political violence increases. The

time dummies capture time-dependent effects, such as global FDI waves, global commodity price

fluctuations, and other global economic phenomena. The lagged FDIis variable minimizes the risk of

omitted variable bias because the amount of FDI received in the previous period is one of the best

predictors of FDI received in the subsequent period. In addition, this variable makes possible the

estimation of the long-term effects of our variables. To reduce the problem of reverse causality, all

independent variables are lagged. However, ultimately, this model cannot determine causality, so the

results should be interpreted as conditional associations, not causal relationships.

        The data on flows of greenfield FDI into developing countries for the period from 2003 to 2012

are obtained from the fDi Markets database, a Financial Times databank tracking cross-border

investment in new projects and expansions of existing ventures. The data are collected through Financial

Times newswires, internal information and other media sources, project data acquired from industry

organizations and investment agencies, and data purchased from market research and publication

companies. Each project is cross-referenced against multiple sources. The data set includes 51,800

greenfield investments in developing countries, amounting to US$ 4.62 trillion. Annual FDI inflows

are aggregated to the sector level of the receiving country. To test hypotheses three and four, we split


                                                    17 
 
 


the total FDI flows into resource-related flows, which include flows to hydrocarbons, minerals, and

agriculture, and non-resource-related FDI flows, which include flows to manufacturing, construction,

distribution, and commercial services. FDI flows are measured in millions of US dollars, and because

the distribution of these flows is skewed, they are log-transformed, using the logarithm of the inverse

hyperbolic sine:      ln	     √      1	).

        We focus on greenfield investment because it consists of a relatively homogeneous group of

investments in new facilities and excludes investments resulting from fire sales (Krugman, 2000). This

focus eliminates concerns that heterogeneity of FDI is driving the results and the possibility that

investment reflects repairs of facilities associated with prior investments rather than new projects. In

developing countries, the inflow of greenfield investments is also considerably greater than the inflow

of brownfield investments (Markusen & Stähler, 2011). A comparison of the number of greenfield

investments in our data set to all mergers and acquisitions (M&As) registered by the Thomson One data

service in the same period reveals that 81.6% were greenfield investments. Moreover, many policy

makers are particularly interested in attracting greenfield FDI (UNCTAD, 2013). Finally, data on

greenfield investments are more detailed than data on M&As. Although the Thomson One data service

includes information on M&As, the size of the investment is missing for approximately 50% of the

observations in developing countries for the period under study.4

        Following the political science literature, we measure political conflict using the number of

battle-related deaths (BRD) per year in a country. The data are obtained from the UCDP/PRIO Battle

Related Death database (Pettersson & Wallensteen, 2015) and are gathered using information taken

from a selection of publicly available sources, including journals, news agencies, NGO reports and

statements of governments. The battle-related deaths variable is a best estimate, based on all information

evaluated by UCDP/PRIO. The variable measures fatalities in conflict situations such as conventional

battlefield fights, guerrilla attacks on government personnel, and bombardments of military bases,

cities, and villages. It only includes battle-related deaths for conflicts with more than 25 battle-related

deaths per year. Although this indicator has limitations – e.g., it does not measure non-fatal casualties

or damage to property – it is widely available for conflict countries and is considered a good proxy for



                                                    18 
 
 


political violence. In addition, this variable is less likely to be endogenous to FDI than most subjective

measures of conflict because MNE investments are unlikely to cause battle-related deaths directly.

Because the battle-related deaths variable is highly skewed, we take the natural log of the inverse

hyperbolic sine function.

        For our second and fourth hypotheses on the geographic scope of political conflict, we use again

the UCDP/PRIO Battle Related Deaths data set. UCDP/PRIO records the warring parties and the

incompatibility of each conflict. The geographic scope variable is a dummy, which is 0 if a conflict is

localized and 1 if a conflict is nation-wide. First, we coded every secessionist conflict as localized

because secessionist fighting is generally confined to the territory that is fought over (Buhaug & Gates,

2002). Subsequently, we manually checked whether conflicts, in which the incompatibility concerned

the government instead of a regional territory, were nationwide by analyzing articles on the conflict on

the website of BBC news and profiles of the insurgents on the START website (2014). Finally, we

visually confirmed our coding using maps based on the UCDP/PRIO Georeferenced Event Database

(Sundberg & Melander, 2013) for all conflicts in Africa and South Asia. Unfortunately, UCDP/PRIO

GED does not yet collect georeferenced data on conflicts on other continents. We found no

inconsistencies in the coding based on the information provided by BBC News or START. We exclude

the main effect of localized conflict from our regressions because the type of conflict is virtually country

invariant and is hence absorbed by the country fixed effects in our regression.5 If a country experienced

both a localized and non-localized conflict, we coded the observation as having experienced a nation-

wide conflict. In 22.4% of the observations, there is an ongoing conflict; of those, 56.6% are coded as

localized.

        Although fDi Markets records FDI data on the project level, it does not include any information

on the investing firm other than the name of the company and its parent company. We collected firm-

level data from Bureau van Dijk’s Orbis database, containing annual report data of over 79,000

companies worldwide, and manually matched these data to companies in the fDi Markets data set.

Nevertheless, 32.9 % of all investment projects in fDi Markets could not be linked to companies in the

Orbis data set. We code geographically diversified firms using a dummy variable which is 1 if the firm

has subsidiaries in at least 10 countries and zero otherwise.6 To facilitate the comparison of different

                                                    19 
 
 


models and to limit sample selection bias, 7 we divide greenfield FDI into FDI by geographically

diversified firms and FDI by other firms. Whereas we restrict the coefficients of our control variables

to be fixed at the country-year level, the effect of political conflict and the constant are allowed to vary

over the values of the diversification dummy. In the section containing our robustness analysis, we also

present the results of a firm-level model.

        The data on our control variables come primarily from the World Bank’s World Development

Indicators Database. We control for GDP given in millions of US$ in 2013 prices; the size of the

population; and inflation measured as the annual growth rate of the GDP implicit deflator. In addition,

we add three variables that control for continuous political risk: the level of democracy; regulatory

quality; and control of corruption. Democracy is measured by the Polity Index developed by Marshall

et al. (2013), which ranges from ‐10 to +10, where low negative numbers indicate autocracies and high

positive numbers correspond to democracies. The quality of regulations indicator, part of Kaufman’s

World Governance Index (WGI), measures perceptions of a government’s ability to formulate and

implement sound policies and regulations that permit and promote private sector development. The

control of corruption measure also comes from the WGI and measures the extent to which public

officials use power for private gain. Both WGI variables are measured as a z-score varying from

approximately -2.5 to 2.5, with higher values corresponding to better governance. Furthermore, we

control for nominal exchange rates (level and standard deviation 8 ) using data collected through

OANDA. Appendix 1 provides descriptive statistics and the correlation matrix. Appendix 2 shows a

list of all countries included in the sample.



                            4. ESTIMATION AND EMPIRICAL RESULTS

Using a fixed effects estimator to estimate the dynamic model (1) presents a problem. In panels with a

large number of countries but a small number of periods, the standard fixed effects estimates are

inconsistent because the transformation process creates a correlation between the regressor and the error

(Nickell, 1981). We therefore use the least-squares dependent variable estimator, also known as the

LSDVC model, developed by Bun and Kiviet (2003) to correct for this bias. The bias correction is

initialized by a system GMM estimator. In a simulation, Flannery and Hankins (2013) compared the

                                                    20 
 
 


LSDVC model to other popular models designed to address dynamic panel data bias, including the

popular system GMM model developed by Blundell and Bond (1998). They find that even in the case

of moderate endogeneity and serial correlation, the LSDVC emerges as the most accurate methodology.

We estimate dynamic model (1) separately for the resource and non-resource sectors and perform a

Chow test (Chow, 1960) in order to test whether the coefficients in the resource and non-resource FDI

estimations are statistically different from each other. The Chow test is designed to test whether the

coefficients of a model estimated over one group are similar to those estimated in another group.

          In addition to analyzing the short-term effect of political violence on greenfield FDI inflows,

we are also interested in the long-term effect. The dynamic panel model (1) makes it possible to identify

the long-term equilibrium effect of political violence on greenfield FDI as follows:
                                           α 	
                           α   	       	         1         .9                (2)

Results

Table 1 shows the baseline results estimated using the Bun and Kiviet LSDVC estimator for three

different specifications in which the dependent variable represents total greenfield FDI (columns 1 and

2), resource greenfield FDI (columns 3 and 4), and all other greenfield FDI, also referred to as non-

resource FDI (columns 5 and 6). Battle-related deaths are negatively associated with total FDI flows,

and the variable is significant at the 10% level. A 10% increase in the number of battle-related deaths

decreases total greenfield FDI flows by approximately 0.95%, ceteris paribus. This effect is in addition

to the decline in FDI stemming from worsening macroeconomic conditions and restrictions in

investment policies; these additional effects are captured by the controls for changes in GDP, exchange

rates, inflation, and the regulatory quality index. The long-term effect of BRD on total greenfield FDI

flows, shown in Table 1, is slightly greater than the short-term effect. We therefore find support for the

first hypothesis (H1), namely that political conflict has a negative effect on total greenfield FDI.

          In the second specification, we take into account the geographic scope of conflict by adding a

moderator for scope of conflict to the model. The coefficient of the moderator is positive and eliminates

the negative effect of the main effect. However, the moderator is not significantly different from zero.




                                                     21 
 
 


Therefore, we find no support for our second hypothesis (H2) that the effect of political conflict on total

FDI flows depends on the geographic scope of the conflict.


Table 1 Effect of Political Violence on Total, Resource, and Non-resource Greenfield FDI

                                      Dependent Variable: Log greenfield FDI (in USD millions), LSDVC Estimation
                                           Total FDI                Resource-Related FDI         Non-Resource-Related FDI
                                    (1)                (2)            (3)            (4)              (5)             (6)
BRDt-1 (ln)                       -0.095+          -0.111           0.009           0.046          -0.125*         -0.225**
                                  (0.052)          (0.072)          (0.074)        (0.102)         (0.051)          (0.070)
BRD (ln)*localizedt-1                              0.033                           -0.075                           0.202*
                                                   (0.096)                         (0.137)                          (0.094)
Greenfield FDIi, t-1 (ln)        0.190***         0.189***          0.095*         0.095*          0.119**          0.109*
                                  (0.042)          (0.043)          (0.043)        (0.043)         (0.044)          (0.044)
GDPt-1 (ln)                       -0.427           -0.440           -1.484+        -1.461+          0.126            0.061
                                  (0.594)          (0.597)          (0.848)        (0.851)         (0.582)          (0.583)
Populationt-1 (ln)                8.696**         8.734**        14.547***       14.528***          6.432*          6.583*
                                  (2.831)          (2.838)          (4.027)        (4.035)         (2.763)          (2.759)
WGI regulatory qualityt-1         -0.069           -0.084           1.616+         1.655+           -0.819          -0.916
                                  (0.647)          (0.651)          (0.925)        (0.929)         (0.635)          (0.637)
Polity Indext-1                    0.006           0.002            0.014           0.022           -0.012          -0.033
                                  (0.049)          (0.049)          (0.070)        (0.070)         (0.048)          (0.048)
Exchange Ratet-1 (ln)             -1.515+          -0.272           -1.447         -1.438           -0.893          -0.870
                                  (0.783)          (0.367)          (1.024)        (1.026)         (0.741)          (0.741)
Exchange Rate Volatilityt-1     -24.344**        -24.497**          -12.680        -12.378        -12.606+         -13.489+
                                  (7.480)          -7.476         (10.638)        (10.626)         (7.331)          (7.317)
Control of Corruptiont-1          1.495*           1.487*           0.784           0.804           1.306*          1.259*
                                  (0.627)          (0.629)          (0.893)        (0.896)         (0.611)          (0.612)
Inflationt-1                      -0.002           -0.002           0.011           0.011           0.001            0.002
                                  (0.008)          (0.009)          (0.012)        (0.012)         (0.008)          (0.008)
Long-term BRD (ln)                -0.117*          0.137             0.010          0.051          -0.142*         -0.253**
                                  (0.065)          (0.088)          (0.083)        (0.113)         (0.059)          (0.079)
Observations                        707                707           707             707             707              707
Number of countries                 90                 90             90             90               90              90
Country FE                          Yes                Yes           Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes
Year FE                              Yes             Yes              Yes             Yes             Yes              Yes
           Note: Political conflict proxied by battle-related deaths. Bootstrapped standard errors are in parentheses.
                                          *** p<0.001, ** p<0.01, * p<0.05, + p<0.10

          With respect to the control variables, the lagged FDI term is highly significant across both

specifications. Exchange rate volatility and level are negatively associated with FDI flows. The effect

is particularly strong for exchange rate volatility. Control of corruption and large population size are

positively and significantly associated with FDI flows, whereas regulatory quality, level of democracy,




                                                              22 
 
 


inflation and GDP do not significantly affect FDI in any of the specifications, possibly because these

variables vary little during the years covered by our sample.

        In columns 3 to 6, we show results from split-sample analyses for resource-related and non-

resource-related FDI. In the resource sector, the coefficient on BRD is positive, very small and not

statistically significant (column 3). The addition of the localized conflict moderator (column 4) slightly

increases the estimate of the positive effect of BRD, but the moderator itself is small and statistically

insignificant. Additionally, the long-term effect of BRD on resource-related FDI is positive and

insignificant. Hence, there is no evidence that political violence affects greenfield FDI flows to this

sector, either over the short or long term.

        In models 5 and 6, which explain FDI to the non-resource sector, the effect of political conflict

is negative and statistically significant at the 5% level; this effect is slightly greater than that for total

FDI. A Chow test shows that the effect of battle-related deaths on non-resource-related FDI is

significantly larger than the effect on resource-related FDI at the 5% level. Hence, we find empirical

support for the third hypothesis (H3), namely that resource-related FDI is less sensitive to conflict than

non-resource-related FDI.

        The scope-of-conflict moderator (model 6) is positive, relatively large, and significant at the

5% level. A Chow test shows that the moderator is significantly larger in the model explaining non-

resource-related FDI (model 6) than in the model analyzing resource-related FDI (model 4). Hence, we

find support for hypothesis 4. Due to the addition of the moderator, the coefficient of BRD becomes

more negative and its significance increases to the 1% level. Whereas an increase in the BRD in a

localized conflict does not affect greenfield FDI in the non-resource sector (effect size = 0.023, standard

error = 0.072), a 10% increase in the BRDs in a nationwide conflict is associated with a significant

reduction of 2.3% in greenfield FDI in the non-resource sector, ceteris paribus. The long-term effect is

even slightly larger.

        With respect to the control variables in the split sample analysis (Column 3-6), the lagged FDI

term and the size of the population are highly significant in the regressions for both sectors. Exchange

rates, the level of democracy and inflation do not significantly affect FDI in any of the specifications.

The control of corruption and exchange rate volatility are important only in the non-resource sector,

                                                     23 
 
 


whereas GDP and regulatory quality have a significant effect only in the resource sector. The finding

that the regulatory quality measure has an opposite sign in the split sample analyses is noteworthy.

Compared to political violence, low-quality investment regulations pose a continuous risk to MNEs

because these institutions are very persistent, and the risk posed by them is predictable. Our results

suggest that the regulatory environment matters for rent-seeking resource activities associated with

large capital investments. None of the results changed meaningfully when a non-corrected LSDV

estimator was used, suggesting that the Nickell bias is small.10,11

Table 2 Effect of Political Conflict on FDI by relatively Undiversified and Diversified Firms

                                Dependent Variable: Log greenfield FDI (in USD millions), LSDV Estimation
                                                                                       Non-Resource-Related
                                       Total FDI             Resource-Related FDI
                                                                                                  FDI
                              Undiversi- Diversified Undiversi- Diversified Undiversi- Diversified
                              fied MNEs          MNEs      fied MNEs         MNEs    fied MNEs          MNEs
                                   (1)              (2)         (3)            (4)        (5)              (6)
BRDt-1 (ln)                     -0.129+           -0.015       0.060          0.088     -0.145*          -0.064
                                 (0.073)         (0.082)      (0.071)        (0.071)    (0.061)         (0.061)
Constant                         -50.651        -53.071    -106.398* -108.520*        -51.979+        -54.134+
                                (34.898)        (34.912)     (49.570)       (49.577)   (30.738)        (30.729)
BRD (ln)*localizedt-1                    -0.001                       -0.122                     0.084
                                         (0.079)                     (0.092)                    (0.069)
Greenfield FDI-i, t-1 (ln)              0.120**                        0.037                  0.137***
                                         (0.037)                     (0.033)                    (0.036)
GDPt-1                                   -0.100                       -0.933                     0.293
                                         (0.460)                     (0.655)                    (0.442)
Populationt-1 (ln)                        3.955                      7.898*                     3.761+
                                         (2.417)                     (3.316)                    (2.155)
WGI regulatory qualityt-1                 0.275                        1.091                     -0.454
                                         (0.706)                     (1.017)                    (0.620)
Polity Indext-1                          -0.037                        0.008                     -0.050
                                         (0.044)                     (0.047)                    (0.036)
Exchange Ratet-1 (ln)                     -0.400                       0.050                     -0.319
                                         (0.295)                     (0.459)                    (0.295)
Exchange Rate Volatilityt-1             -13.326*                      -6.163                     -4.232
                                         (5.404)                     (7.057)                    (3.556)
Control of Corruptiont-1                 1.000+                        0.361                    1.117*
                                         (0.568)                     (0.778)                    (0.542)
Inflationt-1                              0.001                        0.011                     -0.002
                                         (0.008)                     (0.010)                    (0.007)
Observations                              1,234                        1,234                     1,234
Number of Countries                         90                          90                         90
Country FE                                 Yes                          Yes                       Yes
Year FE                                    Yes                          Yes                       Yes
                                       Robust standard errors in parentheses
                                   *** p<0.001, ** p<0.01, * p<0.05, + p<0.10

         Table 2 shows the results for hypothesis 5. For these regressions we aggregated greenfield FDI,

distinguishing between investments made by relatively diversified and undiversified MNEs. Since this

results in a three-dimensional data set (country - year - diversification dummy), it is impossible to use

                                                      24 
 
 


the Bun and Kiviet LSDVC estimator. Instead, we estimate an Ordinary Least Square model with

country and year fixed effects and robust standard errors.12 Model 1 shows that the effect of BRD on

undiversified firms’ greenfield FDI flows is negative but only statistically significant at the 10% level.

A 10% increase in BRD is associated with a 1.3% decrease in FDI flows made by undiversified MNEs.

In contrast, the effect of BRD on FDI of diversified firms, defined as those having subsidiaries in 10

countries or more, is close to zero and is not significant (Column 2). A Chow test shows that the

coefficients in columns 1 and 2 are statistically different from one another at the 1% level, supporting

hypothesis 5 that political conflict has a smaller effects on FDI made by diversified MNEs than on FDI

made by undiversified MNEs. In Column 3 to 6 we also distinguish between resource-related and non-

resource-related greenfield FDI flows of diversified and undiversified firms. The effect of BRD on

resource-related FDI flows, shown in Columns 3 and 4, is small and statistically insignificant,

irrespective of whether these are investments made by undiversified or diversified MNEs. This supports

our previous finding that political conflict does not significantly affect resource-related FDI flows (see

Table 1, Column 3-4).

        The results for non-resource-related FDI flows, shown in Columns 5 and 6 of Table 2, show a

different pattern. Nationwide conflict affects negatively the non-resource-related FDI flows of

undiversified firms. This effect is significant at the 5% level, indicating that a 10% increase in BRD

decreases non-resource-related FDI flows of undiversified MNEs by 1.5%. Non-resource-related FDI

made by diversified MNEs are less affected by increases in the number of BRD and the coefficient is

not significant. The difference between the coefficients in regressions 5 and 6 is statistically significant

at the 1% level. Thus, whether firms are geographically diversified matters for the relationship between

political conflict and greenfield FDI flows only in the case of non-resource-related FDI.




                                                    25 
 
 


                                     5. ROBUSTNESS ANALYSES


In this section, we explore the robustness of the main results to the inclusion of other types of political

violence. We also investigate the importance of within-sector heterogeneity and the robustness of our

results to using an alternative measure of political conflict, distinguishing in particular between wars

and conflicts. In addition, we test our hypotheses at the firm level using a two-stage Heckman model.

Section 6 discusses the special case of the hydrocarbons industry and the role of economic rents and

geographic constraints on investment.


Different types of political violence

We argued in the theoretical section that there are two necessary conditions for political violence to

affect FDI inflows. Violence must have a sufficient effect on a subsidiary’s profits and pose a relatively

continuous risk to its operations. Because political conflict is the only type of political violence that

meets these conditions, we focused on the type of violence in the main results section. However, the

literature suggests that the effect of other types of political violence on FDI flows is mixed. When data

on assassinations were more readily available than were data on other types of political violence,

researchers combined data on assassinations with data on revolutions and riots to proxy for the level of

political violence. Edwards (1990), for instance, finds that assassinations, riots and strikes do not affect

FDI inflows when controlling for political risk. Asiedu (2002) obtains a similar result when she

combines data on the number of assassinations and revolutions in one ‘political risk measure’. However,

when she does not control for other types of political violence, Asiedu (2006) finds a significant

negative effect of assassinations on FDI in Sub-Saharan Africa. Concerning political terror, Blanton

and Blanton (2007) and Bary, Clay and Flynn (2013) find that it negatively affects FDI inflows but just

like Asiedu (2006), these authors do not control for other types of political violence.

        Most studies on terrorism focus on its impact on developed economies. They generally find that

terrorism leads to a negative shock to a country’s GDP and global capital markets (Abadie &

Gardeazabal, 2003; Chen & Siems, 2004), a drop in inward FDI (Enders & Sandler, 1996), an increase

of vacancy rates in Central Business Districts (Abadie & Dermisi, 2008), and a drop in the number of

tourists (Drakos & Kutan, 2003). Studies on the effect of terrorism in developing countries, particularly

                                                    26 
 
 


those focusing on its relationship with FDI, are considerably less abundant. Moreover, those that

consider developing nations show conflicting results (Abadie & Gardeazabal, 2008; Enders et al., 2006;

Li, 2006; Oetzel & Oh, 2014; Powers & Choi, 2012). Again, several of these authors ignore other forms

of political violence and risk in their empirical strategies, which could largely explain the mixed results.

        In Table 3, we include measures for terrorism, political terror and assassinations in our

regression models to test our assumption that political violence must be both relatively continuous and

detrimental to returns on economic activity. We measure terrorism using the number of deaths during

terrorist attacks from the Global Terrorism Database (GTD). This database, developed by the National

Consortium for the Study of Terrorism and Responses to Terrorism, is based on reports from a variety

of open media sources (LaFree & Dugan, 2007). We prefer this proxy to the number of terrorist attacks

because it measures not only the prevalence of attacks, but also their intensity. The number of terrorist

fatalities is highly skewed; hence, we transform the measure using the natural log of the inverse

hyperbolic sine function. We measure political terror with the widely used Political Terror Scale (Wood

& Gibney, 2010), an index constructed based on information from three sources: Amnesty International

Yearly Country Reports, the U.S. State Department Country Reports on Human Rights Practices, and

the World Reports of Human Rights Watch. The index ranges from 0 in the case of a strong rule of law

to 5 in the case of widespread political terror. We measure the numbers of assassinations using the

Cross-National Time Series data developed by Banks (2015).

        The results confirm that terrorism, political terror, and assassinations in a country do not affect

its total greenfield FDI inflows (Figure 2, columns 1-3). The coefficient of the conflict variable BRD is

negative and significant at the 10% level in two of the three regression models (columns 1-2). Although

terrorism and assassinations do not significantly affect greenfield FDI in the resource sector, political

terror has a positive effect on investment in this industry (columns 4-6), indicating that MNEs in the

resource sector benefit from a certain level of oppression. This benefit could be explained by the fact

that a high level of oppression might be necessary to keep certain governments in place. MNEs active

in the resource sector might benefit in such an environment because they depend upon government

contracts that might be reneged upon by a new government; hence, these MNEs have the most to lose

if an incumbent ruler is removed from office. The effect of conflict on resource greenfield FDI remains

                                                    27 
 
 


small and insignificant (columns 4-6). In the models explaining non-resource FDI, terrorism, political

terror, and assassinations are not significantly different from 0. The effect of conflict (BRD) remains

strongly negative and significant at the 0.1% or 1% level. The type of conflict moderator is positive and

significant at the 5% level. Hence, nationwide political conflicts have a strong negative effect on non-

resource FDI, whereas localized conflicts have a negligible effect on this type of FDI.

Table 3 Effect of Political Conflict, Terrorism, Political Terror and Assassinations on
Greenfield FDI

                                      Dependent Variable: Log greenfield FDI (in USD millions), LSDVC Estimation
                                     Total FDI                          Resource-related FDI            Non-Resource related FDI
                            (1)         (2)          (3)          (4)           (5)            (6)      (7)         (8)        (9)
    BRDt-1 (ln)           -0.133+     -0.125+      -0.112       0.037          -0.004     -0.036     -0.254***   -0.216**    -0.226**
                          (0.075)     (0.073)      (0.072)     (0.107)        (0.103)    (0.083)      (0.073)     (0.071)    (0.070)
    BRD (ln)*
                           0.034       0.039        0.034       -0.074         -0.053     0.058       0.202*      0.198*     0.202*
    localizedt-1
                          (0.096)     (0.096)      (0.096)     (0.138)        (0.137)    (0.113)      (0.082)     (0.094)    (0.094)
    Terrorismt-1 (ln)      0.074                                0.031                                  0.098
                          (0.072)                              (0.102)                                (0.070)
    Political terrort-1                0.186                                  0.632**                             -0.006
                                      (0.166)                                 (0.236)                             (0.139)
    Assasinationst-1                                0.006                                 0.035                               0.004
                                                   (0.063)                               (0.090)                             (0.062)
    Observations           707          707          707         707            707        707         707          707        707
    Number of
                            90           90          90           90            90             90       90          90         90
    countries
    Economic
                           Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes            Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
    controls
    Country FE             Yes          Yes          Yes         Yes            Yes        Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes
    Year FE                 Yes          Yes         Yes           Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes          Yes        Yes
               Note: Political conflict proxied by battle-related deaths. Bootstrapped standard errors are in parentheses.
                                              *** p<0.001, ** p<0.01, * p<0.05, + p<0.10

Within-sector heterogeneity

The analyses so far distinguish between non-resource and resource industries but there might be

substantial within-sector heterogeneity that may affect our results. There are substantial differences

between the manufacturing and service industries, for example, in terms of sunk costs and labor

intensity. There might also be considerable heterogeneity in the natural resource category. Investments

in the hydrocarbon industry (oil, gas and coal) might not be sensitive to political violence because they

occur in remote locations (offshore). Recognizing these differences, we re-estimate the model using

more disaggregated data on manufacturing and services FDI flows and hydrocarbon and non-

hydrocarbon FDI flows.

                                                                  28 
 
 


            Our results confirm that the negative effect of conflict on non-resource FDI is observed in both

the manufacturing and service industries (Table 4, columns 1 and 2). The coefficients of the conflict

variable and the scope-of-conflict moderator are similar across the two specifications and a Chow test

shows that the coefficients of the BRD variable are not systematically different for the two industries.

This indicates that it is valid to group manufacturing and services into one non-resource industry. The

results in columns (3) and (4) suggest that the effect of conflict on hydrocarbon and non-hydrocarbon

FDI is comparable in size and positive but insignificant in both cases. In addition, a Chow-test shows

that the difference between the BRD coefficients in Column 3 and 4 is not statistically significant.

Hence, there is no evidence that the insensitivity of resource-related FDI to political conflict is driven

solely by the hydrocarbon sector.


Table 4 Effect of Political Conflict on Manufacturing, Services, Hydrocarbon, and Non-
hydrocarbon Greenfield FDI
                                       Dependent Variable: Log greenfield FDI (in USD millions), LSDVC Estimation
                               Manufacturing FDI              Service FDI           Hydrocarbon FDI          Non-hydrocarbon
                                                                                                                     FDI
                                        (1)                        (2)                     (3)                        (4)
    BRD (ln)                         -0.132+                    -0.209**                  0.055                     0.091
                                      (0.071)                    (0.067)                 (0.105)                   (0.091)
    BRD (ln)*localizedt-1              0.123                     0.168*                   0.020                     -0.082
                                      (0.101)                    (0.096)                 (0.142)                   (0.123)
    Observations                        707                        707                     707                       707
    Number of countries                  90                         90                      90                        90
    Economic Controls                   Yes                        Yes                     Yes                       Yes
    Country FE                          Yes                        Yes                     Yes                       Yes
    Year FE                             Yes                        Yes                     Yes                       Yes
                Note: Political conflict is proxied by battle-related deaths. Bootstrapped standard errors are in parentheses.
                                *** p<0.001, ** p<0.01, * p<0.05, + p<0.10

Conflict and war onset

As an additional robustness check, we use a dummy variable for conflict onset instead of our continuous

BRD variable to measure whether a country experiences a conflict or a war according to the definitions

of UCDP/PRIO. We code an observation as a conflict if there were at least 25 BRD but not more than

1,000 BRD in a year and as a war (or a large conflict) if there are at least 1,000 BRD per year. Thus,

we measure the effect of conflict and war onset rather than the intensity of the disputes. Figure 4 shows




                                                                29 
 
 


that conflicts are more prevalent than wars and that in both categories approximately half of the disputes

are localized and the other half are nationwide.




Figure 4 Incidence of conflict and war and their geographic scope in developing countries over
the period of 2003-2012

        Table 5 shows the results of the LSDVC regression model, including dummy variables for

conflict and war and moderators for their geographic scope. In regression 1, the coefficient of the

political conflict dummy is negative and significant at the 0.1% level and the coefficient on the scope-

of-conflict moderator is positive and significant at the 5% level. These results indicate that the onset of

a nationwide political conflict has a large effect on greenfield investments and that the scope of conflict

matters to MNEs. The onset of a nationwide political conflict decreases greenfield FDI flows on average

by 86.2%, whereas the onset of a localized political conflict has a smaller effect which is not

significantly different from zero (effect size = -0.413, standard error = 0.503). The main effect of war

onset is also negative and as statistically significant as in the case of conflict onset, but as expected the

size of the war effect is much larger than that of conflict. There is evidence that the scope of violence

matters in this case too. The moderator for the onset of a localized war is positive and significant at the

10% level. Quantitatively, the onset of a nationwide war has a very large effect on greenfield FDI flows;

on average, the onset of nationwide wars are associated with a decline in greenfield investment flows

of 93.2%. The onset of a localized war has a smaller effect on greenfield FDI and it is not significantly

different from zero (effect size = -0.937, standard error = 0.778).


                                                     30 
 
 


            In model 2, the main effect of conflict onset on resource-related FDI is negative, but

insignificant. The coefficient of the moderator for geographic scope is positive, but also insignificant.

Hence, there is no evidence that the onset of a conflict affects resource FDI, independent of the scope

of the conflict. However, the onset of a war has a negative effect on resource-related FDI, which is

statistically significant at the 10% level. The onset of a nationwide war decreases resource FDI flows

by 84.1%, whereas that of a localized has a small and statistically insignificant (effect size=-0.103,

standard error = 1.183).

            In model (3), the main effect of conflict onset on non-resource-related FDI flows is negative

and significant at the 1% level. The geographic scope moderator is positive and significant at the 5%

level. The onset of a nationwide conflict reduces greenfield FDI flows to the non-resource sector by

80.4%, but the effect of a localized conflict is not significantly different from 0 (effect size = 0.051,

standard error = 0.547). The onset of a war has a strong negative effect, but this effect is again only

statistically significant if the war is nationwide. This analysis suggests that even when we consider

conflict onset rather than conflict intensity, we find support for the hypotheses proposed in the

theoretical section of the paper. One additional insight we obtain is that unlike conflicts, war onset has

a negative effect on all types of greenfield FDI.

Table 5 Effect of Political Conflict and War on Total FDI, Resource FDI and Non-Resource FDI
                                       Dependent Variable: Log greenfield FDI (in USD millions), LSDVC Estimation
                                              Total FDI              Resource-related FDI  Non-resource-related FDI
                                                  (1)                          (2)                     (3)
    Conflict Dummyt-1                         -1.985***                      -0.562                 -1.632**
                                               (0.528)                      (0.762)                  (0.522)
    Conflict Dummy*Localizedt-1                 1.572*                        0.123                  1.683*
                                               (0.689)                      (0.995)                  (0.679)
    War Dummyt-1                              -2.692***                     -1.842+                -2.172***
                                               (0.664)                      (0.957)                  (0.655)
    War Dummy*Localizedt-1                      1.755+                        1.739                   0.954
                                               (0.999)                      (1.441)                  (0.986)
    Observations                                  707                          707                     707
    No. of Countries                               90                          90                      90
    Economic Controls                            Yes                           Yes                     Yes
    Country FE                                   Yes                           Yes                     Yes
    Year FE                                       Yes                          Yes                     Yes
                                   Bootstrapped standard errors are in parentheses.
                                    *** p<0.001, ** p<0.01, * p<0.05, +p<0.10




                                                       31 
 
 


Firm-level Model

In this section, we discuss how we test our hypotheses using firm-level panel data. This method has the

advantage of enabling us to measure geographic diversification continuously and to add control

variables for firm-level characteristics that might confound the relation between FDI and political

conflict. However, the disadvantage is that for many of the observations in the original data set, firm-

level variables were not available. Although as many as 67.1% of all parent companies in the fDi

Markets data set could be matched to firms registered in ORBIS, only for 1,413 of those firms (10.2%)

data on firm-level characteristics were available. Although a sample of this size is not uncommon in IB

research, it considerably decreases the precision of our estimates and the ability to detect statistically

significant effects. In addition, a missing value logistic regression (Long & Freese, 2006) shows that

firm-level data are not missing at random; the probability that data are missing depends on the sector

and the level of political conflict. As this could considerably bias our results, we prefer the country-

level estimates and show the estimates of the firm-level regressions merely for robustness.

       The firm-level data set comprises data on the 1,413 MNEs that invested in a developing country

between the years 2003 and 2012, according to the fDi Markets data set. For each MNE (m) we report

greenfield FDI to a host country (i) in a certain year (t), resulting in the following regression model:


          	∝    ∝              ∝          	   	∝           	   ∝       	     	   	     	     	     ,   (2)


Similarly to our previous models, the independent variable of interest is political conflict P for country

i in the previous year, while we control for destination country variables Xi(t-1), a set of country dummies

μi, and a vector of time dummies μt. In addition, we add fixed effects for the country of origin μo,

controlling for time-invariant characteristics of the home country of the MNE. We also add a set of

firm-level control variables         	,   including greenfield FDI flows by the MNE m to country i in the

previous year, the age of the firm (ln), the number of employees (ln), the rate of return on equity (ROE),

and geographic diversification, measured by the number of countries in which the multinational is

present (ln). The diversification variable is standardized to simplify the interpretation of the main effect

of political conflict and the moderator. Finally, we include a set of bilateral variables,                   	,




                                                     32 
 
 


controlling for the population-weighted distance (ln) between the host country i and country of origin

o; whether the origin and host country share a common language, common border, or colonial history.

Data on these bilateral variables were obtained from the gravity data set developed by Head, Mayer and

Ries (2010).

        We estimate a two-stage Heckman model to simultaneously examine investment at the

extensive margin - i.e. whether to invest - and the intensive margin - i.e. how much to invest. The first

stage analyzing the extensive margin consists of a probit model, where the dependent variable is 1 if a

MNE invested in a host country in year t and 0 otherwise. The second stage, examining the intensive

margin, consists of an OLS-model estimating the amount of greenfield FDI (transformed using the

inverse sine-transformation) for those firms that decided to invest. To avoid multicollinearity resulting

from limited nonlinearity in the functional form, we use the colonial history dummy as our exclusion

restriction. However, our results are also robust to using different exclusion restrictions.

        Table 6 presents the results from the two-stage Heckman model. Column 1 shows the results

for the regression of the intensive margin, where the dependent variable is the amount of greenfield FDI

flows given that an MNE invests in a country. At the average geographic diversification level, a

nationwide conflict has a significant negative effect on total FDI flows, whereas a localized conflict

does not significantly affect greenfield FDI flows (Column 1). This is consistent with our hypotheses

and main results. However, in the equation for the extensive margin there is no significant main effect

of BRD, irrespective of the type of conflict. Hence, political conflict affects greenfield FDI flows

through a decrease in the size of investment projects, whilst there is no evidence that conflict affects the

probability that an MNE invests in a country. The diversification moderator is not statistically

significant for the intensive margin, but it is positive and significant at the 10% level for the extensive

margin (Column 2). At particularly high levels of geographic diversification, with presence in at least

26 countries, the effect of BRD becomes positive. This indicates that for MNEs that are better able to

absorb the risk posed by political violence, the increase of conflict can actually positively affect the

probability of investment. Although this might seem counterintuitive, it could suggest that MNEs that

are sufficiently diversified have a competitive advantage in countries with high discontinuous risk and



                                                    33 
 
 


can accordingly reap the monopoly rents associated with this advantage. This can in turn initiate entry

into high-risk environments.

Table 6 Heckman estimation of the effect of Political Conflict on firm level greenfield FDI flows 
                                 Dependent Variable: Log greenfield FDI (in USD millions), Heckman estimation 

                                          (1)                           (2)                        (3)
                                     Total FDI                Resource-related FDI      Non-resource-related FDI
                              Intensive       Extensive      Intensive      Extensive    Intensive     Extensive
                               Margin           Margin        Margin          Margin      Margin        Margin
BRDt-1 (ln)                    -0.247*           -0.009        -0.093          -0.018     -0.276*        0.002
                               (0.109)          (0.022)       (0.200)         (0.041)     (0.108)       (0.023)
BRD (ln) * localizedt-1        0.301**           0.000          0.142           0.021     0.308**        -0.010
                               (0.106)          (0.022)       (0.191)         (0.041)     (0.106)       (0.023)
BRD(ln)*Diversficationt-1       -0.018          0.007+          0.010           0.004      -0.007       0.007*
                               (0.012)          (0.003)       (0.027)         (0.007)     (0.012)       (0.004)
                                                 Bilateral Controls
Distance                       0.196+         -0.228***        -0.908       -0.337***      -0.058     -0.254***
                               (0.113)          (0.016)       (0.571)         (0.039)     (0.215)       (0.017)
Common Border                 -0.961**         0.424***         0.925         0.349*       -0.523      0.496***
                               (0.371)          (0.079)       (0.953)         (0.172)     (0.535)       (0.080)
Common Language               -0.538**         0.307***        1.729*       0.337***       -0.152     0.339***
                               (0.196)          (0.040)       (0.767)         (0.080)     (0.379)       (0.042)
Colonial History                               0.126**                        0.145+                  0.181***
                                                (0.046)                       (0.087)                   (0.049)
                                                   Firm Controls
Diversificationt-1 (std)       -0.155*         0.096***         0.516       0.216***        -0.065       0.128***
                               (0.062)          (0.014)       (0.381)         (0.036)      (0.113)        (0.015)
FDI t-1 (ln)                     0.009         0.061***      0.057***       0.068***        0.001        0.059***
                               (0.018)          (0.002)       (0.008)         (0.003)      (0.018)        (0.002)
Age t-1 (ln)                  -0.105**          -0.019*       -0.209+          -0.029     -0.095**         -0.004
                               (0.035)          (0.009)       (0.118)         (0.025)      (0.033)        (0.010)
ROE t-1                         -0.001          0.000+         -0.001        -0.002*        0.000         0.001*
                               (0.001)          (0.000)       (0.005)         (0.001)      (0.001)        (0.000)
Employees t-1 (ln)              -0.059         0.118***         0.247       0.137***        0.106        0.170***
                               (0.051)          (0.006)       (0.239)         (0.014)      (0.137)        (0.006)
Constant                     177.034*** -57.929***             39.617       -50.043**   201.298*** -62.014***
                              (46.194)          (9.001)      (77.702)        (19.365)     (48.315)        (9.271)
Inverse Mills Ratio           -1.427**                         0.300                     -1.550***
                               (0.434)                        (0.511)                      (0.454)
Observations                           519,030                        58,528                       491,123
Economic Controls                        Yes                           Yes                           Yes
Destination FE                           Yes                           Yes                           Yes
Origin FE                                Yes                           Yes                           Yes
Year FE                                  Yes                           Yes                           Yes
                                         Standard errors in parentheses
                                 *** p<0.001, ** p<0.01, * p<0.05, + p<0.10

          Concerning the control variables, distance positively affects the intensive margin, but has a

negative effect on the extensive margin. A common border and a shared language negatively affect the

intensive margin, but positively affect the extensive margin. In addition, a shared colonial history has a

positive effect on the extensive margin. Hence, the bilateral controls indicate that an increase in psychic



                                                       34 
 
 


distance decreases the probability that an MNE sets up a subsidiary in a country, but increases the size

of the FDI flow if the MNE makes an investment. Moreover, FDI in the previous year, the rate of return

on equity and the number of employees positively and significantly affect the probability of investment,

whereas they do not affect the size of the investments. Age has a significant negative effect on both the

intensive and extensive margin, whereas geographic diversification increases the probability of an MNE

making an investment, while decreasing the size of FDI flow.

        We also estimate the Heckman model separately for resource and non-resource FDI decisions.13

The estimates for non-resource-related FDI flows (Column 3) are similar to those of total FDI flows.

This is not surprising; in the firm-level data set 88% of the observations concern non-resource FDI

flows. However, the estimates for the resource sector differ (Column 2). Political conflict, the type of

conflict and the diversification moderator are no longer significant. In line with our hypotheses, the

effect sizes are also considerable smaller than the effects on non-resource-related FDI flows. However,

the number of MNEs in the resource-related FDI regression is small and therefore, the estimates of the

coefficients are relatively imprecise. This concern in combination with the sample selection effect,

explained above, lowers our confidence in the Heckman estimates for the resource sector.


6. THE CASE OF HYDROCARBONS: THE ROLE OF ECONOMIC RENTS AND GEOGRAPHIC
                             CONSTRAINTS ON LOCATION CHOICE

This section examines the factors behind the insensitivity of resource-related FDI to political violence

by focusing on the two mechanisms discussed in the theory section: the size of the economic rents and

the geographic constraints on location choice. We focus on the oil and gas industry because no data on

rents and location choice are available for other natural resource industries. The BP Statistical Review

of World Energy provides a large data set containing information on global oil, gas reserves and prices,

obtained from government sources and published data. As a proxy for geographic constraints on

location choice, we use proven global reserves of oil and gas that can be extracted from known

reservoirs with reasonable certainty in the future. We first standardize the oil and gas reserves data

(because oil and gas reserves are measured in different units) and subsequently take the average of the

two measures to obtain our gasoilreserves variable. We then interact this score with battle-related deaths


                                                   35 
 
 


to test the limited-location-choice mechanism. The main effect of global oil and gas reserves is excluded

because it does not vary over countries and is hence absorbed by the time fixed effects.

        It is possible that oil-and-gas-related FDI flows and political violence are the result of the

discovery of one of these valuable resources. Therefore, we also control for large oil and gas field

discoveries within a country using a data set obtained from the BP Statistical Review of World Energy.

The variable for discovery is a dummy coded as one if a major oil or gas field was found in the country,

and zero otherwise. A major gas/oil discovery is a discovery of a field that contains at least 500 million

barrels of oil or 79 million m3 of gas (Halbouty, 2001).

        We proxy oil and gas rents with a global price index of oil and gas prices (gasoilindex). This

index is constructed using data from the BP Statistical Review of World Energy. We take 2003 as the

base year and subtract 100 from the index to ease the interpretation of our results. We interact this price

index with battle-related deaths to test for the effect of rents on the responsiveness of resource-related

FDI to political violence. The main effect of our global oil and gas price measure is excluded because

it does not vary over countries and is hence absorbed by the time fixed effects.

        Column (1) of Table 7 shows the baseline model for the oil and gas industry. Similar to column

(3) in Table 4, the results show that the effect of political violence on oil and gas FDI is comparable to

the effect on total resource-related FDI flows (see columns 3-4, Table 1): battle-related deaths do not

have a significant effect on oil-and-gas-related FDI. In columns (2) and (3), respectively, we add the

moderator for hydrocarbon reserves and moderator for the price index. Figures 5a and 5b present the

effect of these moderators, as estimated in model 3. The moderating effect of reserves on the

relationship between battle-related deaths and oil and gas FDI is negative and significant, indicating

that when new oil and gas reserves are discovered, MNEs active in the oil and gas sector are less willing

to invest in countries marred by political violence. Nevertheless, the change in global reserves must be

large for the total effect of conflict on greenfield FDI flowing to the hydrocarbon sector to be different

from zero. Figure 5a shows that the effect of battle-related deaths on oil-and-gas-related FDI flows is

positive if global reserves decrease by 0.5 standard deviations or more relative to the mean. However,

the effect only becomes significantly greater than zero if global reserves decrease by at least 2.5 standard

deviations relative to the mean. The effect of conflict on oil and gas FDI is significantly smaller than

                                                    36 
 
 


zero only if reserves increase by 2.0 standard deviations or more relative to the mean. If global reserves

increase by two standard deviations relative to the mean, a 10 percent increase in battle-related deaths

is associated with a reduction of greenfield FDI in the oil-and-gas sector of approximately 4%, ceteris

paribus. Hence, our results thus suggest that during the estimation period, the geographic-constraints

mechanism was at work.

Table 7 Effect of Political Conflict on Greenfield FDI in the Oil and Gas sector
                                                 LSDVC estimations, greenfield FDI in USD millions
                                                       (1)           (2)           (3)           (4)
                 BRDt-1 (ln)                         0.064         0.090         -0.091        -0.097
                                                    (0.077)       (0.078)       (0.114)       (0.130)
                 Ln(BRD)*gasoilreservest- 1                       -0.090*     -0.156**       -0.156**
                                                                  (0.046)       (0.055)       (0.055)
                 Ln(BRD)*gasoilindext-1                                         0.002*        0.002*
                                                                                (0.001)       (0.001)
                 Ln(BRD)*localizedt-1                                                           0.013
                                                                                              (0.141)
                 Major Gas/Oil discoveriest-1        -0.391        -0.332        -0.337        -0.336
                                                    (0.507)       (0.507)       (0.505)       (0.505)
                 FDIt-1 (ln)                        0.086*        0.086*        0.081+        0.081+
                                                    (0.043)       (0.043)       (0.043)       (0.043)
                 GDPt-1 (ln)                         -0.962        -0.950        -1.004        -1.008
                                                    (0.877)       (0.877)       (0.874)       (0.877)
                 Population (ln)                  13.495**      14.050**      13.965**       13.973**
                                                    (4.312)       (4.330)       (4.313)       (4.322)
                 WGI regulatory qualityt-1           1.287         1.121         1.104          1.096
                                                    (0.997)       (1.002)       (0.998)       (0.996)
                 WGI Corruption t-1                  -0.419        -0.482        -0.656        -0.659
                                                    (0.905)       (0.905)       (0.907)       (0.909)
                 Polity Indext-1                     -0.061        -0.038        -0.052        -0.053
                                                    (0.073)       (0.074)       (0.074)       (0.074)
                 Real Exchange Ratet-1 (ln)          0.415         0.470         0.468          0.466
                                                    (0.545)       (0.544)       (0.542)       (0.543)
                 Exchange Rate Volatilityt-1         -2.525        -1.560        -3.752        -3.798
                                                   (11.240)      (11.242)      (11.206)      (11.208)
                 Inflationt-1                        0.009         0.010         0.010          0.010
                                                    (0.012)       (0.012)       (0.012)       (0.012)
                 Observations                         707           707           707            707
                 Number of countries                   90            90            90            90
                 Country FE                           Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes
                 Year FE                              Yes           Yes           Yes            Yes
              The gas and oil reserves variable is standardized, and the gas and oil index is a price index.
                                    Bootstrapped standard errors are in parentheses.
                                        *** p<0.001, ** p<0.01, * p<0.05

        The effect of political violence is positively moderated by oil and gas prices, indicating that the

effect of battle-related deaths on FDI flows to the oil and gas sector depends positively upon the global

prices of oil and gas. This dependency implies that during commodity booms when prices are high,

MNEs are more likely to enter countries marred by political conflict than when prices are low. Figure

5b shows that only in cases of exceptionally high oil and gas prices do the effects of political violence

                                                           37 
 
 


on oil- and gas-related FDIs become significantly different from zero. For example, if prices are at their

base 2003 level and global reserves are at their mean value, the effect of political violence on oil-and-

gas-related FDIs flows is negative but insignificant. However, when the oil-and-gas price index

increases to 240, i.e., the 2012 level, the effect of battle-related deaths becomes significantly positive

at the 5% level. Hence, we find that the effect of political violence on oil and gas FDI flows depends

positively on economic rents or the profitability of oil and gas extraction and that the rent mechanism

was at work towards the end of our investigation period. Finally, in Column (4), we add the moderator

effect of localized and battle-related deaths to the model. The effect of this moderator is positive but

insignificant and does not change the results associated with the rents and geographic-constraints

mechanisms.




Figures 5a and 5b. Marginal effect of ln(BRD) on oil- and gas-related FDIs at different levels of
global oil and gas reserves (std) and oil and gas prices, respectively




                                                   38 
 
 


                                     7. CONCLUDING REMARKS

This study makes several contributions to the literature on political violence and FDI, particularly on

the heterogeneous nature of their relationship. We argue that the relationship between political violence

and greenfield FDI flows is contingent on the type of violence, the characteristics of the FDI-receiving

sector and the international scope of the MNE. We differentiate among several different types of

political violence: high- and low-impact events, discontinuous and continuous events, and localized and

nationwide events. We also differentiate between resource and non-resource sectors, focusing

specifically on differences stemming from geographic constraints on location choice and economic

rents.

         By disaggregating total FDI into sectoral flows and limiting our analysis to a homogeneous set

of greenfield investments, we show that the effect of political conflict on greenfield FDI flows depends

upon sector characteristics, particularly those flows tied to economic rents and geographic constraints

on location choice. We show that while non-resource-related greenfield FDI flows are negatively

associated with political conflict, resource-related greenfield FDI flows do not significantly decrease

when political conflict intensifies. We also find evidence that the effect of nationwide political conflict

on non-resource FDI tends to be greater than the effect of localized conflict. Resource-related FDI is

affected neither by localized nor geographically dispersed conflicts. Finally, we find evidence that

political conflict particularly deters investment by MNEs that are relatively geographically

undiversified. These results are remarkably robust across different specifications and provide a

plausible explanation for the ambiguous results reported in the literature.

         We empirically show that the insensitivity of resource MNEs to political violence can be

attributed to the high profitability of resource extraction and these companies’ geographic constraints

on location choice during the period of estimation. The two mechanisms are related, as suggested by

the prolonged period of high oil prices in the 2000s and the subsequent increase in investment

opportunities provided by the discovery of hydraulic fracturing. During periods of commodity booms,

profitability and limited investment opportunities reinforce one another. However, when the

development of alternative sources of energy reduces the constraints on location choice within the

resource sector, or if the economic rents associated with resource extraction drop, resource MNEs are

                                                    39 
 
 


likely to be considerably less willing to invest in countries experiencing political conflict. Although we

use the oil and gas sector to illustrate the effect of the rents mechanism and the geographic constraints

mechanism on the propensity of MNEs operating in this industry to invest in conflict areas, we

recognize that certain non-resource sectors might also be characterized by these mechanisms. Hence,

we argue more generally that MNEs active in sectors in which these mechanisms are at play are more

likely to invest in countries experiencing political conflict.  

        Finally, our results suggest that a certain level of continuity and impact are necessary conditions

for political violence to affect greenfield FDI flows. Only political conflict, a continuous and high-

impact type of political violence, has a significant effect on greenfield FDI. Other types of political

violence, such as terrorism and assassinations, do not affect greenfield investments, although political

terror is positively associated with the flow of greenfield FDI into resources, possibly because political

repression reduces political instability and the risk that resource licenses might be reneged upon due to

government change.

        The findings in this paper point to a vicious cycle between resource dependence and conflict

by providing evidence that political violence entrenches the resource dependency of fragile countries.

We show that some types of political violence, namely repression through political terror, can be

positively associated with resource-related FDI and that political conflict is detrimental to non-resource-

related FDI – the type of investment considered most effective in promoting structural transformation

and employment creation. At the same time, conflict does not affect resource-related FDI – the type of

investment associated with the resource curse (Collier, 1998; Fearon and Laitin, 2003; Hodler, 2006;

Poelhekke & Van der Ploeg, 2013; Sachs and Warner, 1995).

        These findings provide managers of MNEs with a more nuanced understanding of the effects

of political violence and the risks it poses to the MNE. We show that the continuity of the risk posed is

an important factor influencing MNEs’ entry strategy. However, also sector characteristics that

influence an MNE’s sensitivity to risk, the MNE’s exposure to violence and the ability to diversify risk

should be taken into account when making a risk assessment of investment into developing countries

marred by political violence. As such, our results emphasize that the assumption that political violence

necessarily depresses earnings and puts off investors is too simplistic. Our finding that political conflict

                                                     40 
 
 


positively affects greenfield FDI by the most diversified firms, suggests that if MNEs are able to absorb

discontinuous risk, entry into conflict countries might even increase earnings. As such, MNEs might

want to consider entry into conflict countries – taking into account sector and firm attributes, despite

the large level of risk posed, with the intention of obtaining a competitive advantage.

        The main limitation of this study is that the empirical analysis cannot establish a causal

relationship between FDI and political violence; therefore, the results should be interpreted as

conditional associations. Although it is unlikely that total FDI flows have a direct effect on the number

of battle-related deaths, FDI in the natural resource sector might affect political violence – particularly

separatist violence – by intensifying grievances or increasing the perceived gains of secession.

However, finding sources of exogenous variation in political violence that can be exploited in a panel

format is challenging. Therefore, we address the endogeneity problem by including fixed effects and a

large set of control variables, including income and quality of institutions. In the robustness analyses,

we also control for the discovery of large oil and gas reserves because it is likely that the discovery of

valuable resources rather than the involvement of an MNE fuels conflict. This additional control

variable does not change our main results.

        Another limitation lies in the data sources used. The data on greenfield FDI flows are collected

through Financial Times newswires, internal information sources, other media sources, project data

acquired from industry organizations and investment agencies and data purchased from market research

and publication companies. MNEs investing in conflict countries might actively avoid publication of

the investment project in the media to avoid a public outcry. This selection effect could drive our results

on the effect of political conflict on total greenfield FDI flows. To our knowledge, however, there are

no FDI data sets that are not based on media coverage while simultaneously covering an equally large

set of countries and allowing for disaggregation at the sector level. Nevertheless, it is unlikely that our

results on sector heterogeneity are driven by sample selection bias. It could be expected that particularly

resource-related FDI is sensitive to public outcry because this type of investment is generally believed

to have negative environmental, economic and institutional development effects (Collier & Hoeffler,

1998; Fearon and Laitin, 2003; Hodler, 2006; Ross, 2004; Sachs and Warner, 1995). Non-resource-

related greenfield FDI, however, is widely considered a vehicle for economic development and

                                                    41 
 
 


accordingly does not have a reputation as bad as resource-related FDI (Poelhekke & Van der Ploeg,

2013). Hence, it could be expected that managers in this sector face fewer incentives to avoid

publication of FDI projects than do managers in the resource sector. Such a selection mechanism would

yield results opposite to ours. It is therefore unlikely that such a mechanism drives our sector-level

results.

           This study explores the effects of political violence on greenfield FDI flows to developing

countries and considers how the characteristics of a host country and the presence of political violence

affect MNE location decisions. Additional research could examine sectoral FDI and conflict at the

subnational level. During such an examination, it is possible to consider the distance from the

investment location to the epicenter of a conflict, the exact location and characteristics of an MNE, and

the role of oil rent sharing between subnational and national governments in determining what affects

the likelihood of MNE investment in an affected region. In addition, future research could analyze a

longer time span, studying how gestation periods matter for MNEs’ sensitivity to political violence.




                                                   42 
 
 


                                           REFERENCES

Abadie, A., & Gardeazabal, J. (2003). The economic costs of conflict: A case study of the Basque
      Country. American Economic Review, 113-132.

Abadie, A., & Gardeazabal, J. (2008). Terrorism and the world economy. European Economic
      Review, 52(1), 1-27.

Abadie, A., & Dermisi, S. (2008). Is terrorism eroding agglomeration economies in central business
      districts? Lessons from the office real estate market in downtown Chicago. Journal of Urban
      Economics, 64(2), 451-463.

Agarwal, S., & Ramaswami, S. N. (1992). Choice of foreign market entry mode: Impact of ownership,
      location and internalization factors. Journal of International Business Studies, 1-27.

Asiedu, E. (2002). On the determinants of foreign direct investment to developing countries: Is Africa
      different? World Development, 30(1), 107-119.

Asiedu, E. (2006). Foreign Direct Investment in Africa: The role of natural resources, market size,
      government policies, institutions and political stability. World Economy, 29(1), 63-77.

Asiedu, E, & Lien, D. (2011). Democracy, foreign direct investment and natural resources. Journal of
      International Economics, 84(1), 99-111.

Bader, B., & Schuster, T. (2015). Expatriate social networks in terrorism-endangered countries: An
      empirical analysis in Afghanistan, India, Pakistan, and Saudi Arabia. Journal of International
      Management, 21(1), 63-77.

Banks, A. S. (2015). Cross-National Time-Series Data Archive User's Manual. Center for Social
      Analysis, State University of New York at Binghamton.

Beugelsdijk, S., McCann, P., & Mudambi, R. (2010). Introduction: Place, space and organization—
      economic geography and the multinational enterprise. Journal of Economic Geography, 10(4),
      485-493.

Belderbos, R., Tong, T. W., & Wu, S. (2014). Multinationality and downside risk: The roles of option
      portfolio and organization. Strategic Management Journal, 35(1), 88-106.

Biglaiser, G. & DeRouen, K. (2006). Economic Reforms and Inflows of Foreign Direct Investment in
      Latin America. Latin American Research Review, 41(1), 51-75.

Biglaiser, G. & DeRouen, K. (2007). Following the Flag: Troop Deployment and U.S. Foreign Direct
      Investment. International Studies Quarterly, 51(3), 835-854.

                                                  43 
 
 


Blanton, S. L., & Blanton, R. G. (2007). What Attracts Foreign Investors? An Examination of Human
      Rights and Foreign Direct Investment. Journal of Politics, 69(1), 143-155.

Blattman, C., & Miguel, E. (2010). Civil war. Journal of Economic Literature, 3-57.

Bodea, C., & Elbadawi, I.A. (2008). Political Violence and Underdevelopment. Journal of African
      Economies, 17(2), ii50-ii96.

Brenner, S. (2011). Self-disclosure at international cartels. Journal of International Business Studies,
      42(2), 221-234.

Brouthers, L. E., Gao, Y., & McNicol, J. P. (2008). Corruption and market attractiveness influences on
      different types of FDI. Strategic Management Journal, 29(6), 673-680.

Brunetti, A. & Weder, B. (1998). Investment and Institutional Uncertainty: A Comparative Study of
      Different Uncertainty Measures. Weltwirtschaftliches Archive, 134(3), 513-533.

Buckley, P. J., Devinney, T. M., & Louviere, J. J. (2007). Do managers behave the way theory suggests?
      A choice-theoretic examination of foreign direct investment location decision-making. Journal
      of International Business Studies, 38(7), 1069-1094.

Buhaug, H. & Gates, S. (2002). The geography of civil war. Journal of Peace Research, 39(4), 417-
      433.

Bun, M.J.G. & Kiviet, J.F. (2003). On the diminishing returns of higher order terms in asymptotic
      expansions of bias. Economic Letters, 79(2), p. 145-152.

Burger, M.J., Ianchovichina, E.I., & Rijkers, B. (2016) Risky Business: Political Instability and
      Sectoral Greenfield Foreign Direct Investment in the Arab World. World Bank Economic
      Review.

Burger, M. J., van der Knaap, B., & Wall, R. S. (2013). Revealed competition for greenfield
      investments between European regions. Journal of Economic Geography, 13(4), 619-648.

Busse, M. & Hefeker, C. (2007). Political risk, institutions and foreign direct investment. European
      Journal of Political Economy, 2, 297-315.

Butler, K. C., & Joaquin, D. C. (1998). A note on political risk and the required return on foreign
      direct investment. Journal of International Business Studies, 29(3), 599-607.

Collier, P. & Hoeffler, A. (1998). On economic causes of civil war. Oxford Economic Papers 50, 563-
      573.



                                                   44 
 
 


Chen, A. H., & Siems, T. F. (2004). The effects of terrorism on global capital markets. European
      Journal of Political Economy, 20(2), 349-366.

Chow, G. C. (1960). Tests of equality between sets of coefficients in two linear regressions.
      Econometrica, 591-605.

Cuervo-Cazurra, A. (2006). Who cares about corruption? Journal of International Business Studies,
      37(6), 807-822.

Czinkota, M. R., Knight, G., Liesch, P. W., & Steen, J. (2010). Terrorism and international business:
      A research agenda. Journal of International Business Studies, 41(5), 826-843.

Dai, L., Eden, L., & Beamish, P.W. (2013). Place, space, and geographical exposure: Foreign
      subsidiary survival in conflict zones. Journal of International Business Studies, 44, 554–578.

Darendeli, I. S., & Hill, T. L. (2015). Uncovering the complex relationships between political risk and
      MNE firm legitimacy: Insights from Libya. Journal of International Business Studies, 47(1),
      68-92.

Doyle, M. W., & Sambanis, N. (2000). International peacebuilding: A theoretical and quantitative
      analysis. American Political Science Review, 94(4), 779-801.

Drakos, K., & Kutan, A. M. (2003). Regional effects of terrorism on tourism in three Mediterranean
      countries. Journal of Conflict Resolution,47(5), 621-641.

Driffield, N., Jones, C., & Crotty, J. (2013). International business research and risky investments, an
      analysis of FDI in conflict zones. International Business Review, 22(1), 140-155.

Duanmu, J. L. (2014). State-owned MNCs and host country expropriation risk: The role of home state
      soft power and economic gunboat diplomacy. Journal of International Business Studies, 45(8),
      1044-1060.

Dunning, J. H., & Narula, R. (2005). Multinationals and Industrial Competitiveness: A new agenda.
      Edward Elgar Publishing.

Edwards, S. (1990). Capital Flows, Foreign Direct Investment, and Debt-Equity Swaps in Developing
      Countries. NBER Working Paper Series, 3497.

Enders, W., & Sandler, T. (1996). Terrorism and foreign direct investment in Spain and Greece.
      Kyklos, 49(3), 331-352.

Enders, W., Sachsida, A., & Sandler, T. (2006). The impact of transnational terrorism on US foreign
      direct investment. Political Research Quarterly, 59(4), 517-531.

                                                   45 
 
 


Fearon, J.D. & Laitin, D.D. (2003). Ethnicity, Insurgency, and Civil War. American Political Science
      Review, 97(1), 75-90.

Feinberg, S. E., & Gupta, A. K. (2009). MNC subsidiaries and country risk: Internalization as a
      safeguard against weak external institutions. Academy of Management Journal, 52(2), 381-399.

Flannery, M. J., & Hankins, K. W. (2013). Estimating dynamic panel models in corporate finance.
      Journal of Corporate Finance, 19, 1-19.

García‐Canal, E., & Guillén, M. F. (2008). Risk and the strategy of foreign location choice in
      regulated industries. Strategic Management Journal, 29(10), 1097-1115.

Gause III, F. G. (2011). Why Middle East Studies Missed the Arab Spring: The Myth of Authoritarian
      Stability. Foreign Affairs, 90(4), 81-90.

Globerman, S., & Shapiro, D. (2003). Governance infrastructure and US foreign direct investment.
      Journal of International Business Studies, 34(1), 19-39.

Goerzen, A., Sapp, S., & Delios, A. (2010). Investor response to environmental risk in foreign direct
      investment. Management International Review, 50, 683-708.

Guimaraes, P., Figueirdo, O., & Woodward, D. (2003). A tractable approach to the firm location
      decision problem. Review of Economics and Statistics, 85(1), 201-204.

Gurr, T. R. (1970). Why Men Rebel. Princeton, NJ: University Press Princeton.

Habib, M., & Zurawicki, L. (2002). Corruption and foreign direct investment. Journal of
      International Business Studies, 291-307.

Halbouty, M. (2001). Giant Oil and Gas Fields of the Decade 1990-1999: An Introduction. Retrieved
      Aug 19, 2014 from http://www.searchanddiscovery.com/documents/halbouty03/index.htm.

Head, K., Mayer, T. & Ries, J. (2010).The erosion of colonial trade linkages after independence.
      Journal of International Economics, 81(1):1-14

Henisz, W. J. (2000). The institutional environment for multinational investment. Journal of Law,
      Economics, and Organization, 16(2), 334-364.

Henisz, W. J., & Delios, A. (2001). Uncertainty, imitation, and plant location: Japanese multinational
      corporations, 1990‐1996. Administrative Science Quarterly, 46(3), 443-475

Hodler, R. (2006). The curse of natural resources in fractionalized countries. European Economic
      Review, 50(6), 1367-1386.


                                                  46 
 
 


Holburn, G. L., & Zelner, B. A. (2010). Political capabilities, policy risk, and international investment
      strategy: Evidence from the global electric power generation industry. Strategic Management
      Journal, 31(12), 1290-1315.

Ianchovichina, E. (2016) Economic costs of Post-Arab-Spring civil wars in the Middle East and North
      Africa. Strategic Sectors: Economy & Territory, Panorama, IEMed. Mediterranean Yearbook
      2016.

Kalyvas, S. N. (2014). Civil wars and organized crime: Insights from the intersection of two
      phenomena. Unpublished Paper.

Kaufman, D., Kraay, A., & Mastruzzi, M. (2010). The worldwide governance indicators:
      Methodology and analytical issues. World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 5430.

Kim, W. C., Hwang, P., & Burgers, W. P. (1993). Multinationals' diversification and the risk‐return
      trade‐off. Strategic Management Journal, 14(4), 275-286.

Knight, F. (1921). Risk, Uncertainty & Profits. Boston, MA: Hart, Schaffner & Marx.

Kobrin, S. (1981). Political risk: A review and recommendation. Journal of International Business.

Kobrin, S. J. (1984). Expropriation as an attempt to control foreign firms in LDCs: trends from 1960
      to 1979. International Studies Quarterly, 329-348.

Kogut, B., & Kulatilaka, N. (1994). Operating flexibility, global manufacturing, and the option value
      of a multinational network. Management Science, 40(1), 123-139.

Kolstad, I. & Wigg, A. (2009). It's the rents, stupid! The political economy of the resource curse.
      Energy Policy, 37(12), 5317-5325.

Krugman, P. (2000). Fire-sale FDI. In S. Edwards (ed.), Capital Flows and the Emerging Economies:
      Theory, Evidence, and Controversies. Cambridge, MA: NBER Books.

LaFree, G., & Dugan, L. (2007). Introducing the global terrorism database. Terrorism and Political
      Violence, 19(2), 181-204.

Lee, S. H., & Makhija, M. (2009). Flexibility in internationalization: is it valuable during an economic
      crisis?. Strategic Management Journal, 30(5), 537-555.

Li, J., & Rugman, A. M. (2007). Real options and the theory of foreign direct investment.
      International Business Review, 16(6), 687-712.




                                                   47 
 
 


Li, Q. (2006). Political violence and foreign direct investment. Research in global strategic
      management, 12, 225-249.

Li, Q. & Vashchilko, T. (2010). Dyadic military conflict, security alliances, and bilateral FDI flows.
      Journal of International Business Studies, 41 (5), 765-782.

Lieberman, M.B. & Montgomery, D.B. (1988). First-mover advantages. Strategic Management
      Journal, 9, 41-58.

Markusen, J. & Stähler, F. (2011). Endogenous market structure and foreign market entry. Review of
      World Economics, 147(2), 195-215.

Marshall, M.G. (2013). Major episodes of political violence (MEPV) and conflict regions. Vienna,
      VA: Center for Systemic Peace.

Mason, R., & Weeds, H. (2010). Investment, uncertainty and pre-emption. International Journal of
      Industrial Organization, 28(3), 278-287.

Mataloni, R. J. (2011). The structure of location choice for new US manufacturing investments in
      Asia-Pacific. Journal of World Business, 46(2), 154-165.

Méon, P. & Sekkat, K. (2012). FDI waves, waves of neglect of political risk. World Development,
      40(11), 2194-2205.

Meyer, K. E., Estrin, S., Bhaumik, S. K., & Peng, M. W. (2009). Institutions, resources, and entry
      strategies in emerging economies. Strategic Management Journal, 30(1), 61-80.

Meyer, K. E., & Peng, M. W. (2016). Theoretical foundations of emerging economy business
      research. Journal of International Business Studies, 47(1), 3-22.

Miller, K. D. (1992). A framework for integrated risk management in international business. Journal
      of International Business Studies, 23(2), 311-331.

Narula, R., & Bellak, C. (2009). EU enlargement and consequences for FDI-assisted industrial
      development. Transnational Corporations, 18(2), 69-90.

Nickell, S. (1981). Biases in dynamic models with fixed effects. Econometrica, 49(6), 1417-1426.

Nigh, D. (1985). The effect of political events on United States direct foreign investment: A pooled
      time-series cross-sectional analysis. Journal of International Business Studies, 16(1), 1-17.

Oetzel, J., & Getz, K. (2012). Why and how might firms respond strategically to violent conflict?.
      Journal of International Business Studies, 43(2), 166-186.


                                                  48 
 
 


Oetzel, J. M., & Oh, C. H. (2014). Learning to carry the cat by the tail: firm experience, disasters, and
      multinational subsidiary entry and expansion. Organization Science, 25(3), 732-756.

Oh, C. H., & Oetzel, J. (2016). Once bitten twice shy? Experience managing violent conflict risk and
      MNC subsidiary level investment and expansion. Strategic Management Journal.

Peng, M. W., Sun, S. L., Pinkham, B., & Chen, H. (2009). The Institution-Based View as a Third Leg
      for a Strategy Tripod. The Academy of Management Perspectives, 23(3), 63-81.

Peng, M. W., Wang, D. Y., & Jiang, Y. (2008). An institution-based view of international business
      strategy: A focus on emerging economies. Journal of International Business Studies, 39(5),
      920-936.

Pennings, E. & Sleuwaegen, L. (2004). The choice and timing of foreign direct investment under
      uncertainty. Economic modelling, 21(6), 1101-1115.

Pettersson, T., & Wallensteen, P. (2015). Armed conflicts, 1946–2014. Journal of Peace Research,
      52(4), 536-550.

Poelhekke, S., & van der Ploeg, F. (2013). Do Natural Resources Attract Nonresource FDI? Review of
      Economics and Statistics, 95(3), 1047-1065.

Powers, M., & Choi, S. W. (2012). Does transnational terrorism reduce foreign direct investment?
      Business-related versus non-business-related terrorism. Journal of Peace Research, 49(3), 407-
      422.

Qian, G. (1996). The effect of multinationality measures upon the risk-return performance of US
      firms. International Business Review, 5(3), 247-265.

Qian, G., & Li, J. (1998). Multinationality, global market diversification, and risk performance for the
      largest US firms. Journal of International Management, 4(2), 149-170.

Ramanujam, R., & Goodman, P. S. (2003). Latent errors and adverse organizational consequences: A
      conceptualization. Journal of Organizational Behavior, 24(7), 815-836.

Ramos, M.A. & Ashby, N.J. (2013). Heterogeneous firms response to organized crime: Evidence
      from FDI in Mexico. Journal of International Management, 19 (2), 176-194.

Reeb, D. M., Kwok, C. C., & Baek, H. Y. (1998). Systematic risk of the multinational corporation.
      Journal of International Business Studies, 29(2), 263-279.

Rivoli, P., & Salorio, E. (1996). Foreign direct investment and investment under uncertainty. Journal
      of International Business Studies, 335-357.

                                                    49 
 
 


Ross, M.L. (2004). What do we know about natural resources and civil war? Journal of Peace
      Research, 41(3), 337-356.

Rugman, A. M. (1976). Risk reduction by international diversification. Journal of International
      Business Studies, 7(2), 75-80.

Sachs, J.D., Werner, A.M. (1995). Natural resource abundance and economic growth. NBER Working
      Paper No 5398.

Schneider, F. & Frey, B.S. (1985). Economic and political determinants of foreign direct investment.
      World Development, 13(2), 161-175.

Smit, J.T.J. & Trigeorgis, L. (2004). Strategic Investment: Real Options and Games. Princeton, NJ:
      Princeton University Press.

Sundberg, R., & Melander, E. (2013). Introducing the UCDP georeferenced event dataset. Journal of
      Peace Research, 50(4), 523-532.

UNCTAD (2013). World Investment Report: 2013. New York, NY: United Nations Press.

Wheeler, D., & Mody, A. (1992). International investment location decisions: The case of US firms.
      Journal of international economics, 33(1), 57-76.

Wood, R. M., & Gibney, M. (2010). The Political Terror Scale (PTS): A re-introduction and a
      comparison to CIRI. Human Rights Quarterly, 32(2), 367-400.




                                                 50 
 
Appendix 1: Descriptive Statistics and Correlation matrix

      Variable                      Mean     S.D.    Min     Max     (1)     (2)     (3)     (4)       (5)       (6)       (7)       (8)       (9)       (10)    (11)    (12)    (13)   (14)   (15)   (16)
(1)   BRD (ln)                        1.28    2.50    0.00     9.92     1
(2)   Localized Conflict dummy        0.25    0.43    0.00     1.00 0.292    1
(3)   GDP (current US$, billions)   10.08    1.86    6.15    15.95 0.251 0.216        1
(4)   Regulatory Quality             -0.48   0.59    -2.26    0.69 -0.056 -0.032     0.315         1
(5)   Polity Index                    2.69   5.44    -9.00   10.00 -0.024 -0.073     0.033   0.494           1
(6)   Population (ln)                16.45   1.48    13.10   21.02   0.368   0.356   0.802   0.054 -0.034              1
(7)   Exchange rate (ln)              4.30   2.84    -0.35   16.02   0.121   0.069   -0.23 -0.376 -0.027 -0.009                  1
(8)   Exchange rate volatility        0.01   0.01     0.00    0.20   0.011   -0.02 -0.093    -0.07     0.049 -0.002        0.148           1
(9)   Inflation (annual %)            8.85   9.48 -25.31 103.82      0.015   0.034    0.01   -0.22     -0.08     0.036     0.125     0.055           1
(10) Control of Corruption           -0.62   0.46    -1.51    1.00 -0.075 -0.057     0.171   0.605     0.238 -0.076 -0.438 -0.085 -0.125                    1
(11) No. of Assassinations            0.15   1.10     0.00   26.00   0.176 -0.021    0.078   0.021     0.038     0.074     0.065 -0.005              0   0.004      1
(12) Political Terror Scale           3.11   0.86     1.00    5.00   0.482   0.215    0.27 -0.275 -0.222         0.511     0.179     0.077     0.109 -0.364      0.152      1
(13) Terrorism: Fatalities            1.59   2.25     0.00    8.62   0.712   0.304    0.39 -0.066 -0.013         0.548     0.146     0.044     0.052 -0.145      0.161   0.557      1
(14) Global Oil/Gas Reserves          0.36   0.98    -0.80    2.02   0.014   0.026   0.133   0.043     0.062     0.023     0.033 -0.057        0.024     0.014 -0.029 -0.054 0.008         1
(15) Oil/Gas Price Index            101.23 42.45     21.96 165.83    0.025    0.02   0.109    0.02     0.038     0.016     0.033 -0.054          0.1     0.014 -0.069 -0.007 0.051 0.516          1
(16) Major Oil/Gas discovery          0.08   0.27     0.00    1.00   0.031   0.109   0.391   -0.07 -0.167        0.338 -0.037 -0.036           0.032 -0.064      0.021   0.147 0.074 0.017 -0.002       1
Appendix 2: List of countries in the sample

Albania                         Ethiopia             Morocco
Algeria                         Gabon                Mozambique
Angola                          Gambia               Namibia
Armenia                         Georgia              Nepal
Azerbaijan                      Ghana                Nicaragua
Bangladesh                      Guatemala            Niger
Belarus                         Guinea               Nigeria
Bolivia                         Guinea-Bissau        Pakistan
Botswana                        Guyana               Panama
Brazil                          Haiti                Papua New Guinea
Bulgaria                        Honduras             Paraguay
Burkina Faso                    India                Peru
Burundi                         Indonesia            Philippines
Cambodia                        Iran, Islamic Rep.   Rwanda
Cameroon                        Iraq                 Senegal
Central African Republic        Jamaica              Sierra Leone
Chad                            Jordan               South Africa
China                           Kazakhstan           Sri Lanka
Colombia                        Kenya                Sudan (-2011)
Congo, Rep.                     Lebanon              Suriname
Congo, Dem. Rep.                Liberia              Syria
Costa Rica                      Libya                Tajikistan
Côte d'Ivoire                   Madagascar           Thailand
Cuba                            Malawi               Togo
Djibouti                        Malaysia             Tunisia
Dominican Republic              Mali                 Turkey
Ecuador                         Mauritania           Uganda
Egypt, Arab Rep.                Mexico               Ukraine
El Salvador                     Moldova              Uzbekistan
Eritrea                         Mongolia             Yemen
 


Appendix 3: Results of Fixed Effects (LSDV), Random Effects and pooled OLS models


                                                     Dependent Variable: Log greenfield FDI (in USD millions), LSDV Estimation
                                                     Total FDI                       Resource FDI                Non-Resource FDI
                                                         (1)                               (2)                          (3)
    BRDt-1 (ln)                                       -0.120+                            0.040                      -0.228***
                                                      (0.065)                           (0.093)                      (0.064)
    BRDt-1 (ln)*localized                              0.049                             -0.066                       0.208*
                                                      (0.091)                           (0.129)                      (0.088)
    Observations                                        707                               707                          707
    Number of Countries                                  90                                90                           90
    Economic Controls                                   Yes                               Yes                          Yes
    Country FE                                          Yes                               Yes                          Yes
    Year FE                                             Yes                               Yes                          Yes
                                                          Robust standard errors are in parentheses.
                                                         *** p<0.001, ** p<0.01, * p<0.05, +p<0.10




                                             Dependent Variable: Log greenfield FDI (in USD millions), Random Effects Estimation
                                                  Total FDI                       Resource FDI              Non-Resource FDI
                                                      (1)                               (2)                         (3)
    BRDt-1 (ln)                                    -0.089*                            -0.045                     -0.101*
                                                   (0.040)                           (0.047)                     (0.047)
    BRDt-1 (ln)*localized                          0.082+                              0.035                      0.111*
                                                   (0.045)                           (0.061)                     (0.052)
    Observations                                     707                                707                        707
    Number of Countries                               90                                90                          90
    Economic Controls                                Yes                                Yes                        Yes
    Country FE                                       Yes                                Yes                        Yes
    Year FE                                          Yes                                Yes                        Yes
                                                       Robust standard errors are in parentheses.
                                                      *** p<0.001, ** p<0.01, * p<0.05, +p<0.10




                                                Dependent Variable: Log greenfield FDI (in USD millions), Pooled OLS Estimation
                                                   Total FDI                      Resource FDI                 Non-Resource FDI
                                                       (1)                               (2)                          (3)
    BRDt-1 (ln)                                     -0.089*                            -0.045                      -0.101*
                                                    (0.040)                           (0.047)                      (0.047)
    BRDt-1 (ln)*localized                           0.082+                              0.035                       0.111*
                                                    (0.045)                           (0.061)                      (0.052)
    Observations                                      707                                707                         707
    Number of Countries                                90                                90                           90
    Economic Controls                                 Yes                                Yes                         Yes
    Country FE                                        Yes                                Yes                         Yes
    Year FE                                           Yes                                Yes                         Yes
                                                     Bootstrapped standard errors are in parentheses.
                                                       *** p<0.001, ** p<0.01, * p<0.05, +p<0.10




                                                            
1
   The literature on the determinants of political violence also remains inconclusive (for an overview see Blattman
& Miguel, 2010).
2
   Terrorism is the threatened or actual use of illegal force and violence to attain a political, economic, religious
or social goal through fear, coercion or intimidation (LaFree & Dugam, 2007). 
3
   Political assassinations are the murder or attempted murder of a high government official or politician with a
political aim (Banks, 2015). 


                                                                            53 
 
 


                                                                                                                                                                                          
4
   Some of the data on the size of investment are estimated by fDi Markets rather than directly observed.
Therefore, we repeated our estimations with the number of projects (ln) as the dependent variable. The results
were qualitatively the same as those reported here and are available from the authors on request.
5
   Only Pakistan and Mali experienced both a localized and non-localized conflict.
6
   Firms that were not matched to firms registered by Orbis or firms for which no data were available on the
number of employees were assumed to be small and hence undiversified. We also tested our hypotheses using
other operationalizations of the diversification variable and obtained results that were qualitatively the same.
These results are available from the authors on request.  
7
   Data on firm-level variables other than multinationality were limited, even more so than the data on the
geographic location of subsidiaries. 
8
   Following the literature, exchange rate volatility is operationalized as the standard deviation of the first
difference of the natural logarithm of daily bilateral exchange rates vis-a-vis the U.S. dollar. 
9
   Standard errors of the long run effect are obtained by using the delta method for non-linear combinations of
estimates.
10
    The results of the non-corrected LSDV are reported in the appendix with a random effects and pooled OLS
model. All support our hypotheses (1), (3) and (4).
11
    In an additional analysis, we excluded the level and volatility of exchange rates because the inclusion of these
variables reduced the size of our sample by 25%. The results were qualitatively the same as those reported herein
and are available from the authors on request.  
12
    For the analysis in Table 1 we show that the Nickell bias is limited and we assume that the bias remains
negligible in the models distinguishing between diversified and undiversified MNEs. 
13
    We estimate separate Heckman regressions for resource-related and non-resource-related FDI flows instead of
including interaction effects to avoid the issue of interpretation concerning three-way interactions. In addition,
the regression results in Table 1 show that also the control variables behave differently for the two sectors.
Finally, many of the firms in the resource sector also make greenfield FDI in the non-resource sector. 




                                                                                          54 
 
