                                                      WPS7907


Policy Research Working Paper                        7907




              CPI Bias and Its Implications
             for Poverty Reduction in Africa
                                Andrew Dabalen
                                   Isis Gaddis
                               Nga Thi Viet Nguyen




Poverty and Equity Global Practice Group
December 2016
Policy Research Working Paper 7907


  Abstract
  International poverty estimates for countries in Africa com-                       this study, poverty reduction may be understated because
  monly rely on national consumer price indexes to adjust                            of consumer price index bias. With correction of con-
  trends in nominal consumption over time for changes in the                         sumer price index bias, poverty in these countries could
  cost of living. However, the consumer price index is subject                       fall between 0.8 and 5.7 percentage points per year faster
  to various types of measurement bias. This paper uses Engel                        than currently thought. For two countries, however, the
  curve estimations to assess bias in the consumer price index                       paper finds the opposite trend. There is no statistically
  and its implications for estimated poverty trends. The results                     significant change in poverty patterns after adjusting for
  suggest that in 11 of 16 Sub-Saharan African countries in                          consumer price index bias for the other three countries.




  This paper is a product of the Poverty and Equity Global Practice Group and a background paper to the Poverty in a Rising
  Africa report. It is part of a larger effort by the World Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution
  to development policy discussions around the world. Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://
  econ.worldbank.org. The authors may be contacted at nnguyen3@worldbank.org.




          The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
          issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
          names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
          of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
          its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                        Produced by the Research Support Team
           CPI Bias and Its Implications for Poverty Reduction in Africa*

                          Andrew Dabalen, Isis Gaddis, Nga Thi Viet Nguyen**




JEL classification: E30, E31, I32, O12, C82
Keywords: inflation, CPI bias, Africa, poverty, Engel curve




* We thank Kathleen Beegle, Jennifer Cisse, Luc Christiaensen, Jed Friedman, John Gibson, as well as participants at
the March 2016 African Development Conference, Centre for the Study of African Economies, Oxford University
and the May 2016 Inspirational Breakfast Meeting of the World Bank’s Poverty and Equity Global Practice Africa
team for comments. We are also grateful to the national statistical offices of the countries used in this study for sharing
the price data. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this work do not necessarily reflect the
views of The World Bank, its Board of Executive Directors, or the governments they represent. Of course, all errors
are our own.

** The authors are with the World Bank. Corresponding author: Nga Thi Viet Nguyen (nnguyen3@worldbank.org).
    I.       Introduction


Consumer price indexes (CPIs) play an important role for our understanding of poverty trends in
Africa. This is because international poverty estimates rely on national CPIs to express nominal
consumption estimates from household surveys in real terms and the base year of the international
poverty line.1 However, there are concerns that CPIs may not always adequately reflect changes
in the cost of living. Recent studies suggest that consumption growth and poverty reduction in
Sub-Saharan Africa in the recent past may have been stronger than widely believed (see Kenny
2011; Young 2012; Pinkovskiy and Sala-i-Martin 2014), though others have challenged this notion
(see Harttgen, Klasen and Vollmer 2013). Underlying these differing views about levels and trends
in poverty and living standards in the region are often concerns about missing or inaccurate data,
including concerns about the accuracy of measured inflation (see Beegle et al 2016).

There are several reasons why CPIs may not correctly measure changes in the cost of living. The
most well-known causes, which have received considerable attention in the United States and other
developed countries, are commodity substitution bias, outlet substitution bias, quality change bias
and bias from the introduction of new goods (Schultze and Mackie 2002; Hausman 2003).
Additional caveats arise for CPIs in Sub-Saharan Africa, due to weaknesses in country statistical
systems, and when CPIs are used specifically for the purpose of measuring poverty trends (Beegle
et al 2016). These include concerns about the representativeness of CPI weights for the poor (see
Günther and Grimm 2007) and urban bias of the underlying input data (see Gaddis 2016).

The Engel curve method introduced by Costa (2001) and Hamilton (2001) attempts to address
some of the above biases, mostly commodity and outlet substitution bias. Engel’s law arises from
the observation that the food budget share in household consumption declines with the increase in
real household income. This suggests that movements in the food budget share over time can reveal
changes in real incomes, conditional on changes in relative prices and household characteristics.
As a corollary, among demographically similar households at the same level of real income,
differences in food budget shares at different points in time might signal mismeasurement of the
true change in cost of living.


1
 The current international poverty line stands at $1.90 per person per day in 2011 international dollars. See PovcalNet
for the latest international poverty estimates: http://iresearch.worldbank.org/PovcalNet/.

                                                                                                                     2
This paper studies the direction and magnitude of CPI bias for 16 Sub-Saharan African countries
using the Engel curve method and estimates the implications of this bias on the measured change
in the incidence of poverty. This Engel curve method has been applied to different countries in the
world, such as Australia (Barrett and Brzozowski 2010), Brazil and Mexico (De Carvalho Filho
and Chamon 2012), Canada (Beatty and Larsen 2005), China (Chamon and De Carvalho Filho
2014; Nakamura, Steinsson and Liu 2016), Indonesia (Olivia and Gibson 2013), the Republic of
Korea (Chung, Gibson and Kim 2010), New Zealand (Gibson and Scobie 2010), Norway (Larsen
2007), the Russian Federation (Gibson, Stillman, and Le 2008), and the United States (Costa 2001,
Hamilton 2001, Logan 2009). However, to the best of our knowledge, no such analysis exists for
countries in Africa. The contribution of this paper is to provide comparable estimates of CPI bias
for 16 countries in Sub-Saharan Africa to further our understanding of price changes and their
implications on poverty trends in the region.

Using comparable consumption data from 16 Sub-Saharan African countries, namely, Burkina
Faso, Cameroon, Côte d’Ivoire, Democratic Republic of Congo, Ethiopia, Ghana, Madagascar,
Mauritius, Mozambique, Nigeria, Rwanda, Senegal, South Africa, Tanzania, Togo, and Uganda,
combined with monthly food, non-food, and overall CPI data from the respective national
statistical offices (NSOs) our results suggest that the official CPIs mostly overestimate increases
in the cost of living. In the 13 countries where our results indicate that CPIs overestimate inflation,
the average annual CPI upward bias ranges from 0.7 percent in Cameroon to 43.9 percent in
Nigeria. Three countries, Burkina Faso, Ghana, and Uganda, experience a negative bias between
-8.9 percent a year in Burkina Faso and -5.8 percent in Ghana. These estimates of CPI bias are
statistically significant, except for Cameroon and Ghana.

Armed with these estimates of bias in national CPIs, we study the implications for measured trends
in international poverty. Correcting for CPI bias, poverty falls significantly faster than suggested
by current international poverty numbers in 11 countries. Based on our estimates, the difference
in poverty reduction resulting from CPI-bias adjustment could be as large as -5.7 percentage points
per year in Tanzania between 2008 and 2012. Only two countries, Uganda and Ghana, experience
significantly slower poverty reduction rates with the correction of CPI bias. The change in poverty
trend due to CPI bias correction is statistically insignificant in Mauritius, Cameroon, and Burkina
Faso. While we advise to interpret individual country estimates and the magnitude of point


                                                                                                     3
estimates with a degree of caution, this is suggestive evidence that African countries may have
been more successful in reducing poverty than currently thought.

The paper is organized as follows. Section II explains why CPIs in Sub-Saharan Africa may be
biased and outlines the Engel curve method. Section III describes our empirical methodology,
while section IV describes the data sources. Section V shows estimates of the CPI bias and
conducts several robustness checks. Section VI assesses the implications of CPI bias for measured
poverty trends. Section VII concludes.




    II.      Literature review

CPI bias in Sub-Saharan Africa

The CPI measures the rate at which the prices of a specific basket of goods and services change
from month to month. To compute the CPI, NSOs require price and quantity data for a variety of
goods and services. Virtually all NSOs in Sub-Saharan Africa run regular monthly consumer price
data collection programs, which form the basis for computing the CPI. In addition, estimating a
weighted average of price changes relative to a base period requires data on consumed quantities
as budget shares. These quantity data typically come from nationally representative household
budget surveys (HBS), which most NSOs field in irregular intervals (see Beegle et al 2016).2

Most NSOs use a fixed-base Laspeyres-type index and staged aggregation approach to compute
the CPI (see United Nations 2009). In a first step, individual price quotations are combined to
elementary aggregates that represent broad goods categories purchased by consumers in a specific
locality and type of outlet. In the second step, elementary aggregates are combined to commodity-
group indexes (for example, food and beverages, apparel, transport) and ultimately the all-item
CPI using weights (budget shares) estimated from the HBS for a base period.

It is well-known that Laspeyres indexes tend to overstate changes in the cost of living. This is
because they hold quantities fixed in the base period and disregard consumer substitution behavior



2
 The term HBS is used to denote national household surveys collecting consumption data, this includes a range of
surveys that go by different labels, e.g. Living Standards Survey, Income, Expenditure and Consumption Survey, etc.

                                                                                                                 4
towards goods that have become relatively cheaper over time (Deaton 1998). This commodity
substitution bias may be particularly relevant in Sub-Saharan Africa, where many countries lack
regular HBS programs. According to metadata of the International Labour Organization (ILO
2013), which depict national practices in computing CPIs as of July 2012, 13 percent of the
population in the region was living in countries in which the baskets were based on data from the
1990s, and an additional 23 percent was living in countries were basket weights dated between
2000 and 2004 (see Beegle et al 2016).

A related issue is that CPIs often do not reflect differences in the prices of the same product
purchased at various outlets if distribution channels change over time. This is referred to as the
outlet substitution bias. In many African countries, for example, the popularity of supermarkets
that offer discounted prices has been growing, at least in urban areas. Because the CPI does not
account for the shift among consumers towards these more economic retail outlets (for items
previously purchased in traditional stores), it overstates actual inflation.

CPIs also do not account for changes in the quality of existing goods and services in the basket,
which leads to a quality change bias. Over the years, as technology has evolved, many products
have exhibited dramatic improvements (for example, greater functionality or safety, greater
nutritional value, and so on). However, it is typically very difficult to separate out how much of
the price change recorded for a specific product is associated with a change in quality and how
much is associated with actual inflation.3 Similarly, it often takes many years until newly available
goods and services are introduced into the CPI computation, the new product bias. Because the
CPI fails to capture the benefits to consumers from greater availability of products and brands,
changes in the cost of living are typically overstated.

The CPIs in many countries in Sub-Saharan Africa suffer from additional sources of bias and
measurement error. An important example is urban bias. Because a number of NSOs in the region
collect price data solely in urban areas, their CPIs reflect changes in prices experienced by the
urban population, in some cases, the population living in the capital city only. For example,


3
  NSOs in developed countries often use splicing procedures, which attribute a certain fraction of the overall price
change to quality, or rely on hedonic estimation techniques, which explicitly model quality. Nonetheless, there is
evidence that some degree of quality improvement is typically not captured and that quality change bias often leads
to an overestimation of inflation (Boskin et al 1996, 1998; Hausman 2003).

                                                                                                                  5
Tanzania’s national CPI reflects the prices surveyed in urban areas in 21 regions across the country.
Meanwhile, Madagascar’s national CPI reflects the prices of goods and services in the capital,
Antananarivo, only. Similarly, before 2011, the National Statistical Institute of the Democratic
Republic of Congo did not collect prices in any administrative province except Kinshasa, the
capital. When price data in rural areas are not available, CPIs are based on urban price data only,
with the (arguably strong) assumption that urban and rural prices move in parallel. What is more,
even when HBS data are nationally representative, some countries compute budget shares for
urban households only. In Tanzania, for instance, CPI weights until 2009 were based on
consumption patterns among urban households in the 2001 HBS. In 2010, as part of the process
of rebasing the index to the HBS 2007, the reference population for the weights was broadened to
include rural households (Tanzania NBS 2010).

Finally, for the purpose of poverty analysis, concerns arise over the fact that the weights are not
representative of poor households’ consumption patterns. CPI weights are computed as the
consumption shares of an aggregate reference population, which attaches a weight to each
household in proportion to its total expenditures. Because of this plutocratic bias, CPI weights
reflect consumption patterns of households at the upper end of the distribution (Nicholson 1975,
Deaton 1998). In times of changing relative prices, such as during food price shocks, inflation
measured by the CPI can then differ from the inflation experienced by poorer population groups
(Günther and Grimm 2007).

The Engel curve method

The Engel curve method attempts to address some of the above biases, mostly the commodity and
outlet substitution biases.4 The method takes as a starting point Engel’s Law and the idea that
movements in food budget shares that cannot be explained by changes in relative prices and
household characteristics reveal changes in real incomes. As a result, any systematic difference
over time in the food budget shares of demographically similar households at the same level of
real income (CPI deflated) and facing the same relative prices is assumed to reflect
mismeasurement in the CPI. This Engel curve method was first introduced by Costa (2001) and



4
 According to Hausman (2003), the method only accounts for commodity and outlet substitution bias. Beatty and
Larsen (2005), however, argue that it also captures some quality change bias arising from increased durability.

                                                                                                             6
Hamilton (2001). Using nationwide consumption surveys between 1888 and 1994 in the United
States, Costa (2001) finds that the CPI underestimated increases in the true cost of living until
1919, but consistently overestimated them thereafter. Hamilton (2001), using a different set of
data, the Panel Study of Income Dynamics between 1974 and 1991 in the United States, finds a
similar trend. In particular, he estimates the annual CPI upward bias at approximately three
percentage points between 1974 and 1981 and slightly less than one percentage points between
1981 and 1991. The results of Costa (2001) and Hamilton (2001) are also broadly consistent with
the findings of Boskin et al (1996, 1998), who calculate the contribution of each source of CPI
bias and conclude that between 1979 and 1995 the United States CPI exhibited an upward bias of
1.1 percentage points per year.

Since then the Engel curve method has been applied to various other countries. In two papers
referring to Canada, Beatty and Larsen (2005) and Brzozowski (2006) find that the Canadian CPI
overstated changes in the cost of living among specific demographic groups. Similarly, Barrett and
Brzozowski (2010), in a study on the Australian CPI, show there was cumulative upward bias of
34 percent between 1975 and 2003, although the magnitude of the bias varies by household type
and time period considered. In New Zealand, Gibson and Scobie (2010) argue that the country’s
CPI overestimated inflation by an amount similar to the bias in the United States. In contrast,
Larsen (2007), following the same method but using data on Norway in the 1990s, concludes that
the CPI understated the increase in the cost of living.

More recently, the application of the Engel curve method has been extended to developing and
transitional economies in Asia and Latin America. De Carvalho Filho and Chamon (2012) argue
that post-reform growth in real household incomes in Brazil and Mexico was underestimated
because the CPI overstated the increase in the cost of living. Gibson, Stillman, and Le (2008)
obtain similar results using data from Russia during the transition period between 1992 and 2001.
In Indonesia, Olivia and Gibson (2013) find that the CPI bias was negative during the 1997–98
financial crisis, but consistently positive since 2000. In China, Nakamura, Steinsson and Liu
(2016) find that official inflation rates show less variability over time than actual inflation rates.

While Engel curve estimates have become a widely used methodology to cross-triangulate official
inflation trends, the method is not without limitations. Its major weakness is that any drift in the
Engel curve that cannot be explained by the covariates in the regression model is attributed entirely

                                                                                                         7
to CPI bias. This assumption may not hold if there are additional, unobserved forces that shift the
Engel curve - such as changes in preferences, or variations in the way consumption data are
collected. Analysis in Gibson, Le and Kim (2016), for example, suggests that the method does not
perform well in a spatial context. A similar concern is that even though the method controls for
changes in household characteristics, biases can arise from assumptions about the nature of
relationship between these covariates and the food share. For example, Logan (2009) argues that
the effect of household size on demand varies over time and that this is not captured by the standard
Engel curve estimation because of the way demographic effects are modeled. Using household
survey data on the United States from 1888 and 1935, Logan (2009) finds that when changing
household size effects are taken into account, estimates of CPI bias are reduced by 25 percent.5

A related critique is that Engel curve estimates conflate various types of CPI bias and are hence
difficult to interpret. As noted earlier, Engel curve estimations are used primarily to tackle biases
arising from commodity and outlet substitution. However, as argued by Beatty and Crossley
(2012), the method may conflate the above form of CPI bias with inflation inequality across the
distribution (plutocratic bias). This may be problematic, in particular, if Engel curve estimations
are used to make statements and recommendations referring to the quality of the CPI and its
methodology. Plutocratic weights, for example, are preferred for some purposes of the CPI, such
as the deflation of economic aggregates (Pollak 1998) and are hence (at least partly) an explicit
component in the design of the index.6




      III.     Empirical methodology
Our starting point is the Leser-Working form of the food Engel curve, which is defined as a linear
function of the log of real total expenditure and a relative price term, as follows:

                wi , j ,t     ln PF , j ,t  ln PN , j ,t    ln Yi , j ,t  ln Pj ,t   X   ui , j ,t    (1)



5
    However, it is unclear whether the household size correction decomposes or modifies CPI bias estimates.
6
  It is not entirely clear how important plutocratic bias is in practice. Case studies show that distributional differences
in inflation can be significant in times of rapidly changing prices, e.g. after a drought or other supply side shock
(Günther and Grimm 2007). Studies for the US, on the other hand, often find little systematic inequality in inflation
across the income distribution (Kokoski 2000; Kaplan and Schulhofer-Wohl 2016).

                                                                                                                         8
where wi,j,t is the food budget share of household i in region j at time t; PF,j,t is the true price of
food items; PN,j,t is the true price of non-food items; and Pj,t is the true price of all goods, which is
a weighted average of PF,j,t and PN,j,t; Yi , j ,t is total household expenditure; X is a vector of

individual household characteristics, and u is the residual.

Hamilton (2001) decomposes any observed price level, Pj ,t , into the true price level and an error

term, under the assumption that the error term is uniform across region j, as follows:

                                           ln Pj ,t  ln P j , 0  ln 1   j ,t   ln 1  E t  .                         (2)


where Pj ,0 is the true price at time 0; ,j,t is the cumulative percent increase in the CPI from year

0 to year t; and Et is the cumulative percent measurement error in the CPI from year 0 to year t.

Inserting equation (2) into equation (1) leads to the following:

          wi , j ,t     ln1   F , j ,t   ln1   N , j ,t )    ln Yi , j ,t  ln1   j ,t   X  
           ln1  E F ,t   ln1  E N ,t    ln1  Et    ln PF , j ,0  ln PN , j ,0    ln Pj ,0  ui , j ,t   (3)

If cross-sectional household consumption data and a cross-sectional CPI for food, non-food and
all items over the entire sample period are available, the following equation can be estimated:

                      ˆ   ln 1     ln 1  
         wi , j ,t                  F , j ,t       N , j ,t    ln Yi ,t  ln 1   t 
                      T              J
          X     t Dt    j D j  ui , j ,t .                                                                          ( 4)
                      t 1          t 1


where Dt is a dummy variable equal to 1 in year t; Dj is a dummy equal to 1 for region j; and ˆ is

the constant term from equations (1) and (3), plus the coefficients of the omitted time and the
omitted region dummies.

The time dummy variables,  t , are used to measure the CPI bias as follows:

                                  t   ln1  E F ,t   ln1  E N ,t    ln1  Et                                   (5)




                                                                                                                                 9
                                                            	            ,
If the relative bias in food and non-food prices,                             , is constant throughout the sample
                                                            	            ,

period, the CPI bias for all goods, ln(1+Et), can be identified by:


                                ln 1                                         																																																										 6
                                                        1
                                                    1           1

where α is the food share in the CPI.

Assuming that either the CPI bias in food and non-food prices is equal, r=1, or that changes in the
relative price ratio of food to non-food items do not affect the food budget share, γ=0, equation (6)
can be re-written as follows:


                                         ln 1                       																																																																		 7


However, if (1-r) and γ are different from zero, then (7) gives a biased estimate of the CPI bias.
The bias is positive if (1-r) and γ are of the same sign and negative otherwise.

From (7), the cumulative percent CPI bias between time t and time 0 can be calculated as:


                                                    1   exp                   																																																								 8


Following Barrett and Brzozowski (2010), the correction factor that multiplies the measured CPI
in time t to give the true cost of living index in time t is given by:


                                                    1                   exp                  																																									 9


If data on the cross-sectional variation in relative food prices are not available, which is often the
case in Sub-Saharan African countries, equation (4) cannot be estimated because the coefficient
 for the relative prices of food and non-food items in each region j cannot be identified. Using
temporal movements in the national price index for food items relative to non-food items is equally
not possible because this period-to-period variation is perfectly correlated with the time dummy
variables, Dt . However, it is possible to estimate a simple model of the food budget share:


                                                                                                                                      10
                                                                                 
                                                                                              T      J
                                                 ˆ   ln Y  ln1     X   D   D  u
                                  wi , j ,t              i , j ,t   t          t t  j j i,t
                                                                                              t 1   j 1
                                                                                                                                      (10)


In this case, the coefficient  t of the time dummy variables, Dt , measures both the CPI bias in
equation (4) and the effect on the budget share of the intertemporal variation in the observed prices
for food relative to non-food items. Thus, the cumulative percent CPI bias at time t is given by:


                                              t   
                                                      ln 
                                                         1   F ,t  ln 
                                                                          1   N ,t 
                             Biast  1  exp                                                                                        (11)
                                                                                    

where      ,   and       ,   are the cumulative percent increase in the food and non-food CPI, respectively,
between time 0 and time t, and  must be obtained from outside the estimated parameters in
equation (4) as described in section VI.7

To estimate the implication of CPI bias for poverty in time t in a given country c, we revise the
international poverty line, currently $1.90 per person per day in 2011 dollars, by adjusting for CPI
bias estimated according to equation (8) or equation (11). First, we convert the international
poverty line to local currency units in time 0, that is the year of the sample period closest to 2011
(the year that anchors the poverty line and Purchasing Power Parity exchange) for a given country
c. Next, we update the poverty line in time t, that is the other year of the sample period, using the
correction factor described in equation (9).8 The adjusted poverty line in time t for country c is
then 9:

                                                                               1.90       ,
                                                   ,                                                         																												 12
                                                                   1   Π   ,     1    Π   ,              ,




7
  Without cross-sectional CPI data, , and , are constants.
8
  Time 0 could be the beginning year or the end year of the sample period. For example, for Rwanda 2005-2010, time
0 is 2010. In the case of Nigeria 2011-2013, time 0 is 2011.
9
  Equation (12) applies to most countries in our sample where time 0 is earlier than 2011. In some special cases where
time t < 2011 < time 0 (Congo, D.R. 2004-2012, Ghana 2005-2012, Mauritius 2006-2012, Tanzania 2008-2012,
Tanzania 2010-2012, and Uganda 2009-2012), the adjusted poverty line is calculated as:
                              .            ,       ,
                     ,                                         .
                                       ,               ,
In a special case where 2011 < time 0 < time t (Nigeria 2011-2013), the adjusted poverty line is calculated as:
                    ,   1.90      ,    1 Π,          1 Π,                 , .

                                                                                                                                         11
where             ,     is the Purchasing Power Parity conversion factor in year 2011 for country c;
Π    ,         is the cumulative percent increase in the CPI from time 0 to year 2011; Π                ,   is the
cumulative percent increase in the CPI from time 0 to time t; and                           ,   is the correction
factor for country c in time t, estimated from equation (9).




         IV.     Data

The Engel curve method requires detailed monthly CPI data on food and non-food items at regional
levels and comparable consumption surveys in multiple years. However, data in Sub-Saharan
Africa are challenging in terms of availability and quality. Of the 48 countries in the region, only
half has two or more HBSs since the early 2000s (Beegle et al 2016). Among these, only a limited
number collect consumption data using the same (or at least similar) survey design and
methodology, thereby rendering the consumption aggregates comparable over time. Obtaining
detailed CPI series adds another layer of difficulty. In some of the countries with comparable
HBSs, detailed CPI data are either unavailable during the periods of interest or the continuity of
the series has been disrupted due to political unrest or other factors, as, for example, in the case
for Sierra Leone.

For the purpose of this study we obtain household consumption and CPI data for 16 countries in
Sub-Saharan Africa that account for 70 percent of the regional population.10 These countries are
Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Côte d’Ivoire, Democratic Republic of Congo, Ethiopia, Ghana,
Madagascar, Mauritius, Mozambique, Nigeria, Rwanda, Senegal, South Africa, Tanzania, Togo,
and Uganda. For Nigeria and Tanzania we use panel data from the Living Standards Measurement
Study–Integrated Survey on Agriculture (LSMS-ISA), partly to address quality concerns with
other consumption surveys (World Bank 2014, 2015).11 Only household survey series considered
as comparable over time (in terms of the broad data collection method for consumption data and




10
  We use consumption rather than income because it is generally thought to be a better measure of permanent income
and is also easier to measure in economies with large agricultural or other informal sectors (see Deaton 1997).
11
     See LSMS-ISA (database), World Bank, Washington, DC, http://go.worldbank.org/BCLXW38HY0.

                                                                                                               12
seasonality) are included in the analysis (see Beegle et al 2016). Table 1 provides a list of the
microdata used in this study.

We obtain monthly national CPI data disaggregated into food and non-food components from the
respective NSOs. In terms of geographical coverage, all countries, except Nigeria and Rwanda,
only collect prices in urban areas. In other words, the national CPIs in these countries reflect the
prices paid by urban residents. Conversely, the national CPIs in Nigeria and Rwanda reflect both
rural and urban prices. In terms of the availability of cross-sectional CPIs, regional CPI data are
available for only four countries – Ethiopia, Ghana, Mozambique, and Uganda. These data allow
us to estimate the CPI-bias based on equation (4). The remaining countries only have national
CPIs, and we are therefore required to apply equation (10) for the CPI-bias estimation. Table 2
lists the CPI data used in this study.

Detailed expenditure data are aggregated into two broad groups: food expenditure and total
expenditure. Food expenditure is defined as expenditure for the consumption of food, nonalcoholic
beverages, alcoholic beverages, and tobacco from own-production, market purchase, and gifts.
Total household expenditure includes spending on food and non-food expenditure, such as
clothing, housing, household furnishings and equipment, health and personal care, education,
transport, communications, recreation, and miscellaneous goods and services. We then merge the
consumption data for each household with the monthly CPI during the period when the household
was interviewed. This allows for temporal variations in inflation patterns.

We use several criteria to select our analysis sample. First, to minimize the effect of extreme
outliers, which may indicate data quality problems, households with a food budget share of less
than 2 percent or greater than 95 percent are excluded. Second, to render household demographics
more homogeneous, we exclude households in which the household head is younger than 21 years
of age or older than 75 years of age. These restrictions are similar to those used by Costa (2001),
Gibson, Stillman, and Le (2008) and Hamilton (2001). Finally, rural households in all the countries
in this study, except Mauritius, Nigeria, and Rwanda, are dropped because the CPIs in these
countries reflect prices faced by urban populations only.12 Because of this, our estimates of CPI


12
  While the national CPIs for Mauritius reflects urban prices only, the Household Budget Survey for Mauritius does
not identify households’ location – either urban or rural areas. Therefore, all households must be included for the
estimates of CPI bias in the case of Mauritius.

                                                                                                                13
bias should be interpreted as the wedge between CPI inflation and the change in the cost of living
experienced by the average urban household. This difference may reflect substitution bias of the
CPI, but also some degree of inflation inequality across the distribution.

Engel’s Law postulates a negative relationship between a household’s food budget share and real
income for any homogeneous population group facing the same relative prices. Besides our main
explanatory variables – CPI-deflated total consumption, relative food prices, regional and time
dummy variables – we also control for key characteristics of the household (e.g. household size
and the share of children) and its head (e.g. age, gender, education, and marital status).




       V.       Estimation results

Table 3 provides summary statistics of the data used in our analysis. As stated in Engel’s Law, the
average household food share falls as income rises. Thus, we can see that the average budget share
devoted to food could be as low as 30 percent in upper middle income countries such as Mauritius
and as high as 74 percent in low income countries such as Madagascar.

To show how the food budget share changes over time, the averages of the variables in different
survey periods are reported for each country. All countries except Ghana experienced a decline in
the share of food in total consumption between the first and the last survey periods. According to
Engel’s Law, this drop in the budget share of food may indicate improved living standards.

Figure 1 plots Engel curves for 16 Sub-Saharan African countries. The graphs are based on
households with a food budget share between 2 percent and 95 percent of total consumption and
with household heads aged between 21 and 75 years. The solid (reference) lines are the Engel
curves of the oldest survey in each country. The dotted lines are the Engel curves for subsequent
survey years.13

All countries in our study show movements of the Engel curves over time. In 13 of the 16 countries,
namely, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Côte d’Ivoire, Democratic Republic of Congo, Ethiopia,
Madagascar, Mauritius, Nigeria, Rwanda, Senegal, South Africa, Tanzania, and Togo, the dotted


13
     These are bivariate graphs without any controls.

                                                                                                14
curve lies below the solid reference curve. This indicates that Engel curves have drifted to the left,
a signal that the national CPIs in these countries may overstate the increase in cost of living. In
Ghana, Mozambique, and Uganda the direction of the CPI bias does not seem consistent across
the income distribution. In Ghana, for example, the CPIs appear downward-biased among those
people at the lower end of the income distribution, while they appear biased in the opposite
direction among people at the upper end of the distribution. The pattern is reversed in Mozambique
and Uganda.

While the illustrations in Figure 1 show a clear drift in the Engel curves for the countries in our
study, movements in food budget shares could also be attributed to changes in relative prices,
household characteristics, etc. Thus, we use regression analysis to condition on these potentially
confounding influences and assess the actual drift in the food Engel curve.

Table 4 reports the results of ordinary least square (OLS) regressions of the Engel functions. All
regressions are weighted by population-level sampling weights (as discussed later in this section,
unweighted regressions are run as a robustness check). As explained in section III, we apply
equation (4) to Ethiopia, Ghana, Mozambique, and Uganda (linked to the availability of cross-
sectional price data) and equation (10) to the rest of the countries. We also limit our sample to
urban populations for all countries except Mauritius, Nigeria, and Rwanda.

Across all countries, the estimated regression coefficients for CPI-deflated total expenditure are
negative and statistically significant. These results are consistent with Engel’s Law that food
budget shares decline as households become richer. The coefficients of the various household
characteristics show that, in general, food shares are higher among households of larger size, with
younger children, and with heads who are married or older. Food shares decline among households
in which the heads have higher educational attainment. There is no clear pattern across countries
between the gender of the household head and the food budget share.

The signs of the time dummy variables in Table 4 are consistent with the shifts in the food Engel
curves illustrated in Figure 1. They suggest a drift to the left in the food Engel curves in Cameroon,
Côte d’Ivoire, the Democratic Republic of Congo, Ethiopia, Madagascar, Mauritius, Mozambique,
Nigeria, Rwanda, Senegal, South Africa, Tanzania, and Togo. This drift suggests that growth in
real consumption is underestimated. Meanwhile, the food Engel curves in Burkina Faso, Ghana,


                                                                                                   15
and Uganda seem to shift to the right, suggesting an overestimation of real consumption growth.
The coefficients of the time dummies for Burkina Faso and Cameroon are not statistically
significant at the 5 percent level.

Table A1 in appendix 1 shows the results of two robustness checks. The first is to add to the
existing model the quadratic log of CPI-deflated total consumption to account for Engel curvature
– that is non-linearity in the relationship between a household’s real income and its food share.
This concept is first introduced by Costa (2001) as an extension of Hamilton’s work. The second
robustness check is to run unweighted regressions, because there has been some debate about the
use of sampling weights in regression analysis (see Deaton 1997). Both specifications show similar
results for the time dummy variables similar to our main specification in Table 4 (for ease of
comparison, repeated in Table A1 under the column OLS). The only exception is Mozambique,
where the sign of the time dummy coefficient changes when sampling weights are disregarded,
which suggests significant heterogeneity in region-specific bias in this country. Further
investigation reveals that the observed results are mostly driven by the bias in urban cities in
Namputa province, the most populous province in the country which accounts for approximately
20 percent of the weighted population. In fact, if we drop Namputa from our sample, the regression
results are similar regardless of whether sampling weights are used.

Finally, to obtain estimates of CPI bias for the 12 countries that lack cross-sectional CPI data, it
was necessary to estimate  in order to remove any effect of differential inflation rates on food
and non-food items in the budget share of food. Appendix 2 explains these calculations in detail.

Table 5 presents estimates of  for all countries that do not have cross-sectional CPI data. Overall,
 is estimated to range from 0.17 to 0.24, compared with the values of  = 0.044 used by Olivia
and Gibson (2013) for Indonesia, 0.109 by Gibson and Scobie (2010) for New Zealand, 0.19 by
Gibson, Stillman, and Le (2008) for Russia, and 0.037 used by Hamilton (2001) for the United
States. Because we do not have sufficient data to measure  for the Democratic Republic of Congo,
we assign the country the regional average of 0.22.

Finally, columns 1, 2 and 3 in Table 6 show the cumulative CPI bias, its standard error and p-value
computed using the delta method for the 16 countries in our study. We assume that in each country


                                                                                                  16
this bias is constant over the sample period to calculate the average annual bias presented in column
4. The correction factor, that is the CPI multiplier to estimate true inflation, is shown in column 5.

The CPI bias is positive and statistically significant for the sample periods in 12 of the 16 countries
in our study, namely, Côte d’Ivoire, the Democratic Republic of Congo, Ethiopia, Madagascar,
Mauritius, Mozambique, Nigeria, Rwanda, Senegal, South Africa, Tanzania, and Togo. In these
countries, households allocated their budget share on food as if their true cost of living was
increasing more slowly than the rate indicated by the CPI. The upward bias ranges from 2.8 percent
a year in Ethiopia between 2004 and 2010 to 43.9 percent a year in Nigeria between 2011 and
2013. Meanwhile, two countries experienced the opposite trend in the CPI bias, ranging from -7.5
percent a year in Uganda between 2009 and 2012 to -8.9 percent a year in Burkina Faso between
1998 and 2003. The bias is not statistically significant in Cameroon and Ghana.




     VI.     Implications of CPI bias for poverty trends in Africa

Consumer price indexes (CPIs) play a pivotal role for the measurement of poverty trends in Sub-
Saharan Africa. The World Bank’s international poverty estimates currently use an international
poverty line of $1.90 per person per day at 2011 international prices. This poverty line is affected
by CPI bias, because CPIs are used to deflate the poverty line between the year of the household
survey and 2011 (the benchmark year of the purchasing power parity exchange rates). In addition,
some countries in Sub-Saharan Africa use the CPI to update their national poverty lines. National
poverty lines are usually based on the Cost of Basic Needs (CBN) approach which aims to compute
the cost of maintaining some basic living standard. A typical CBN poverty line is calculated from
the cost of a food basket that meets certain food energy requirements – for example 2,100 calories
per person per day – and observed spending on non-food essentials such as clothing and household
items (Ravallion 1998). Anyone living below this poverty line is considered poor. Some countries
– for example Uganda and Mauritania – use the CPI to update their national poverty lines over
time.14




14
  Other countries have used the CPI in the past, for example Ethiopia (before the 2010 update) and Zambia (before
the 2009 revision of 1996-2006 poverty estimates).

                                                                                                              17
In this section, we re-assess poverty estimates for the 16 countries in our study to account for the
cumulative CPI bias estimated in the previous section. In countries where the CPI overstates the
increase in cost of living, the poverty lines adjusted for CPI bias will show a more moderate
increase over time (in nominal terms) than the ones typically reported, therefore increasing
measured poverty reduction. The opposite effect occurs in countries where the CPI understates
inflation. For the purpose of evaluating the poverty implications of CPI bias, we make the strong
assumption that in the 14 countries where prices are only collected in urban areas, the estimated
CPI bias also applies to rural areas.15

The calculation of the adjusted poverty lines is described in equation (12). Table 7 presents official
inflation rates and estimates of inflation adjusted for CPI bias. Table 8 illustrates the implications
of this CPI bias for poverty reduction in all countries in our study.

The correction factors in Table 7 range widely, from 0.045 in South Africa to 1.45 in Burkina
Faso. Relative to the base year, the official CPI for the other year of the sample period multiplied
by the correction factor indicates the true cost of living for that year. For example, in Côte d’Ivoire,
the correction factor is estimated at 0.48 in 2002, which means, relative to the 2008 base period,
the official CPI for 2002 multiplied by 0.48 shows the actual price level in 2002. In other words,
the CPI level in 2002 was overestimated by 52 percent. Similarly, in Uganda, with the correction
factor of 1.37, the price level is understated by 37 percent in 2009.

How relevant is this CPI bias for estimated poverty trends? Since the CPI bias is measured in
percentage terms, a large bias is more consequential if the underlying cumulative inflation is
higher. For example, in the case of Burkina Faso, the CPI is estimated to significantly understate
the true cost of living by 44.7 percent between 1998 and 2003 (i.e. the correction factor is 1.447
in Table 7). However, the reported cumulative inflation during the same period is only 6.4 percent,
so that the adjusted inflation increases only moderately to 9.2 percent. Therefore, the difference in
poverty reduction based on the official inflation rate vs. the CPI-bias adjusted inflation rate is
marginal. On the other hand, a comparable, though opposite, 51.4 percent CPI bias in the
Democratic Republic of Congo leads to a cumulative bias-adjusted inflation rate of 136.7 percent,
compared with the official inflation rate of 281.3 percent. As a result, the bias-adjusted poverty

15
 These countries are Burkina Faso, Cameroon, D.R. Congo, Côte d’Ivoire, Ethiopia, Ghana, Madagascar, Mauritius,
Mozambique, Senegal, South Africa, Tanzania, Togo, and Uganda.

                                                                                                            18
reduction in annual terms is 1.7 percentage points faster than the one based on the official inflation
rate.

Overall, for countries experiencing an upward bias, our estimates of CPI bias suggest that the
international poverty rate (bias-adjusted) fell faster than currently thought by somewhere between
0.8 percentage point per year in Mozambique and 5.7 percentage points per year in Tanzania (2008
– 2012) (Figure 2). Ghana, and Uganda are the two countries having the opposite trend. Correcting
for the CPI bias, the annual reduction in international poverty is 2 percentage-points slower in
Uganda, and 5.3 percentage-point slower in Ghana than indicated by current international poverty
numbers. In Mauritius, Cameroon, and Burkina Faso, the change in poverty trend due to the
correction of CPI bias is not statistically significant.



    VII.    Conclusion

In this paper, we estimated Engel curves for demographically similar households in 16 Sub-
Saharan African countries. If Engel’s law holds, the coefficients of these curves should not change
over time, controlling for relative prices. However, we observe that the Engel curves drift to the
left in the majority of countries in this study. Burkina Faso, Ghana, and Uganda are the three
countries experiencing the opposite trend. We estimate that the average annual CPI upward bias
ranges between 0.7 percent in Cameroon and 43.9 percent in Nigeria. Conversely, the official CPI
understates inflation in Burkina Faso, Ghana, and Uganda by somewhere between 5.8 and 8.9
percent annually. This CPI bias, however, is not statistically significant in Cameroon and Ghana.

After adjusting for the effect of this bias, measured international poverty falls faster than currently
thought in countries where the CPI overstates changes in the true cost of living – by up to 5.7
percentage points per year as in the case of Tanzania between 2008 and 2012. Conversely, for
countries experiencing downward bias, the progress in poverty reduction is estimated to be slower
by as much as 5.3 percentage points per year as in the case of Ghana.

The weakness of this indirect method of estimating the CPI bias is that it is based on the assumption
that the Engel curves hold over time. In other words, the observed shift in the Engel curves is
attributed entirely to the CPI bias. Thus, the estimation does not take into account other issues that


                                                                                                    19
may contribute to the unexplained movement of the budget share of food such as changes in tastes,
omitted variables, and so on. In addition, we also assume that the CPI bias has a uniform effect
across the income distribution, and across all geographical locations in a given country. Hence,
while we regard the estimates in this paper as cautious evidence that international poverty rates in
Africa might have fallen faster than indicated by current numbers, additional work would be
needed to corroborate the Engel curve estimation results (for example, using the methods outlined
in Hausman 2003).




                                                                                                 20
Tables and Figures


Table 1: Household Surveys, by Country, Sub-Saharan Africa, 1998–2013
  Country                                          Household survey                                           Year 
  Burkina Faso        Enquête Burkinabé sur les Conditions de Vie des Ménages                        1998–2003 
  Cameroon            Enquête Camerounaise Auprès des Ménages                                        2001–2007 
  Congo, D.R.         Questionnaire de l’enquête                                                     2004‐2012 
  Côte d’Ivoire       Enquête Niveau de Vie des Ménages                                              2002–2008 
  Ethiopia            Welfare Monitoring and Household Income Expenditure Survey                     2004–2010 
  Ghana               Ghana Living Standards Survey                                                  2005–2012 
  Madagascar          Enquêtes Périodiques auprès des Ménages                                        2001‐2005‐2010 
  Mauritius           Household Budget Survey                                                        2006–2012 
  Mozambique          Inquérito aos Agregados Familiares Sobre Orçamento Familiar                    2002–2008 
  Nigeria             General Household Survey                                                       2011–2013 
  Rwanda              Enquête Intégrale sur les Conditions de Vie des Ménages                        2005–2010 
  Senegal             Enquête de Suivi de la Pauvreté au Sénégal                                     2005–2011 
  South Africa        Income and Expenditure Survey                                                  2005–2010 
  Tanzania            Household Budget Survey                                                        2000–2007 
  Tanzania            Living Standards Measurement Study                                             2008‐2010‐2012 
  Togo                Questionnaire des Indicateurs de Base du Bien‐être                             2006–2011 
  Uganda              National Household Survey                                                      2009–2012 




Table 2: Consumer Price Indexes, by Country, Sub-Saharan Africa, 1998–2013
 Country                       Consumer Price Index                        Year         Coverage  Availability of regional CPIs 
 Burkina Faso  Indice harmonisé des prix à la consommation             1998–2003          Urban                No 
 Cameroon         National consumer price index                         2001–07           Urban                No 
 Congo, D.R.      Consumer Price Index                                 2004‐2012          Urban                No 
 Côte d’Ivoire  Indice harmonisé des prix à la consommation             2002–08           Urban                No 
 Ethiopia         Country and regional consumer price indexes           2004–10           Urban                Yes 
 Ghana            Consumer price index                                  2005–12           Urban                Yes 
 Madagascar  National consumer price index                           2001‐2005‐2010       Urban                No 
 Mauritius        Consumer price index                                  2006–12           Urban                No 
 Mozambique  Índice de preços no consumidor                             2002–08           Urban                Yes 
 Nigeria          Country composite index                               2011–13          National              No 
 Rwanda           All Rwanda consumer price index                       2005–10          National              No 
 Senegal          Indice harmonisé des prix à la consommation           2005–11           Urban                No 
 South Africa  Consumer price index                                     2005–10           Urban                No 
 Tanzania         National consumer price index                         2000–12           Urban                No 
 Togo             Indice harmonisé des prix à la consommation           2006–11           Urban                No 
 Uganda           National (composite) consumer price index             2009–12           Urban                Yes 
Source: “Consumer Price Indices,” Laborsta Internet, International Labour Organization, Geneva, 
http://laborsta.ilo.org/applv8/data/SSM1_NEW/E/ALL%20COUNTRIES_CPI_Descriptions%20‐2013.pdf 




                                                                                                                             21
Table 3: Summary Statistics, by Country, Sub-Saharan Africa, 1998–2013
                              Food share    Standard     Log of household  Standard 
Country         Survey year     (mean)      deviation   consumption (mean) deviation
                   1998          0.591        0.172           13.184         0.824
Burkina Faso
                   2003          0.554        0.198           13.291         0.770
                   2001         0.467        0.178            13.532         0.745
Cameroon
                   2007         0.461        0.167            13.345         0.730
                   2004         0.658        0.140            12.651         0.772
Congo, DR
                   2012         0.640        0.154            12.613         0.742
                   2002         0.520        0.192            14.063         0.817
Cote d'Ivoire
                   2008         0.470        0.197            13.791         0.800
                   2004         0.586        0.137            9.237          0.528
Ethiopia
                   2010         0.514        0.131            9.207          0.558
                   2005         0.596        0.171            8.239          0.726
Ghana
                   2012         0.731        0.246            7.501          0.741
                   2001         0.775        0.177            13.350         0.789
Madagascar         2005         0.722        0.146            13.359         0.633
                   2010         0.735        0.155            13.184         0.653
                   2002         0.608        0.202            9.792          0.840
Mozambique
                   2008         0.586        0.188            9.946          0.831
                   2006         0.309        0.112            12.133         0.579
Mauritius
                   2012         0.291        0.101            12.150         0.588
                   2011         0.691        0.162            12.853         0.644
Nigeria
                   2013         0.652        0.173            12.783         0.684
                   2005         0.678        0.197            13.427         0.929
Rwanda
                   2010         0.610        0.170            13.566         0.843
                   2005         0.583        0.132            14.645         0.742
Senegal
                   2011         0.536        0.153            14.636         0.678
                   2005         0.421        0.154            11.478         1.137
South Africa
                   2010         0.269        0.180            10.973         1.029
                   2000         0.713        0.122            12.457         0.672
Tanzania
                   2007         0.629        0.121            12.760         0.670
                   2008         0.634        0.123            13.256         0.738
Tanzania           2010         0.605        0.122            13.266         0.730
                   2012         0.581        0.121            13.281         0.756
                   2006         0.573        0.173            13.586         0.713
Togo
                   2011         0.457        0.162            13.678         0.801
                  2009          0.474        0.137            14.774         0.752
Uganda
                  2012          0.437        0.122            14.871         0.726
Source : Household surveys




                                                                                       22
Table 4: Regression Results, by Country, Sub-Saharan Africa, 1998-2013

                                   Burkina Faso       Cameroon        Congo, D. R.    Cote d'Ivoire      Ethiopia         Ghana         Madagascar       Madagascar         Mauritius     Mozambique

ln(relative  food inflation)                                                                            ‐0.147***          ‐0.032                                                          0.244***
                                                                                                          (0.007)         (0.023)                                                           (0.083)
ln(real  total  consumption)         ‐0.117***         ‐0.056***       ‐0.078***        ‐0.071***       ‐0.095***        ‐0.077***       ‐0.093***        ‐0.079***         ‐0.117***      ‐0.091***
                                      (0.003)           (0.002)          (0.002)         (0.002)          (0.001)         (0.003)          (0.003)          (0.002)          (0.001)        (0.002)
Time  dummy                            0.004            ‐0.004*        ‐0.032***        ‐0.043***       ‐0.063***        0.026***        ‐0.090***        ‐0.042***         ‐0.015***       ‐0.043**
                                      (0.004)           (0.002)          (0.003)         (0.003)          (0.001)         (0.009)          (0.003)          (0.003)          (0.001)        (0.020)
Sample  size                           4,992             12,830          14,566          11,151           44,600           8,852            8,834           11,480            12,736         8,852
Adjusted R2                            0.306             0.237            0.294           0.184            0.228           0.353            0.316           0.268             0.412          0.353
Availability of regional CPI           No                No               No              No               Yes             Yes              No               No                No             Yes
Sample coverage                       Urban             Urban            Urban           Urban           National         Urban            Urban            Urban            National        Urban
Year of survey rounds               1998,  2003       2001,  2007      2004,  2012     2002,  2008      2004,  2010     2006,  2012      2001,  2010      2005,  2010       2006,  2012    2002, 2008
Note: Regressions are controlled for household size, share of  household younger than 5 year old, share of  household between 5 and 10 year old, share of  household between 10 and 17 year old, 
head's age, head's gender, head's education, head's marital status, and regional dummies.

Significance level: * = 10 percent, ** = 5 percent, *** = 1 percent

(continued)

                                     Nigeria          Rwanda           Senegal       South Africa     Tanzania        Tanzania        Tanzania           Togo            Uganda

ln(relative  food inflation)                                                                                                                                            ‐0.714***
                                                                                                                                                                         (0.196)
ln(real  total  consumption)        ‐0.013***         ‐0.089***       ‐0.090***       ‐0.074***       ‐0.040***       ‐0.044***       ‐0.049***        ‐0.069***        ‐0.082***
                                      (0.003)          (0.002)         (0.002)         (0.001)         (0.001)         (0.003)         (0.003)          (0.003)          (0.004)
Time  dummy                         ‐0.033***         ‐0.064***       ‐0.050***       ‐0.220***       ‐0.072***       ‐0.056***       ‐0.021***        ‐0.101***         0.026***
                                      (0.003)          (0.003)         (0.002)         (0.002)         (0.002)         (0.003)         (0.003)          (0.004)          (0.007)
Sample  size                          8,824            19,715           11,002         25,969           20,990          3,612           4,499            4,832            2,986
Adjusted R2                           0.297             0.341           0.337           0.492           0.197           0.161           0.121            0.331            0.262
Availability of regional CPI           No               No               No             No               No              No              No               No               Yes
Sample coverage                      National         National          Urban          Urban            Urban           Urban           Urban            Urban            Urban
Year of survey rounds               2011,  2013      2005,  2010      2005, 2011     2005,  2010      2001,  2007     2008,  2012     2010,  2012      2006, 2011       2009,  2012
Note: Regressions are controlled for household size, share of  household younger than 5 year old, share of  household between 5 and 10 year old, share of  household between 10 
and 17 year old, head's age, head's gender, head's education, head's marital status, and regional dummies.

Significance level: * = 10 percent, ** = 5 percent, *** = 1 percent


                                                                                                                                                                                                       23
Table 5: Estimates of                for Countries without Cross-sectional CPI Data

       country
                          Survey                     Cumulative 
                          period                       CPI‐bias
Burkina Faso            1998‐2003         0.231         ‐0.447
Cameroon                2001‐2007         0.226          0.040
Cote d'Ivoire           2002‐2008         0.223          0.517
Madagascar              2001‐2010         0.202          0.718
Madagascar              2005‐2010         0.208          0.281
Mauritius               2006‐2012         0.167          0.330
Nigeria                 2011‐2013         0.216          0.878
Rwanda                  2005‐2010         0.234          0.623
Senegal                 2005‐2011         0.231          0.627
South Africa            2005‐2010         0.205          0.955
Tanzania                2000‐2007         0.220          0.942
Tanzania                2008‐2012         0.234          0.877
Tanzania                2010‐2012         0.236          0.623
Togo                    2006‐2011         0.239          0.899
* Note: There  is insufficient data to estimate  Ῡ for Congo, 
D.R. Thus, we  use  the  average  of all  Ῡ estimates (0.22)  for 
this country.


Table 6: Cumulative CPI Bias, by Country, Sub-Saharan Africa, 1998–2013
                                         Cumulative  Standard                  Average annual    Correction 
                                                                     P‐value
Country            Survey period          CPI bias     error                      CPI bias         factor
                                             (1)        (2)           (3)            (4)             (5)
Burkina Faso       1998‐2003               ‐0.447      0.055         0.000         ‐0.089          1.447
Cameroon           2001‐2007                0.040      0.038         0.298         0.007           0.960
Congo, D.R.        2004‐2012                0.514      0.020         0.000         0.064           0.486
Cote d'Ivoire      2002‐2008                0.517      0.024         0.000         0.086           0.483
Ethiopia           2004‐2010                0.169      0.012         0.000         0.028           0.831
Ghana              2005‐2012               ‐0.407      0.164         1.000         ‐0.058          1.407
Madagascar         2001‐2010                0.718      0.013         0.000         0.080           0.282
Madagascar         2005‐2010                0.281      0.025         0.000         0.056           0.719
Mauritius*         2006‐2012                0.330      0.009         0.000         0.055           0.670
Mozambique         2002‐2008                0.378      0.135         0.005         0.063           0.622
Nigeria*           2011‐2013                0.878      0.060         0.000         0.439           0.122
Rwanda*            2005‐2010                0.623      0.014         0.000         0.125           0.377
Senegal            2005‐2011                0.627      0.010         0.000         0.105           0.373
South Africa       2005‐2010                0.955      0.002         0.000         0.191           0.045
Tanzania           2000‐2007                0.942      0.007         0.000         0.135           0.058
Tanzania           2008‐2012                0.877      0.021         0.000         0.219           0.123
Tanzania           2010‐2012                0.623      0.033         0.000         0.311           0.377
Togo               2006‐2011                0.899      0.012         0.000         0.180           0.101
Uganda             2009‐2012               ‐0.373      0.110         0.001         ‐0.075          1.373
* national CPI bias




                                                                                                               24
Table 7: Estimated ‘True’ Inflation, by Country, Sub-Saharan Africa, 1998–2013

                                      Reported inflation        Correction           True  inflation
                                                                  factor
Country          Survey period (cumulative  %)    (annual  %)                 (cumulative  %) (annual  %)
Burkina Faso       1998‐2003       0.064             0.013        1.447           0.092           0.018
Cameroon          2001‐2007         0.127            0.021        0.960           0.122           0.020
Congo, D.R.       2004‐2012         2.813            0.352        0.486           1.367           0.171
Cote  d'Ivoire    2002‐2008         0.224            0.037        0.483           0.108           0.018
Ethiopia          2004‐2010         1.630            0.272        0.831           1.355           0.226
Ghana             2005‐2012         1.254            0.179        1.407           1.765           0.252
Madagascar        2001‐2010         1.435            0.159        0.282           0.405           0.045
Madagascar        2005‐2010         0.545            0.109        0.719           0.392           0.078
Mauritius         2006‐2012         0.330            0.055        0.670           0.221           0.037
Mozambique        2002‐2008         0.842            0.140        0.622           0.524           0.087
Nigeria           2011‐2013         0.233            0.116        0.122           0.028           0.014
Rwanda            2005‐2010         0.636            0.127        0.377           0.240           0.048
Senegal           2005‐2011         0.178            0.030        0.373           0.067           0.011
South Africa      2005‐2010         0.068            0.014        0.045           0.003           0.001
Tanzania          2000‐2007         0.456            0.065        0.058           0.027           0.004
Tanzania          2008‐2012         0.507            0.127        0.123           0.063           0.016
Tanzania          2010‐2012         0.283            0.142        0.377           0.107           0.053
Togo              2006‐2011         0.210            0.042        0.101           0.021           0.004
Uganda            2009‐2012         0.403            0.134        1.373           0.554           0.185




                                                                                                            25
Table 8: Poverty Implication, by Country, Sub-Saharan Africa, 1998–2013

                   Survey                Official  poverty reduction                Poverty reduction from correction of CPI bias
    country                  Cummulative   Annual  (%  Standard                   Cummulative   Annual  (%  Standard 
                   period                                              P‐value                                            P‐value
                               (% pt.)            pt)       errors                   (% pt.)        pt)       errors
Burkina Faso     1998‐2003         ‐24.35           ‐4.87      0.697      0.000          ‐23.89        ‐4.78       0.70       0.000
Cameroon         2001‐2007             6.15           1.02     0.590      0.000              6.10       1.02       0.59       0.000
Congo, D.R.      2004‐2012           ‐0.28          ‐0.03      0.477      0.557          ‐13.63        ‐1.70       0.43       0.000
Cote  d'Ivoire   2002‐2008             5.99           1.00     0.574      0.000              0.83       0.14       0.59       0.158
Ethiopia         2004‐2010           ‐2.77          ‐0.46      0.431      0.000          ‐14.66        ‐2.44       0.44       0.000
Ghana            2005‐2012         ‐28.15           ‐4.02      0.497      0.000              8.71       1.24       0.29       0.000
Madagascar       2001‐2010           13.08            1.45     0.642      0.000            ‐3.83       ‐0.43       0.57       0.000
Madagascar       2005‐2010             7.70           1.54     0.530      0.000              2.08       0.42       0.51       0.000
Mauritius        2006‐2012             0.11           0.02     0.119      0.343            ‐0.12       ‐0.02       0.13       0.371
Mozambique       2002‐2008         ‐11.57           ‐1.93      0.621      0.000          ‐16.34        ‐2.72       0.60       0.000
Nigeria          2011‐2013             4.86           2.43     1.006      0.000            ‐5.40       ‐2.70       0.98       0.000
Rwanda           2005‐2010           ‐8.35          ‐1.67      0.656      0.000          ‐14.75        ‐2.95       0.64       0.000
Senegal          2005‐2011             0.40           0.07     0.695      0.562            ‐5.39       ‐0.90       0.70       0.000
South Africa     2005‐2010           ‐6.57          ‐1.31      0.368      0.000          ‐23.58        ‐4.72       0.40       0.000
Tanzania         2000‐2007         ‐12.70           ‐1.81      0.445      0.000          ‐20.14        ‐2.88       0.40       0.000
Tanzania         2008‐2012             0.53           0.13     1.103      0.633          ‐22.43        ‐5.61       1.08       0.000
Tanzania         2010‐2012           ‐0.79          ‐0.40      1.061      0.455          ‐11.02        ‐5.51       1.06       0.000
Togo             2006‐2011           ‐1.37          ‐0.27      0.885      0.121            ‐8.74       ‐1.75       0.87       0.000
Uganda           2009‐2012           ‐8.17          ‐2.72      0.825      0.000            ‐2.17       ‐0.72       0.81       0.008




                                                                                                                                      26
Figure 1: Engel Curves, Sub-Saharan Africa, 1998–2013
 a. Burkina Faso, 1998–2003                 b. Cameroon 2001-07




 c. Congo, Democratic Republic, 2004-2012   d. Côte d’Ivoire, 2002–08




 e. Ethiopia, 2004–10                       f. Ghana, 2005–12




                                                                        27
g. Madagascar, 2001, 2005, 2010   h. Mauritius, 2006–12




i. Mozambique, 2002–08            j. Nigeria, 2011–13




k. Rwanda, 2005–10                l. Senegal, 2005–11




                                                          28
m. South Africa, 2005–10        n. Tanzania, 2000–07




o. Tanzania, 2008, 2010, 2012   p. Togo, 2006–11




q. Uganda, 2009–12




                                                       29
Figure 2: Difference in Poverty Reduction Resulting from Correction of CPI bias (percentage points per year)




                                                                                                               30
Appendix 1


Table A1: Sensitivity Analysis
                                               Burkina Faso                                 Cameroon                                 Congo, D.R.                                  Cote d'Ivoire
                                                               Ignoring                                  Ignoring                                   Ignoring                                      Ignoring 
                                      OLS       Quadratic                         OLS       Quadratic                       OLS       Quadratic                          OLS       Quadratic
                                                               weights                                   weights                                    weights                                       weights
ln(relative  food inflation)


ln(real  total  consumption)       ‐0.117***          0.107*    ‐0.116***       ‐0.056***     0.217***   ‐0.052***       ‐0.078***      0.398***     ‐0.066***        ‐0.071***      0.225***     ‐0.073***
                                    (0.003)          (0.057)          (0.003)    (0.002)       (0.042)      (0.002)        (0.002)        (0.039)      (0.002)         (0.002)         (0.050)       (0.002)
                               2
ln(real  total  consumption)                      ‐0.008***                                  ‐0.010***                                  ‐0.018***                                    ‐0.011***
                                                     (0.002)                                   (0.001)                                    (0.001)                                      (0.002)
Time  dummy                          0.004             0.001     0.016***        ‐0.004*      ‐0.005**   ‐0.022***       ‐0.032***      ‐0.031***    ‐0.014***        ‐0.043***      ‐0.044***    ‐0.038***
                                    (0.004)          (0.004)          (0.004)    (0.002)       (0.002)      (0.002)        (0.003)        (0.003)      (0.003)         (0.003)         (0.003)       (0.003)
Sample  size                         4,992         4,992         4,992           12,830      12,830      12,830            14,566       14,566       14,566            11,151        11,151        11,151
Adjusted R2                        0.306        0.308         0.360            0.237         0.239         0.235            0.294        0.301         0.286            0.184        0.186        0.176
Availability of regional CPI        No           No            No                No           No            No               No           No            No               No           No            No
Sample coverage                   Urban        Urban         Urban            Urban         Urban         Urban            Urban        Urban         Urban             Urban       Urban         Urban
Year of survey rounds           1998, 2003 1998, 2003 1998, 2003            2001, 2007 2001, 2007 2001, 2007             2004, 2012 2004, 2012 2004, 2012             2002, 2008 2002, 2008 2002, 2008
Note: Regressions are controlled for household size, share of household younger than 5 year old, share of household between 5 and 10 year old, share of household between 10 and 17 year old, head's age, 
head's gender, head's education, head's marital status, and regional dummies.

Significance level: * = 10 percent, ** = 5 percent, *** = 1 percent
                                                 Ethiopia                                    Ghana                                   Madagascar                                   Madagascar
                                                               Ignoring                                  Ignoring                                   Ignoring                                      Ignoring 
                                      OLS       Quadratic                         OLS       Quadratic                       OLS       Quadratic                          OLS       Quadratic
                                                               weights                                   weights                                    weights                                       weights
ln(relative  food inflation)       ‐0.123***      ‐0.119***     ‐0.091***        ‐0.032      ‐0.060***    ‐0.072***
                                    (0.007)          (0.007)          (0.007)    (0.023)       (0.023)      (0.025)
ln(real  total  consumption)       ‐0.143***       0.015        ‐0.141***       ‐0.077***     0.205***   ‐0.068***       ‐0.093***      0.855***     ‐0.088***        ‐0.079***      1.288***     ‐0.060***
                                    (0.001)          (0.019)          (0.001)    (0.003)       (0.028)      (0.003)        (0.003)        (0.053)      (0.003)         (0.002)         (0.050)       (0.002)
                               2
ln(real  total  consumption)                      ‐0.008***                                  ‐0.017***                                  ‐0.035***                                    ‐0.050***
                                                     (0.001)                                   (0.002)                                    (0.002)                                      (0.002)
Time  dummy                        ‐0.026***      ‐0.028***     ‐0.033***       0.026***        0.015*        0.013      ‐0.090***      ‐0.095***    ‐0.091***        ‐0.042***      ‐0.041***    ‐0.063***
                                    (0.002)          (0.002)          (0.002)    (0.009)       (0.009)      (0.010)        (0.003)        (0.003)      (0.004)         (0.003)         (0.003)       (0.003)
Sample  size                        26,439        26,439         26,439           8,852       9,770       9,770            8,834        8,834        8,834             11,480        11,480        11,480
Adjusted R2                          0.374         0.376         0.369            0.353       0.265       0.219            0.316        0.340        0.281              0.268        0.312         0.230
Availability of regional CPI          Yes           Yes           Yes             Yes         Yes          Yes              No           No           No                 No           No            No
Sample coverage                     Urban         Urban         Urban            Urban       Urban       Urban             Urban        Urban        Urban             Urban         Urban        Urban
Year of survey rounds           2004, 2010 2004, 2010 2004, 2010            2006, 2012 2006, 2012 2006, 2012             2001,  2010 2001,  2010 2001,  2010          2005,  2010 2005,  2010 2005,  2010
Note: Regressions are controlled for household size, share of household younger than 5 year old, share of household between 5 and 10 year old, share of household between 10 and 17 year old, head's age, 
head's gender, head's education, head's marital status, and regional dummies.

Significance level: * = 10 percent, ** = 5 percent, *** = 1 percent

                                                                                                                                                                                                           31
Appendix 1


Table A1: Sensitivity Analysis (continued)
                                                 Mauritius                                    Mozambique                                    Nigeria                                     Rwanda
                                                                 Ignoring                                      Ignoring                                  Ignoring                                     Ignoring 
                                      OLS        Quadratic                         OLS         Quadratic                       OLS         Quadratic                       OLS         Quadratic
                                                                 weights                                       weights                                   weights                                      weights
ln(relative  food inflation)


ln(real  total  consumption)       ‐0.117***        0.089***      ‐0.113***      0.244***         0.209***      ‐0.274***   ‐0.013***        0.554***     ‐0.007***     ‐0.089***        0.573***      ‐0.086***
                                     (0.001)          (0.034)         (0.001)     (0.083)           (0.081)       (0.094)     (0.003)         (0.059)       (0.003)       (0.002)          (0.023)        (0.002)
                               2
ln(real  total  consumption)                       ‐0.008***                                     ‐0.026***                                  ‐0.022***                                    ‐0.024***
                                                      (0.001)                                       (0.001)                                   (0.002)                                      (0.001)
Time  dummy                        ‐0.015***       ‐0.015***      ‐0.015***     ‐0.043***        ‐0.037***      0.062***      ‐0.033***     ‐0.032***     ‐0.034***     ‐0.064***        ‐0.066***     ‐0.063***
                                     (0.001)          (0.001)         (0.002)     (0.020)           (0.019)       (0.022)       (0.003)       (0.003)       (0.003)       (0.003)          (0.003)        (0.003)
Sample  size                         12,736        12,736         12,736          8,852           8,852         8,852          8,824         8,824        8,824           19,715         19,715        19,715
Adjusted R2                          0.412          0.414         0.401           0.353           0.377         0.358          0.297         0.304        0.250           0.341          0.368          0.361
Availability of regional CPI           No            No               No            No             No             No            No            No            No              No             No            No
Sample coverage                    National      National       National          Urban          Urban          Urban        National      National      National        National       National      National
Year of survey rounds              2006,  2012   2006,  2012    2006,  2012     2002,  2008    2002,  2008    2002,  2008   2011,  2013   2011,  2013   2011,  2013     2005,  2010    2005,  2010   2005,  2010
Note: Regressions are controlled for household size, share of  household younger than 5 year old, share of  household between 5 and 10 year old, share of household between 10 and 17 year old, head's age, 
head's gender, head's education, head's marital status, and regional dummies.

Significance level: * = 10 percent, ** = 5 percent, *** = 1 percent

                                                  Senegal                                     South Africa                                Tanzania                                    Tanzania
                                                                Ignoring                                      Ignoring                                  Ignoring                                     Ignoring 
                                      OLS        Quadratic                        OLS          Quadratic                      OLS         Quadratic                       OLS         Quadratic
                                                                weights                                       weights                                   weights                                      weights
ln(relative  food inflation)


ln(real  total  consumption)       ‐0.090***       0.999***      ‐ 0.061***     ‐ 0.074***      ‐0.260***      ‐ 0.072***   ‐0.040***       0.517***    ‐ 0.041***     ‐ 0.044***       0.192***     ‐ 0.054***
                                    (0.002)          (0.044)          (0.002)    (0.001)           (0.010)       (0.001)     (0.001)         (0.029)       (0.002)      (0.003)           (0.061)       (0.003)
                               2
ln(real  total  consumption)                      ‐ 0.037***                                     0.008***                                  ‐ 0.022***                                  ‐0.009***
                                                     (0.001)                                       (0.000)                                   (0.001)                                      (0.002)
Time  dummy                        ‐0.050***      ‐ 0.053***     ‐ 0.032***     ‐ 0.220***      ‐0.219***      ‐ 0.211***   ‐0.072***      ‐ 0.071***   ‐ 0.102***     ‐ 0.056***      ‐0.056***     ‐ 0.062***
                                    (0.002)          (0.002)          (0.002)    (0.002)           (0.002)       (0.002)     (0.002)         (0.002)       (0.002)      (0.003)           (0.003)       (0.004)
Sample  size                        11,002        11,002         11,002          25,969         25,969         25,969        20,990        20,990        20,990          3,612          3,612         3,612
Adjusted R2                          0.337         0.372          0.263           0.492          0.498          0.450        0.197          0.211        0.238           0.161          0.164         0.210
Availability of regional CPI          No            No             No              No             No             No           No             No           No              No             No            No
Sample coverage                     Urban         Urban          Urban           Urban          Urban          Urban         Urban         Urban        Urban           Urban          Urban         Urban
Year of survey rounds           2005, 2011 2005, 2011 2005, 2011            2005, 2010 2005, 2010 2005, 2010             2001, 2007 2001, 2007 2001, 2007              2008, 2012 2008, 2012 2008, 2012
Note: Regressions are controlled for household size, share of household younger than 5 year old, share of household between 5 and 10 year old, share of  household between 10 and 17 year old, head's age, 
head's gender, head's education, head's marital status, and regional dummies.

Significance level: * = 10 percent, ** = 5 percent, *** = 1 percent

                                                                                                                                                                                                                    32
Appendix 1


Table A1: Sensitivity Analysis (continued)

                                                 Tanzania                                     Togo                                 Uganda
                                                                Ignoring                                 Ignoring                               Ignoring 
                                      OLS       Quadratic                         OLS       Quadratic                    OLS      Quadratic
                                                                weights                                  weights                                weights
ln(relative  food inflation)                                                                                          ‐0.714***     ‐0.683***    ‐0.740***
                                                                                                                       (0.196)        (0.192)      (0.221)
ln(real  total  consumption)       ‐0.049***       0.352***     ‐0.057***       ‐0.069***    ‐0.101***   ‐0.074***    ‐0.082***      0.777***   ‐0.074***
                                    (0.003)          (0.062)          (0.003)    (0.003)       (0.064)      (0.004)    (0.004)        (0.082)      (0.004)
                               2
ln(real  total  consumption)                      ‐0.015***                                      0.001                              ‐0.028***
                                                     (0.002)                                   (0.002)                                (0.003)
Time  dummy                        ‐0.021***      ‐0.021***     ‐0.025***       ‐0.101***    ‐0.101***   ‐0.111***    0.026***       0.025***    0.033***
                                    (0.003)          (0.003)          (0.003)    (0.004)       (0.004)      (0.004)    (0.007)        (0.007)      (0.007)
Sample  size                         4,499         4,499         4,499            4,832       4,832       4,832         2,986        2,986       2,986
Adjusted R2                          0.121         0.129         0.177            0.331       0.330       0.320         0.262        0.289       0.241
Availability of regional CPI          No            No            No              No           No          No            Yes         Yes          Yes
Sample coverage                     Urban         Urban         Urban            Urban       Urban       Urban         Urban        Urban       Urban
Year of survey rounds           2010, 2012 2010, 2012 2010, 2012            2006, 2011 2006, 2011 2006, 2011             2009, 2012 2009, 2012 2009, 2012
Note: Regressions are controlled for household size, share of household younger than 5 year old, share of household between 5 and 10 year old, share of 
household between 10 and 17 year old, head's age, head's gender, head's education, head's marital status, and regional dummies.

Significance level: * = 10 percent, ** = 5 percent, *** = 1 percent




                                                                                                                                                             33
Appendix 2


Calculation of CPI bias estimates for countries without cross-sectional CPI data

We follow the calculation of estimates of the CPI bias described in Gibson, Stillman, and Le
(2008). First, we obtain the own-price elasticity of food demand using the method introduced by
Frisch (1959), as follows:

                                                      1
                                                 eii  i (1  wii )  wii .                                 (13)
                                                      

where w is the average budget share of food;  is the expenditure elasticity of food demand
(calculated as 1   w ); and  is the flexibility of money. The estimate of the flexibility of money
is derived from the relationship proposed by Lluch, Powell, and Williams (1977) of
  36 X 0.36 , where X is the gross national product per capita in 1970 U.S. dollars.16

Equipped with the estimate of the own-price elasticity of food demand, eii , together with the

estimated value of the coefficient for CPI-deflated total expenditure, β, from equation (9), the
average budget share of food, w , and the share of food component in the CPI, α, obtained from
the NSOs, we are able to calculate the relative prices between food and non-food  , as follows:
Rearranging equation (14) gives:

                                                          
                                           eii  1                                                         (14)
                                                          w

We then incorporate estimates of  into the estimation of CPI bias using equation (10).


                                                 1  eii w  
                                                                                                         (15)




16
  We use gross domestic product (GDP) estimates rather than gross national product. To obtain X, we take the average
of per capita GDP (in constant 2005 U.S. dollars) between two survey periods and combine with the GDP deflator in
2005 and 1970.

                                                                                                                34
References
Barrett, Garry F., and Matthew Brzozowski. 2010. “Using Engel Curves to Estimate the Bias in
    the Australian CPI.” Economic Record 86 (272): 1–14.
Beatty, Timothy, and Erling Larsen. 2005. “Using Engel Curves to Estimate Bias in the Canadian
    CPI as a Cost of Living Index.” Canadian Journal of Economics 38 (2): 482–99.
Beatty, Timothy and Thomas Crossley. 2012. “Lost in Translation: What Do Engel Curves Tell
    Us About the Cost of Living?”, mimeo.
Beegle, Kathleen, Luc Christiaensen, Andrew Dabalen, and Isis Gaddis. 2016. Poverty in a Rising
    Africa. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Boskin, Michael J., Ellen R. Dulberger, Robert J. Gordon, Zvi Griliches, and Dale W. Jorgenson.
    1996. Toward a More Accurate Measure of the Cost of Living: Final Report. Washington,
    DC: Senate Finance Committee. http://www.ssa.gov/history/reports/boskinrpt.html.
———. 1998. “Consumer Prices, the Consumer Price Index, and the Cost of Living.” Journal of
  Economic Perspectives 12 (1): 3–26.
Brzozowski, Matthew. 2006. “Does One Size Fit All? The CPI and Canadian Seniors.” Canadian
    Public Policy 32 (4): 387–412.
Chung, Chul, John Gibson, and Bonggeun Kim. 2010. “CPI Mismeasurements and Their Impacts
   on Economic Management in Korea.” Asian Economic Papers 9 (1): 1–15.
Chamon, Marcos and Irineu De Carvalho Filho. 2014. “Consumption Based Estimates of Urban
   Chinese Growth.” China Economic Review 29: 126-37.
Costa, Dora L. 2001. “Estimating Real Income in the United States from 1888 to 1994: Correcting
    CPI Bias Using Engel Curves.” Journal of Political Economy 109 (6): 1288–1310.
Deaton, Angus. 1997. The Analysis of Household Surveys: A Microeconometric Approach to
    Development Policy. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press.
———. 1998. “Getting Prices Right: What Should Be Done?” Journal of Economic Perspectives
  12 (1): 37–46.
De Carvalho Filho, Irineu, and Marcos Chamon. 2012. “The Myth of Post-Reform Income
   Stagnation: Evidence from Brazil and Mexico.” Journal of Development Economics 97 (2):
   368–86.
Frisch, Ragnar. 1959. “A Complete Scheme for Computing All Direct and Cross Demand
     Elasticities in a Model with Many Sectors.” Econometrica 27 (2): 177–96.
Gaddis, Isis. 2016. “Prices for Poverty Analysis in Africa”, Policy Research Working Paper 7652,
   World Bank, Washington D.C.
Gibson, John, and Grant Scobie. 2010. “Using Engel Curves to Estimate CPI Bias in a Small,
    Open, Inflation-Targeting Economy.” Applied Financial Economics 20 (17): 1327–35.

                                                                                             35
Gibson, John, Trinh Le, and Bonggeun Kim. 2016. “Prices, Engel Curves and Time-Space
    Deflation: Impacts on Poverty and Inequality in Vietnam.” World Bank Economic Review,
    forthcoming.
Gibson, John, Steven Stillman, and Trinh Le. 2008, “CPI Bias and Real Living Standards in Russia
    during the Transition.” Journal of Development Economics 87 (1): 140–60.
Günther, Isabel, and Michael Grimm. 2007. “Measuring Pro-poor Growth When Relative Prices
    Shift.” Journal of Development Economics 82 (1): 245–56.
Hamilton, Bruce W. 2001. “Using Engel’s Law to Estimate CPI Bias.” American Economic
   Review 91 (3): 619–30.
Harttgen, Kenneth, Stephan Klasen, and Sebastian Vollmer. 2013. “An African Growth Miracle?
    Or: What Do Asset Indices Tell Us about Trends in Economic Performance?” Review of
    Income and Wealth 59 (October): S37–S61.
Hausman, Jerry. 2003. “Sources of Bias and Solutions to Bias in the Consumer Price Index.”
    Journal of Economic Perspectives 17 (1): 23–44.
ILO (International Labour Organization). 2013. All Countries CPI Descriptions: Methodologies
    of Compiling Consumer Price Indices. 2012 ILO Survey of Country Practices. Geneva: ILO.
Kaplan, Greg and Sam Schulhofer-Wohl. 2016. “Inflation at the Household Level.” NBER
    Working Paper 22331, National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER), Cambridge MA.
Kenny, Charles. 2011. Getting Better: Why Global Development Is Succeeding and How We Can
   Improve the World Even More. New York: Basic Books.
Kokoski, Mary. 2000. “Alternative CPI Aggregations: Two Approaches.” Monthly Labor Review
   (November): 31-9.
Larsen, Erling. 2007. “Does the CPI Mirror the Cost of Living: Engel’s Law Suggests Not in
    Norway.” Scandinavian Journal of Economics 109 (1): 177–95.
Lluch, Constantino, Alan A. Powell, and Ross Williams. 1977. Patterns in Household Demand
    and Saving. Washington, DC: World Bank; New York: Oxford University Press.
Logan, Trevon D. 2009. “Are Engel Curve Estimates of CPI Bias Biased?” Historical Methods 42
    (3): 97–109.
Nakamura, Emi, Jón Steinsson and Miao Liu. 2016. “Are Chinese Growth and Inflation Too
   Smooth? Evidence from Engel Curves.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 8(3):
   113-44.
Nicholson, J. L. 1975. “Whose Cost of Living?” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series A
    (General) 138 (4): 540–42.
Olivia, Susan, and John Gibson. 2013. “Using Engel Curves to Measure CPI Bias for Indonesia.”
    Bulletin of Indonesian Economic Studies 49 (1): 85–101.


                                                                                              36
Pinkovskiy, Maxim and Xavier Sala-i-Martin. 2014. “Africa Is On Time.” Journal of Economic
    Growth 19(3): 311-38.
Pollak, Robert A. 1998. “The Consumer Price Index: A Research Agenda and Three Proposals.”
     Journal of Economic Perspectives 12 (1): 69–78.
Ravallion, Martin. 1998. “Poverty lines in theory and practice.” Living Standards Measurement
    Study (LSMS) Working paper 133, World Bank, Washington, DC.
Schultze, Charles L., and Christopher Mackie. 2002. At What Price? Conceptualizing and
    Measuring Cost-of-Living and Price Indexes. Washington, DC: National Academy Press.
Tanzania NBS (National Bureau of Statistics). 2010. “Methodology for Compilation of National
    Consumer Price Index (NCPI), Tanzania Mainland.” NBS, Ministry of Finance and Economic
    Affairs, Dar es Salaam, Tanzania.
United Nations. 2009. Practical Guide to Producing Consumer Price Indices. New York: United
    Nations.
World Bank. 2014. Nigeria: Where Has All the Growth Gone? A Policy Note. Report No. 78908.
   World Bank, Washington DC.
———. 2015. United Republic of Tanzania. Tanzania Mainland Poverty Assessment. Report No.
  AUS6819. World Bank, Washington DC.
Young, Alwyn. 2012. “The African Growth Miracle.” Journal of Political Economy 120 (4): 696–
   739.




                                                                                          37
