                                                    WPS7913


Policy Research Working Paper                      7913




The Political Economy of Teacher Management
           in Decentralized Indonesia
                                   Andrew Rosser
                                  Mohamad Fahmi




Education Global Practice Group
December 2016
Policy Research Working Paper 7913


  Abstract
  Indonesia faces serious challenges in the number, cost, qual-                      and votes from schools to the elite, lubricate patronage and
  ity, and distribution of teachers. This paper examines the                         political networks, and ensure that elites maintain politi-
  role of political economy factors in producing these chal-                         cal control rather than maximize educational performance
  lenges and shaping efforts to resolve them. It argues that the                     and equity. The fall of the New Order, the authoritarian
  challenges have their origins in the way in which political                        and centralized regime that ruled Indonesia from 1965 to
  and bureaucratic elites have for decades used the school                           1998, led to efforts to change this situation, but these have
  system to accumulate resources, distribute patronage, mobi-                        had little impact so far. The paper concludes by assessing
  lize political support, and exercise political control. This                       what can be done by proponents of teacher manage-
  orientation has meant that teacher numbers, quality, and                           ment reform in this context to promote better outcomes.
  distribution have been managed to maximize flows of rents




  This paper is a product of the Education Global Practice Group, World Bank and the Australian Department of Foreign
  Affairs and Trade. It is part of a larger effort by the World Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution
  to development policy discussions around the world. Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://
  econ.worldbank.org. The authors may be contacted at andrew.rosser@unimelb.edu.au.




          The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
          issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
          names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
          of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
          its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                        Produced by the Research Support Team
          The Political Economy of Teacher Management in Decentralized Indonesia




                                               Andrew Rosser1

                                              Mohamad Fahmi2




Keywords: political economy, education, teachers, teacher management, Indonesia


JEL Classifications: D73, H75, I28, P16




1
    University of Adelaide (University of Melbourne from February 2017).
2
    Padjadjaran University.
Acknowledgements

We wish to thank Ikhfan Haris, Ben Satriatna and Deri Mardiana for their assistance during
fieldwork for this study. We also wish to thank Samer Al-Samarrai, Jerry Strudwick, Tazeen
Fasih, Fasli Jalal, Yasuhiko Matsuda, Andy Ragatz, Halsey Rogers, Javier Luque, Susiana
Iskandar, Joanne Dowling, Santi Savitri, and Simon Milligan for providing useful feedback on
the study design and early results and an earlier draft of the paper. We also want to thank
Sumarna Surapranata, Director General for Teacher and Education Personnel, for his review of
the paper.  Finally, and most importantly, we wish to thank the numerous government officials,
academics, donor officials, journalists, teachers, teacher and NGO activists and other
individuals who gave up their time to be interviewed, particularly in our four focus regions.
The views and opinions expressed in this paper are those of the authors only. DFAT and the
World Bank do not accept legal liability for material contained in this document.

                             	




                                                                                            2 
 
Acronyms	and	Abbreviations	
 

    ACER               Australian Council for Education Research

    bansos             social assistance

    Baperjakat         Advisory Board for Position and Rank

    Bappenas           Agency for National Development Planning / National
                       Ministry of Development Planning

    BERMUTU            Better Education through Reformed Management and
                       Universal Teacher Upgrading

    BKD                Badan Kepegawaian Daerah, Regional Civil Service
                       Agency

    BKDD               Badan Kepegawaian Daerah dan Diklat Regional Civil
                       Service and Training Agency

    BOS                Bantuan Operasional Sekolah, School Operational
                       Assistance

    BPK                State Financial Audit Agency

    BPKP               State Finance and Development Supervision Agency

    bupati             district head

    CBT                computer-based competency test

    CPNS               civil service candidate

    DAK                Dana Alokasi Khusus, Special Allocation Funds

    dana bagi hasil    Revenue Sharing Funds

    dana perimbangan   Funds provided by the central government transfers to
                       regional governments to enable the latter to carry out their
                       functions under decentralization.

    Dapodik            MoEC education database

    DAU                General Allocation Funds

    dewan pendidikan   District-level Education Boards

    DFAT               Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade (Australia)


                                                                                      3 
 
    Dinas                     local government agency

    di-nonjob-kan             shifted from powerful positions within the dinas to ones
                              where they have nothing to do

    dinas pendidikan          District Office of Education

    DPR                       Dewan Perwakilan Rakyat: national parliament

    DPRD                      Dewan Perwakilan Rakyat Daerah: regional parliament

    FAGI                      Independent Teachers Action Forum

    Fatayat                   a women’s organization that is part of Nahdatul Ulama

    FGII                      Independent Teachers’ Forum

    FKGH                      Honorary Teachers’ Communication Forum

    FSGI                      Federasi Serikat Guru Indonesia: Indonesia Federation of
                              Teacher Union

    formasi guru PNS          the number and type of new civil servant teachers awarded
                              to regions by the central government each year

    GNI                       Gross National Income

    Golkar                    the New Order’s electoral vehicle, now one of the
                              country’s main political parties.

    gugus                     group, cluster

    Guru                      teacher

    guru honda/honor daerah   honorary teacher appointed by regional government

    guru honor                honorary teacher

    guru inpres               civil servant teachers appointed under the Inpres scheme

    guru PNS                  civil servant teacher

    guru tetap yayasan        permanent teacher at a private school

    ICW                       Indonesia Corruption Watch

    IGHI                      Indonesian Honorary Teachers’ Association

    IKIP                      teacher training college


                                                                                          4 
 
    IMF                   International Monetary Fund

    Infak                 spending in the name of Allah, a form of charity

    juknis                petunjuk teknis, technical guidelines

    kabupaten             district

    kepala sekolah        school principal

    KKGSD                 Primary School Teacher Working Groups

    komisi                parliamentary commission

    komite sekolah        school committee

    Kota                  municipality

    KPK                   Anti-corruption Commission

    KPKMA                 Municipality A Education Coalition

    KTSI                  Indonesian Honorary Employees Community

    LBH                   Lembaga Bantuan Hukum: Legal Aid Foundation

    LMPTK                 Quality Improvement of Teachers and Education Personnel

    LPTK                  Teacher Training Institutions

    LSM plat merah        an NGO that is closely linked to government

    Mahkamah Konstitusi   Constitutional Court

    Masjid Agung          Grand Mosque

    MenPAN                Ministry for the Empowerment of the State Apparatus

    MGMP                  Subject Teachers Deliberative Groups

    MKKS                  School Principal Working Deliberative Group

    MKPS                  School Supervisor Working Deliberative Group

    MoEC                  Ministry of Education and Culture (Kemendikbud,
                          previously named MoNE)

    MoNE                  Ministry of National Education (Kemendiknas, changed
                          later into MoEC)


                                                                                    5 
 
    mono-loyalty           a policy requiring all civil servants to be loyal to the
                           government

    MoRA                   Ministry of Religious Affairs (Kemenag)

    Muhammadiyah           a leading Islamic social organization, generally considered
                           modernist in orientation

    Nahdatul Ulama         a leading Islamic social organization, generally considered
                           traditionalist in orientation

    New Order              the name of the regime that governed Indonesia from 1965
                           to 1998
    NGO                    non-government organization

    Ojek                   motorbike taxi

    Pancasila              literally, five principles. The state ideology

    PDI-P                  Indonesian Democratic Party of Struggle

    pengawas               school supervisor

    perbup                 bupati regulation

    perda                  regional regulation

    Persatuan Umat Islam   Islamic Community Association

    PGRI                   Persatuan Guru Republik Indonesia: Indonesian Teachers
                           Union, the major teacher union

    PISA                   Programme for International Students Assessment

    PKS                    Prosperous Justice Party

    PNS                    civil servant

    politisasi             politicization

    preman                 street thug, gangster

    Prodep                 An Australian government-funded training program for
                           school principals and supervisors

    PTUN                   State Administrative Court

    rombel                 study group/class

    sekda                  Regional Secretary, the head of the local civil service

                                                                                         6 
 
     sekolah favorit               popular schools

     sekretariat                   Group, cluster (same as gugus)

     SKB 5 Menteri                 Five Ministerial Decree (on Teacher Management)

     SKTM                          Surat Keterangan Tanda Miskin, a letter confirming that
                                   one is poor

     SMA                           senior secondary school

     SMERU                         a leading Indonesian private research institute

     SMK                           vocational senior secondary school

     SPG                           Teacher Education School

     Surat Edaran                  Circulating Letter

     Tim Penilaian Akhir           Final Assessment Team

     Uji Kompetensi Guru           Competency Test for Teachers

     UNCEN                         Cendana University

     Upeti                         tribute to leaders/officials paid by subjects

     UPTD                          Unit Pelaksana Teknis Daerah, agency branch

     USAID                         United States Agency for International Development

                                                         

  




                                                                                             7 
 
1.	Introduction	

Since the early 2000s, Indonesia has dramatically increased spending on education in line with
a new Constitutional requirement3 for the national government and regional governments4 to
allocate at least 20 percent of their respective budgets to education. Between 2001 and 2012,
public education spending increased from 2 percent of Gross National Income (GNI) to 4
percent.5 This increased spending has contributed to significant improvements in children’s
access to primary and junior secondary education, particularly through the funding of a new
national school grants program (BOS) covering the operational costs of basic education and, in
so doing, helping to realize the government’s long-standing commitment to free basic
education. However, it appears to have contributed little to improved student learning
outcomes. While Indonesian children are starting school earlier and staying in school longer,
they do not appear to be learning more. The country’s performance in international standardized
tests such as the Program for International Student Assessment (PISA) has improved little since
the early 2000s and remains poor relative to neighboring countries. A recent World Bank (2015:
3) study concluded: ‘The bottom line seems to be that, despite all the extra spending, nothing
major has changed in the performance of Indonesia’s school children’.

This outcome is related in part to problems of teacher management. Indonesia has plenty of
teachers—around 3 million by one estimate (The Economist 2014). According to USAID’s
Prioritas program (2015), an initiative specifically concerned with teacher management, this
gives Indonesia one of the most enviable teacher-student ratios in the world: for instance, with
1 teacher for every 16 students at primary school level, it has a more generous supply of teachers
than the Republic of Korea (1 per 21 students), Cambodia (1 per 48), and Brazil (1 per 22). But
the quality of Indonesian teachers is poor: many lack basic competencies, particularly with
regards to subject knowledge and pedagogical skills (Jalal et al 2009; Chang et al 2014; Pisani
2013). The World Bank study, for instance, found that ‘many teachers have major difficulties
with even the most basic mathematical problems’ (World Bank 2015: 47). At the same time,
Indonesian teachers are poorly distributed between schools, especially between schools in
urban and rural and remote areas, and absenteeism rates, while improving, remain high (USAID
Prioritas 2015; McKenzie et al 2014; UNCEN et al 2012; Pisani 2013). As one measure of the
scale of the distribution problems, USAID (2015) found that teacher-student ratios in 23
districts ranged from 10 in urban Madiun, Central Java, to 25 in the remote rural district of Nias
Selatan. Finally, rising teacher salary costs, driven by big increases in teacher pay, have
crowded out spending in other areas of the education budget needed to improve education
quality.6

The Indonesian central government has introduced a range of reform initiatives to address these
issues since the mid-2000s, some of which are beginning to have positive effects, particularly
with regards to teacher numbers and cost and the quality of newly recruited teachers. These
have included a moratorium on civil service teacher appointments, a more transparent and
accountable system for recruiting civil servant teachers, a teacher certification program,
restrictions on the number of terms that school principals can serve, and the issuance of an
instruction to regional governments to address teacher distribution problems. But much analysis
                                                            
3
   The amendment was made in 2002. 
4
   We use the terms ‘regional’ and ‘local’ interchangeably throughout this report. In both cases, they are used to
refer to districts (kabupaten) or municipalities (kota) and, depending on the context, provinces as well.
5
   Figures are from the World Bank’s World Development Indicators database.
6
    For an analysis of the budgetary impact of teacher salary increases, especially ones stemming from the
certification program, see Chang et al (2014: 161-162).

                                                                                                                8 
 
suggests that Indonesian teachers nevertheless remain too numerous, too costly, too poor in
quality, too badly distributed, and too frequently absent from work (see World Bank 2010a;
Pisani 2013; McKenzie et al 2014; Chang et al 2014; Al-Samarrai et al 2012).

This paper examines the role of political economy factors in contributing to Indonesia’s current
teacher management problems and shaping efforts to resolve them. It suggests that these
problems have their origins in the way in which political and bureaucratic elites, at both the
national and local levels, have for decades used the school system—and teacher management
in particular—to accumulate resources, distribute patronage, mobilize political support, and
exercise political control. This orientation has meant that teacher numbers, quality, and
distribution have been managed to maximize flows of rents and votes from schools to this elite,
lubricate patronage and political networks, and ensure that these elites maintain political control
rather than to maximize educational performance and equity. Democratization and
decentralization since the fall of the New Order, the authoritarian and centralized regime that
ruled Indonesia from 1965 to 1998, have done little to change this situation. They have
consolidated the formal authority of regional governments in relation to teacher management
and created genuine competition within the local elite for teachers’ votes. But schools’ role as
a source of rents and votes as well as a mechanism for distributing patronage and exercising
political control has remained more or less unchanged.

In this context, recent central government efforts to reduce teacher numbers, promote better
teacher distribution, and enhance teacher quality through, for instance, more transparent
recruitment practices and teacher redistribution have represented a direct assault on elite
interests. In particular, given that local elites play the dominant role in teacher management,
the central government’s efforts have represented an assault on the interests of local elites.
Central government reform initiatives have consequently encountered considerable—if often
subterranean—resistance except in a few exceptional cases where specific conditions
conducive to reform have emerged.

The paper argues—on the basis of an analysis of the political dynamics surrounding specific
reforms in a set of regional cases—that these conditions are:

           i) where the central government has had at its disposal or been able to devise policy
           instruments that are effective in disciplining local governments and it has
           maintained a commitment to these instruments in the face of opposition;
           ii) where local civil society groups are present and able to launch effective public
           campaigns demanding reform, exploiting their ability to access the independent
           media and, if necessary, the courts; and local governments are able to find effective
           ways of buying off the losers from reform;
           iii) where mid-level government officials, especially ones at the local education
           agency, have judged that reform initiatives can be exploited for patronage purposes;
           secured support from above; and officials have devised effective strategies for
           managing the politics of reform;
           iv) where reform-minded district leaders have been elected providing an imperative
           for education agency officials to design reform programs and the latter have had
           access to relevant ideas and policy advice as a result of contact with donors; and
           v) where teachers and the patronage and political networks of which they are part
           have stood to lose little from reform in the first place.



                                                                                                 9 
 
In presenting this argument, the paper begins by outlining a conceptual framework for
understanding teacher management policy and its implementation in Indonesia (Section 2). It
then identifies the contending forces that have been involved in struggles over teacher
management in Indonesia (Section 3) and provides a general overview of the way in which
struggles between them have played out over time (Section 4). It then examines the political
and social dynamics surrounding a range of specific teacher management issues over which
contestation has occurred in the post New Order period (Section 5). The final section (Section
6) presents the paper’s conclusions, focusing on the policy implications of the analysis for
proponents of reform.


2.	Analytical	and	Methodological	Matters	
 

2.1	Understanding	Teacher	Management	in	Indonesia	

Much work on teacher management policy and its implementation in developing countries has
focused on three analytical tasks. The first has been to define and describe teacher management
problems in these countries. In this respect, it has been concerned with questions such as the
adequacy of teacher supply, utilization, and distribution; the adequacy of teachers’ skills and
capabilities; the quality of in-service and pre-service teacher training; the effectiveness of
systems for teacher recruitment, evaluation and management; and the adequacy of teacher pay.
The second analytical task has been to prescribe technical policy solutions to these problems
taking into account existing levels of development and budget constraints. The third analytical
task has been to assess the effectiveness of proposed solutions through evaluations of the impact
of projects and programs and consider the implications for project/program design. The central
problematic of this work has been how to maximize educational benefit (as measured, for
instance, by national performance in PISA and similar examinations) within the context of a
given resource envelope, understood in terms of both government budget finances and human
resources. Mulkeen’s (2010) detailed analysis of teacher supply, training and management
issues in Anglophone Africa constitutes one key contribution in this vein. Others include
Gaynor’s (1998) analysis of teacher management decentralization in developing countries and
various recent reports on teacher management issues in the Indonesian context (see, for
instance, Jalal et al 2009; World Bank 2010a; 2010b; Chang et al 2014; World Bank 2015).

This work has served to define a reform agenda in relation to teacher management consisting
of measures to increase/decrease the number of teachers (depending on whether countries are
considered to be in shortage/deficit); distribute teachers more efficiently throughout the school
system; enhance the quality of teacher training; make teacher recruitment, evaluation processes
more meritocratic; and ensure that teacher pay is sufficient to attract good candidates into the
profession without being excessive. But because this work has focused largely on technical
issues, it has not, in most cases, examined the political dynamics surrounding processes of
teacher management reform even though some authors have acknowledged that such processes
are inherently political in nature (see, for instance, Gaynor 1998). To the extent that they have
explored the political dimensions of change, they have tended to see things in terms of
individual teacher incentives and behavior. The challenge, it is presumed, is to ensure that
teacher incentives align with broader goals such as improved education outcomes and fiscal
sustainability. The way in which teacher management issues are embroiled in contestation
between larger political and social groups is set aside in favor of making a case for a more


                                                                                              10 
 
efficient and effective allocation of resources and designing policy and institutional
frameworks that establish the ‘right’ incentives for actors understood in individual terms.7

In contrast, this paper proposes that teacher management policy-making and implementation
be understood as an inherently political process characterized by contestation between
competing political and social groups over access to and control over resources and power. The
key point here is that teacher management reform has redistributive dimensions: it shifts
resources and power away from some political and social groups and towards others. In
particular, it shifts resources and power away from political and bureaucratic elites, the
patronage and political networks they control, and teachers and towards parents of
schoolchildren, especially ones in poor areas that have under-resourced and poor quality
schools. To the extent that budget savings are achieved through a more efficient allocation of
teacher supply, it also shifts resources away from teacher salaries to other areas of public
spending (including other areas of education spending) and the interests that are embedded in
those areas of spending. For these reasons, teacher management reform is subject to political
contestation between groups who stand to benefit from such reform and those who stand to lose
from it.

To operationalize this conceptualization of teacher management reform, we draw on an
analytical framework that shares much with those developed by Grindle (2004; 2007) in her
work on the political economy of education reform in Latin America and Hudson and Leftwich
(2014) in their work for the Developmental Leadership Program (DLP). As an academic field,
political economy—like many other academic fields—has been characterized by significant
debate over the merits of different analytical approaches. Much of this debate has centered on
whether analytical primacy should be given to interest-related, institutional or agential factors
in explaining political, economic, and/or social change (Rodan et al 2006; Hameiri 2007;
Leftwich 2010; Hudson and Leftwich 2014). Our framework seeks to integrate these factors in
recognition that they all have at least some bearing on change, albeit in different ways in
different contexts. At the same time, it also seeks to interpret and apply these factors in a manner
that is sensitive to the historical, political and social specificities of the Indonesian context.

The framework centers on three levels of analysis:

             Level 1: Actors, Interests, and Agendas: This level focuses on identifying the key
              political actors who are involved in teacher management policy-making and its
              implementation and their respective interests, policy agendas, and forms of leverage
              over policy and implementation. Such actors may be specific individuals (such as a
              local chief executive) but more commonly are groups of individuals or organizations.
              The latter may include technocratic elites, political and bureaucratic elites, teachers,
              teacher trade unions, non-government organizations (NGOs), and parent groups.

             Level 2: Institutions: This level of analysis is primarily concerned with understanding
              the way in which formal and informal ‘rules of the game’ such as written laws and
              regulations, cultural values, voluntary codes and standards, and the like structure
              interactions between political actors. There is accordingly a strong emphasis on
              questions related to the institutional design of legal and political systems, the nature of
              laws and government regulations, bureaucratic structures, and the way in which these
                                                            
7
  Scholars who have explored the political economy of teacher management reform in developing countries
include Kingdon and Muzammil (2009) and Beteille (2009).

                                                                                                      11 
 
        shape who has access to decision-making processes, citizens’ ability to organize and
        mobilize for collective action, and the responsiveness of political elites to their interests
        and concerns. For our purposes, key issues include: What types of political regime have
        shaped political activity and, in particular, teachers’ and education activists’ ability to
        mobilize for collective action? What are the respective responsibilities and powers of
        central and regional governments with regards to teacher management policy-making
        and implementation? What is the nature of financial arrangements between different
        levels of government? What different types of teachers exist under Indonesian law and
        regulation? How have these changed over time?

       Level 3: Agency: This level of analysis focuses on understanding the role of strategic
        choice and action, as exercised by individual and organizational actors, in policy-
        making and its implementation. In particular, it is concerned with these actors’ choices
        and actions with regards to, depending on their respective agendas, the promotion of or
        opposition to teacher management reform.


In interpreting this framework and applying it to the Indonesian context, we also draw on
concepts, language and findings that have emerged from the literature on Indonesia’s political
economy during the post-New Order period (including previous work by the authors),
particularly that focused on politics at the sub-national level. Broadly speaking, this literature
has entailed three broad types of study each of which has focused on one or other of the three
levels of analysis above.

    1. The first type of study has focused on the first level of analysis above and emphasized
       the political constraints to liberal and progressive reform stemming from continuities in
       the structure of power and interest between the New Order and post-New Order periods.
       It has argued that the state remains controlled by the same political, bureaucratic and
       corporate interests that dominated the New Order while popular forces and NGOs
       remain weak (Robison and Hadiz 2004). At both the national and local level, it has
       suggested, this has meant continued rule by figures from military, bureaucracy,
       business, and, in some cases, preman (street thug) backgrounds. Cabinet ministers,
       parliamentary figures, provincial governors and district heads appointed by Suharto
       may have been cleared away following reformasi but they have simply been replaced,
       in many cases, by individuals occupying the next tier down. Books by Robison and
       Hadiz (2004), Winters (2010) and Hadiz (2010) have been the most influential
       exemplars of this type of analysis (see also Hadiz 2003).
    2. The second type of study has focused on institutional variables and, in particular, the
       effects of institutional changes brought about by democratization and decentralization.
       It has shown that these changes have affected the respective roles of the central and
       regional governments in the policy-making process and, within the latter, of local
       parliaments and local executives, producing a shift in policy-making authority away
       from the central government towards regional (especially district) governments and
       away from local executives towards local parliaments (Turner and Podger 2003; Ray
       and Goodpaster 2003). At the same time, however, this work has suggested that the
       extent of change in both respects has been less dramatic than some proponents of
       democratic decentralization in Indonesia desired. While local parliaments are meant to
       issue local regulations jointly with bupatis (district heads), in practice the latter have
       initiated the vast majority of these regulations and dominated deliberations over their
       formulation, suggesting that local executives continue to exercise greater authority over

                                                                                                  12 
 
       the policy-making process than local parliaments despite democratization. At the same
       time, subsequent legal changes have made it harder for local parliaments to impeach
       bupatis, given bupatis the authority to intervene in the work of local parliaments in
       certain ways, and strengthened the hand of bupatis in budget preparation and
       management (Buehler 2009: 278-279). The introduction of direct elections for bupati
       positions in 2004—prior to this time, bupatis were elected by members of the district
       DPRD—has further enhanced their authority vis-à-vis local parliaments by giving them
       an independent mandate to govern (Schiller 2009: 151-152).
    3. The third type of study has taken issue with the broad-brush nature of the first and
       second types of study, pointing out that district-level governments have varied in their
       responses to a range of policy issues. For instance, while many district governments
       have done little to improve access to or the quality of public services, some have been
       quite progressive, investing heavily in programs of free education and health care. This
       third type of study has accepted that there has been considerable continuity in the
       structure of power and interest in Indonesia. But it has argued that some scope for
       reform has emerged as a result of democratization because local politicians now have
       an electoral incentive to adopt popular policies or NGO activists have had greater
       freedom to push for change (Rosser and Wilson 2012; Rosser and Sulistiyanto 2013;
       Aspinall 2014; Rosser 2015). In terms of the framework above, it has emphasized the
       third level of analysis.

The three different levels of analysis—and the concepts, language and findings from the
literature on Indonesia’s political economy that inform our understanding of them—permeate
all sections of this paper. However, Section 3 focuses on the first level of analysis while section
4 illustrates how changes in the institutional arrangements that characterized the New Order
and post-New Order periods—specifically with regards to the nature of the country’s political
regime and the division of responsibilities between the central and regional governments—
have served to shape these struggles. The role of agency then enters the analysis more
substantively in Section 5 on the politics surrounding specific teacher management reforms as
we look at the strategies pursued by different sets of actors—including bupati and NGOs—in
pursuit of their respective agendas. Before we enter into this analysis, however, it is necessary
to note a few points about the methodological approach employed in the study.


2.2	Notes	on	Methodology	


2.2.1 Sources of Data
The analysis presented in this paper is based on material from primary and secondary sources,
much of which was collected during fieldwork in Indonesia between May and August 2015,
although we have also drawn to a limited extent on material collected before and after this time.
Primary material was collected through interviews with national and regional government
officials, donor officials, civil society activists, political party/parliamentary representatives,
journalists, parent groups, teacher organizations, school principals and teachers in Jakarta and
four districts/municipalities in two provinces. We also carried out one interview in a fifth
district with the head of the local education agency and some of her staff. In total, we conducted
92 interviews across Jakarta and these districts/municipalities. To ensure confidentiality we
have anonymized the names of districts/municipalities—we refer to them as District A, District
B, Municipality A, and Municipality B, respectively—as well as our interviewees throughout

                                                                                                13 
 
the paper. We have also avoided references to names of individuals and documents that could
identify the districts and/or interviewees. A reliance on interview data poses some
methodological problems particularly with regards to the accuracy of the data collected
(informants may not remember events correctly, interviewers may misinterpret their
comments) and the potential for bias (informants may present only one side of a story).
Accordingly, where possible, we have sought to double check information collected through
interviews with other interviewees or secondary sources and to secure the views of a range of
stakeholders. Secondary material was collected through online newspaper and media outlets,
government publications, donor reports, and previous academic studies. We also examined,
where relevant, laws and regulations provided to us by informants or that we were able to source
online.


2.2.2 National vs. Regional Focus
The focus of the paper is on the regional level given that, under Indonesia’s current
decentralized system of government, primary responsibility for managing teacher management
issues lies at this level. However, in examining this topic, the paper gives significant attention
to the role of the central government and national level politics in shaping outcomes at the
regional level. As Section 5 illustrates, the central government has played a crucial role in
setting the incentives that regional governments face vis-à-vis teacher management and the
scope that they have to effectively resist reform through its use of central policy instruments.
In some cases, it has designed effective policy instruments for promoting teacher management
reform and remained committed to them in the face of political resistance. In other cases, it has
either failed to devise such policy instruments in the first place or watered them down in the
face of resistance. Whether the central government has played a disciplining role or effectively
left regional governments to their own devices has thus been a crucial determinant of outcomes
at the regional level, making it an important matter for the study.


2.2.3 Comparative Orientation
The paper is focused solely on Indonesia’s experience with teacher management policy and
implementation. However, it incorporates a comparative element by seeking to explain
differences in policy and implementation outcomes across different types of teacher
management reform. Work in comparative political economy has been primarily concerned
with cross-national comparisons. But in recent times, it has embraced ‘within-case
comparison’, a study design that entails comparison of outcomes across time, region or issue
within particular national contexts.
This study employs such a study design. The four districts chosen as the focus for fieldwork all
have a clear need for reform in teacher management as indicated by their teacher-student ratios
and indicators related to the distribution of teachers (see Annex One). It is reasonable to assume
that they also all face problems related to teacher competencies. However, each district-level
government has responded differently to the need for reform. All have introduced one or more
types of teacher management reform but the nature of these reforms and the extent to which
they have been implemented has varied significantly from case to case. District B has
introduced measures such as teacher redistribution but done little in relation to most other areas
of reform. District A has also carried out teacher redistribution but done little in other areas of
reform. Municipality A has sought to regroup schools and carry out periodization of school

                                                                                                14 
 
principals but not yet conducted teacher redistribution. Municipality B has been relatively slow
off the mark in relation to all aspects of teacher management reform but is beginning to carry
out teacher redistribution and periodization. In short, these four regions provide a rich tapestry
of material for exploring the political dynamics surrounding specific reforms and understanding
why they have proceeded in some cases but not others.


3.	The	Contending	Forces	

Struggles over teacher management policy and its implementation in Indonesia have involved
several sets of actors, each of which has had distinct interests, policy agendas and ways of
exercising leverage over policy-making and implementation. These actors include technocratic
elites, political and bureaucratic elites, and, of course, teachers and their unions.


3.1 Technocratic Elites

Technocratic elites are government officials with a high level of academic training—
particularly in economics but also, in some cases, other fields—who have the capacity to
analyze statistical data and make decisions on the basis of economic or scientific principles.
Many have received their training from leading foreign universities, particularly in Europe and
the United States and, to a lesser, extent Australia. Their principal concern with regards to
education policy for several decades has been to promote improved access to education—in
particular basic education but in more recent years secondary education as well—through
expansion of the school system and the introduction of policies of free and/or universal
education (see, for instance, Prawiro 1998: 176-181). But they have also given attention to
issues of teacher quality, teacher redistribution, and teacher numbers and cost. In seeking to
achieve these goals, one of their key concerns has been to ensure that government spending on
education—and in particular teachers’ salaries—is used as efficiently as possible and does not
impose an excessive burden on the budget (Jalal and Mustafa 2001; Jalal et al 2009).
Technocratic actors have not been immune to rent-seeking behavior given that they are
embedded in patronage networks like other officials. But, at the policy level, they have
generally advocated measures to improve governance of the education system.

Technocratic officials have historically been located in a range of central government ministries
and agencies but, in particular, the National Ministry (previously Agency) for Development
Planning (Bappenas), the Coordinating Ministry for Economic Affairs, and the Ministry of
Finance (Jawa Pos 2014; Balikpapanpos 2014). The Ministry of Education and Culture
(MoEC) has also had a significant cohort of technocratic officials although generally with
academic training in fields other than economics. During the second term of the Yudhoyono
government (2009-2014), a crucial period as far as this study is concerned, Vice-President
Boediono, a foreign trained economics professor, emerged as a key technocratic actor in
addressing these issues. This was primarily due to his role as Chair of the Education Committee,
a cabinet sub-committee bringing together representatives from, among other ministries, the
Ministries of Education and Culture, Finance, State Administration and Bureaucratic Reform,
Internal Affairs, and Religious Affairs (Kompas 2010; Vice President of Indonesia 2011).

Technocratic elites have lacked a significant domestic support base that is capable of mobilizing
politically to promote their policies or capturing the state apparatus through the electoral
process. But they have risen to senior positions within government, gained control over

                                                                                               15 
 
government programs and budgets, and exercised leverage over government policy because of
structural pressures on the government—specifically, the need for the country to enhance
human resources in a cost-effective way in order to maintain national economic
competitiveness while ensuring fiscal sustainability. They have also attracted support from the
foreign donor community, enabling the government to access the resources that donors control.
Among donors, the key proponents of teacher management reform have been the World Bank,
the US Agency for International Development (USAID), and Australia’s Department of
Foreign Affairs and Trade (DFAT), all of which have been extensively engaged in Indonesia’s
education sector and teacher management issues in particular. In addition to funding a series of
projects focused on these issues (see below), donors have also carried out extensive related
analytical work (see, for instance, World Bank 2010a; 2010b; Al Samarrai et al 2012; and
USAID Prioritas 2014; 2015). Finally, technocratic elites have drawn some support from the
Indonesian business community, at least to the modest extent that the latter has sought to
promote change in the country’s approach to teacher management (see below).


3.2 Political and Bureaucratic Elites

Political and bureaucratic elites, as that term is used here, refers to state officials occupying
senior positions in the executive, legislative and judicial arms of government who—in contrast
to technocratic elites—have been driven primarily by rent-seeking and political agendas rather
than a desire to promote reform. Such officials have long permeated the state apparatus at both
the national and local levels (Robison and Hadiz 2004). Importantly for our purposes, they have
also permeated those parts of the bureaucracy responsible for teacher management. A series of
recent corruption cases related to government procurement in the education sector at the
national and local levels has exposed the identities and modus operandi of some figures within
this group. 8 But, in general, these figures can be difficult to identify because networks of
corruption and patronage operate in the shadows that sit behind formal institutions, making it
difficult to see clearly how they operate and whom they embrace. While government
procurement of school supplies, textbooks, equipment and construction has been the most
obvious source of rents for these elites (Box One), they have also had important interests at
stake in relation to teacher management.

                                                                       Box One
                                                               Special Allocation Funds

Since the implementation of decentralization in 2001, the central government has provided
Special Allocation Funds (DAK) to regional governments to finance central government
initiatives that are implemented by the regions. Among these initiatives are activities related to
school building, construction and repair. Funds for these activities have been a source of rents
for political and bureaucratic elites at the local level. In interviews with various informants, it
became clear that much rent-seeking in relation to these funds occurred via the agency of NGOs
with close connections to senior political and bureaucratic figures. Often referred to as LSM
plat merah (literally, ‘red license plate NGOs’, a reference to the fact that government cars
have red license plates), these NGOs typically extort money from school principals and local
education agency officials by threatening to make public allegations of corruption and
impropriety in relation to the use of DAK funds unless they hand over a share of the funds. This

                                                            
8
     See, for instance, Amelia (2012) and Setuningsih (2012).

                                                                                                16 
 
money is then presumably channeled upward to senior political and bureaucratic figures. Such
NGOs are often staffed by thugs or members of criminal gangs known as preman.

Firstly, teacher management has represented a way in which political and bureaucratic elites,
at both the national and local levels, have enriched themselves and their allies or mobilized
resources for favored institutions and pet projects. Central government officials have had
control over the number and type of teacher positions, enabling them to do deals with regional
governments over how these positions are allocated between regions. Likewise, regional
government officials have had control over teacher appointments, enabling them to sell teacher
and school principal positions to the highest bidder or, alternatively, appoint friends, family
members and political allies to such positions. 9 Either way, they have gained control over
school-level rent-seeking opportunities. Most crucial in this respect have been school principal
positions because of their responsibility for school budgets (Widoyoko 2005). In general, so-
called sekolah favorit (literally ‘favorite’ schools—i.e. schools where there is high demand for
student places) have presented greater rent-seeking opportunities than non-favorite schools
because of the fact that they have attracted students from more affluent backgrounds than other
public schools and have, consequently, had greater potential to extract resources, legitimately
or otherwise, from parents. Teacher management has also provided an opportunity for political
and bureaucratic elites to generate funds for elite-dominated institutions and prestige projects
through levies on teachers’ salaries, the latter being the largest single item of expenditure in the
education budget (see Box Two).

                                                                         Box Two
                                                               Levies on Teachers’ Salaries

Example A
According to media reports, in 2003-2004, the head of District A’s education agency and head
of the agency’s finance section were prosecuted for misuse of infak funds intended to finance
the renovation of the local Grand Mosque (Masjid Agung) as well as funds related to the Broad
Basic Education program. The infak funds, which are formally voluntary contributions or a
form of charitable payment, had been mobilized through non-voluntary deductions from
teachers’ salaries, provoking complaints from over 1,000 teachers across the district.

Example B
In interviews, several informants told us that it is not uncommon for certified teachers to share
their respective professional allowances—an additional payment that such teachers receive—
with guru honor at the same school. This redistribution would appear to be instigated by the
school principal. While this practice can be seen as consistent with Indonesian cultural norms
of ‘shared poverty’ it is also consistent with the logic of patron-client networks to the extent
that guru honor—typically appointed by school principals—may be the latter’s relatives or
friends.

Secondly, by cultivating patronage networks through teacher management decisions, political
and bureaucratic elites at the national and local levels have also been able to build political
networks, mobilize votes during elections and exercise political control. The recruitment of
additional teachers, increases in their pay, and offers of promotion or transfer to more lucrative
roles has been a way for incumbent or aspiring politicians to secure political support within the
school system. As leading figures within local communities, teachers have been able to exercise
                                                            
9
     On this practice, see Kompas (2002).

                                                                                                 17 
 
some influence over how people in their communities vote at election time, making their
support a potentially valuable asset. As the individuals responsible for delivering curricula
related to Pancasila (the state ideology) and more recently citizenship and behavior, they have
also played a crucial role in ensuring Indonesian students and their families remain loyal to the
state.

Political and bureaucratic elites have accordingly sought to manage teacher numbers, quality,
and distribution so as to maximize the rents and votes that flow from schools upward through
the bureaucracy or directly to elites and these elites’ political control over the populace. This
orientation has entailed: i) maximization of the number of civil service teacher positions funded
by the central government—regardless of whether there is a bona fide need for extra teachers—
so as to maximize patronage resources at their disposal; ii) use of local government resources
to employ additional honorary teachers, particularly in the run-up to local elections, again
regardless of whether there is a bona fide need for extra teachers (Pierskalla and Sacks 2015);
iii) efforts to ensure the appointment of friends, family members and political allies to teacher—
especially school principal—positions rather than the best qualified candidates; iv) support for
the charging of illegal fees by schools and misuse of school and local education budgets; v)
extraction of legal and illegal fees from teachers’ pay without threatening their continued
political compliance; and vi) use of promotions, demotions and transfers to reward or discipline
teachers for providing/not providing political support (see Box Three). To the extent that such
practices have worked against educational quality and equity and fiscal prudence, they have
been at odds with the technocratic agenda.

                                                                    Box Three
                                                               Teacher Politicization
                                                                 (Politisasi Guru)

It is not uncommon for teachers who back losing candidates in elections for regional head (i.e.
bupati/mayor) to be ‘punished’ by being moved to isolated parts of a region. According to
Ilfiyah et al (2015: 28):

Teachers who oppose their superiors such as school principals, local education agency sub-district branches, heads
of local education agencies, or even regional heads will be shifted to isolated schools. This even happens in the
periods leading up to and after elections for regional head. Teachers who are considered to be politically opposed
to regional heads will be shifted to isolated schools far away from their families. Or teachers who support losing
candidates in elections for regional head must be prepared to be shifted from their schools.

In one case, we heard that a school principal had been di-nonjob-kan (shifted to position where
he had nothing to do and no resources at his disposal) after publicly aligning himself with one
of the mayor’s rivals at the forthcoming mayoral election. After the rival candidate won the
election, he was then promoted to head of the education agency.10

In pursuing their interests, political and bureaucratic elites have been able to take advantage of
the fact that they have occupied the state apparatus and, in particular, those parts responsible
for teacher management policy and its implementation. These have included the Ministry for
the Empowerment of the State Apparatus (MenPAN) and various regional government bodies
such as education agencies (Dinas Pendidikan), civil service agencies (BKD), and Advisory
Boards for Position and Rank (Baperjakat). MenPAN has had responsibility for determining
the number and type of new guru PNS positions awarded to regions, making it possible for its
                                                            
10
     Interview with a university academic and member of the local Education Board.

                                                                                                               18 
 
officials to sell civil service positions to regional elites looking for additional patronage
resources. 11 Regional government bodies have in turn been responsible for hiring and
promotion decisions. School principal promotions, for instance, have been tightly controlled
by senior local government officials through Baperjakat, a body that typically comprises the
Regional Secretary (Sekda) (the head of the local civil service), several of his/her assistants, the
Inspector, and the head of the BKD. The head of the local education agency generally does not
sit formally on this board but is able to make recommendations to it. The Regional Secretary
and education agency head also play an important role in making decisions about the rotation
of public school principals through their positions on another body, the Final Assessment Team
(Tim Penilaian Akhir).


3.3 Teachers

Indonesian teachers fall into two broad groups:

             Civil servant teachers (guru PNS): These teachers hold permanent positions and receive
              relatively good salaries and pension benefits compared to many other Indonesian
              workers and in particular honorary teachers (on the latter, see below). They are virtually
              un-sackable. The vast majority are found in public schools. In the past, some civil
              servant teachers were assigned to private schools but this has become increasingly rare:
              a 2010 national regulation gave permission to regional governments to withdraw guru
              PNS from private schools (Kompas 2010a) and many regional governments have
              responded by doing precisely that. Ambitious and successful guru PNS have a clear
              career path ahead of them that entails promotion to school principal (kepala sekolah),
              supervisor (pengawas), and then bureaucratic positions in the local education agency
              (dinas pendidikan), all the while retaining civil servant status. Those who make it
              through to head of the local education agency are then well-placed to run for district
              head or mayor. Teacher management reform has presented a threat to these teachers to
              the extent that it has entailed possible reduction in teacher numbers, relocation to less
              desirable/more remote schools, increased workloads, fewer promotion opportunities,
              greater accountability with regards to teaching quality, and reductions in salary and
              conditions. Where rewards have been offered to teachers who are subject to reform
              initiatives—for instance, access to new allowances—their incentives can be different.
              But in the absence of such rewards, teacher management reform has essentially been a
              threat to them.

             Honorary teachers (guru honor/honorer): These teachers are casually employed and do
              not have civil servant status. Most are employed directly by schools using School
              Operational Assistance (BOS) funds but some are employed by regional governments
              (the latter being referred at as guru honor daerah or guru honda). The term guru honor
              is often used to refer specifically to casually-employed teachers who work at public
              schools. But in District A and Municipality A, we noted that it was used by honorary
              teacher organizations to encompass both casually-employed teachers in public schools
              and all teachers in private schools.12 The common denominator between these two sets
              of teachers is a relative lack of job security, lower salaries and lower pension benefits
                                                            
11
  Interview with anti-corruption activist, Jakarta, May 2015.
12
  In interview,  figures from a local organization representing guru honor in District A argued that there are no
permanent private school teachers (guru tetap yayasan) in the district. All are employed on a casual basis. District
A, June 2015.

                                                                                                                 19 
 
              compared to guru PNS. There is no consistency in the amounts that guru honor are paid
              or the basis on which they paid with some being paid by the hour, others by the day,
              and other again a flat rate per month regardless of hours worked.13 In contrast to guru
              PNS, honorary teachers have no clear career path ahead of them: without civil servant
              status, they cannot be promoted to school principal or supervisory positions, or
              administrative positions in the local education agency. While teacher management
              reform has generally entailed initiatives related to guru PNS, it has also presented a
              threat to honorary teachers to the extent that it has potentially reduced their
              opportunities for work and/or the scope for them to upgrade from honorary to civil
              servant status. This, as we will see, has particularly been the case with controls on the
              appointment of new guru PNS, teacher redistribution, school mergers and multi-grade
              teaching.

In contesting teacher management policy and its implementation, teachers have been severely
constrained by their structurally subordinate position vis-à-vis technocratic elites and political
and bureaucratic elites—specifically, the fact that (except for those promoted through to
positions in the local education agency) they do not occupy positions of authority in the state
apparatus. During the New Order period, teachers were also constrained by authoritarian
controls on civil society activism and independent organization. During the freer political
climate of the post-New Order period, however, they have had a number of avenues of protest
available to them. These have included being able to engage in public debate over policy issues
and organize for collective action through teacher trade unions. Claiming a membership of 1.9
million teachers (roughly two-thirds of the total),14 the Indonesian Teachers Union (PGRI) has
been the most important vehicle in this respect. But newer independent unions such as the
Indonesian Independent Teachers’ Forum (FGII), the Independent Teachers Action Forum
(FAGI), the Indonesian Teachers Union Federation (FSGI), and the various organizations
representing guru honor have also been very active in recent years, particularly at the national
level, although their memberships are doubtless vastly smaller than the PGRI.15 Other avenues
of protest have included exploiting teachers’ personal social and political networks to directly
lobby local political and bureaucratic elites in relation to specific teacher transfer, promotion
or other decisions; and challenging such decisions in court.


3.4 Other Actors

Three other sets of actors have also played a role in struggles over teacher management policy
and its implementation during the post-New Order period, albeit relatively minor roles. The
first of these has been activists associated with ICW’s Public Service Monitoring Division.
Since its establishment in the late 1990s, ICW has been a trenchant critic of the central
government’s education policies, particularly those seen to promote the ‘privatization’ or
‘commercialization’ of education. It played a leading role in defeating government policies on
international standard schools and educational legal entities through legal challenges at the
Constitutional Court (Rosser and Curnow 2014; Rosser 2015). With regards to teacher
management reform, it has been less vocal and more sympathetic to central government policy.
To the extent that ICW activists have commented on teacher management reform, they have i)
acknowledged the need for improvement in teacher quality and distribution although not
                                                            
13
    Interviews with various school principals and teachers in District A, Municipality B and District B, June-August
2015. See also Padmawati (2010: 20).
14
    See http://download.ei-ie.org/Docs/WebDepot/PGRI_Presentation_DCmeeting.ppt.
15
    According to one recent media report, FSGI, for instance, has 3,000 members (Mustakim 2015).

                                                                                                                 20 
 
necessarily reductions in teacher numbers; and ii) lambasted the government for failing to
implement its policies in this area (rather than for the nature of these policies). For instance, in
a 2015 USAID-funded report, Ilfiyah et al (2015) noted the desperate need for better teacher
distribution and lamented the fact that the central government had made relatively little progress
in effecting change. To the extent that ICW activists have engaged in debates over teacher
management reform, therefore, their position has been, in important respects, broadly
supportive of government policy and consistent with the technocratic agenda—in marked
contrast to their stand on many other education policy issues (Rosser and Curnow 2014). This
stance has removed a key source of potential opposition to teacher management reform.

The second set of actors has been parents of school children (hereafter just parents). Parents in
Indonesia are poorly organized. Few parent representative groups exist and those that do have
typically been formed to influence decision-making within particular schools in affluent areas.
They have consequently been concerned with the particular problems of school management
in so-called sekolah favorit (which tend to be located in these areas) rather than schools in
general. Other mechanisms of potential parental influence have included school committees
(komite sekolah) and district-level Education Boards (Dewan Pendidikan). But the former have
generally been dominated by school principals while the latter have generally been dominated
by local political and bureaucratic elites and/or parents from middle class backgrounds. Both
are typically poorly funded and sometimes inactive. Combined together, these factors have
limited the scope for genuine involvement of parents in decision-making, particularly poor
parents and, along with limited NGO activity, severely constrained citizen demand for change
at both the national and local levels. Parents have also played a role in relation to teacher
management issues—albeit in a way that has not aided reform—to the extent that they have
constituted a resource upon which individual teachers have drawn in seeking to influence
transfer and promotion decisions.

The third set of actors has been Indonesian business groups and their main representative
organizations, the Indonesian Chamber of Commerce (KADIN) and the Indonesian Employers’
Association (APINDO). Indonesian businesses have long complained of difficulty in recruiting
skilled workers, especially to fill management positions. But, neither they nor their
representative organizations have lobbied strongly for the government to improve access to and
the quality of the country’s education system—in particular by improving teacher
management—perhaps fearing that it would open up the possibly of increased corporate
taxation.16 Also, for many business groups, the issue of improving education quality has been
a minor concern because the key to business success has been gaining access to government
contracts, grants and licenses rather than building competitive advantage through technological
development. This has particularly been the case at the local level. As a result, as Guharoy
(2008) has noted, Indonesian businesses and their representative organizations have tended to
be ‘silent’ on education issues, focusing their lobbying efforts instead on trying to promote
more flexible labor regulations and secure various forms of government largesse. A recent
report by APINDO (2014), for instance, calls for government subsidization of business in-
house training programs as the main way of addressing skill shortages.

In 2012, McKinsey and Co (2012) issued a report on the Indonesian economy that shifted the
focus by calling for a range of measures to improve the quality of Indonesia’s education system.
                                                            
16
    Tendler (2002) has suggested that for businesses in developing countries, employers requiring unskilled labor
can ‘fear’ education as it will reduce the pool of potential employees willing to work as unskilled labor, lead to
out migration and reduce their comparative advantage by pushing up wages. It is difficult to know to what extent
this factor has been at work in the Indonesian case.

                                                                                                               21 
 
Specifically, it called for the government to raise ‘the standard of teaching with an emphasis
on attracting and developing great teachers’ (2012: 8). To this end, it proposed that the
government should increase teacher remuneration, recruit teachers from the top tier of
graduates, and improve teacher distribution. This report may signal a change in the business
community’s approach to education issues. But such pronouncements still remain the exception
rather than the rule.

In the following sections, we illustrate how struggles between these various actors have played
out during the post-New Order period. In so doing, we begin by examining the politics of
teacher management under the New Order, noting the way in which the balance of power
between political and bureaucratic elites, technocratic elites and other actors and the nature of
New Order’s political institutions shaped the number, employment, distribution and quality of
teachers during that period. We then examine how the collapse of the New Order and the
broader political and institutional changes it produced has changed the politics of teacher
management in Indonesia. In this respect, we begin by examining the politics of teacher
management in post-New Order Indonesia in general terms before examining the politics of
various specific teacher management issues.


4.	The	Political	Economy	of	Teacher	Management:	Overview	

4.1 Background: The New Order Period

Under the New Order, military and bureaucratic officials dominated Indonesian politics along
with the business groups to which they were linked. The Indonesian military seized power in a
coup in 1965. Thereafter, its leaders emasculated the political parties and the national
parliament, gained control over the bureaucracy through the appointment of military officials
to senior bureaucratic positions and the introduction of requirements for government
bureaucrats to support Golkar, and subordinated the judiciary to political and bureaucratic
authority. At the same time, they re-engaged with the donor community and sought to attract
mobile private domestic and foreign capital back into the country through the introduction of
economic policy reforms. As part of this process, they gave substantial authority over economic
and social policy to a group of economic technocrats known collectively as the ‘Berkeley
Mafia’ (Robison, 1986; Winters, 1996). By contrast, the poor and NGO elements were
prevented from exercising much influence over policy-making and its implementation by the
imposition of authoritarian controls on their activities (Robison and Hadiz, 2004).

With the technocrats exercising significant influence over economic and social policy, the New
Order invested heavily in promoting improved access to education, especially basic education,
through expansion of the school system. This was particularly the case during the oil boom
years of the late 1970s and early 1980s when the government was awash with petrodollars
(Prawiro 1998: 176-181). A significant part of this investment was used to recruit new teachers
to staff new schools that were built throughout the country, in particular, in regional and remote
areas.

Corruption, however, served to undermine the educational effectiveness of this new investment
in the school system. Indonesian schools became part of the larger ‘franchise’ structure that
characterized the New Order’s rule, the key feature of which was the purchase of government
positions in exchange for access to the rents they could generate (McLeod 2000). Local

                                                                                               22 
 
community members such as parents, who had previously played a central role in school
management, were pushed aside in favor of politico-bureaucratic figures who bought their
positions at schools from local education officials in exchange for the opportunity to make
money through corruption, fees, and the appointment of friends to teaching positions (Rosser
and Joshi 2013; Irawan et al 2004: 50). In this context, teachers became incorporated into
networks of corruption and patronage as both generators and beneficiaries of the rents that
education budgets and teaching positions made available.

At the same time, schools became vehicles through which the New Order mobilized votes at
election time and exercised political control (Schiller 1999: 11; Bjork 2003: 192-193). The
school system was one of few national institutional structures that reached all the way down to
the village level, making it an extremely important link between political and bureaucratic elites
and the masses. As civil servants, teachers were required to support Golkar, the New Order’s
electoral vehicle; display ‘mono-loyalty’ to the state; and both take and teach compulsory
courses in the state ideology, Pancasila. If they failed to perform these responsibilities, they
risked demotion or transfer to less attractive schools, particularly in remote areas. Teachers
were also required to be members of the Indonesian Teachers Union (PGRI), the sole
recognized teachers’ trade union. Established in 1945 as part of the nationalist resistance to
Dutch rule, the PGRI operated during the New Order period as a mechanism for controlling
teachers rather than the articulation of their collective interests. Its political subordination was
made transparent by its incorporation into Golkar in 1970 (Kompas 1970). In exchange for its
allegiance to the New Order, it was given a monopoly on the representation of teachers and
authority to extract fees from teachers’ salaries with little or no accountability over use of the
associated funds (Reeve 1985: 328).

In this context, there was little political will within government to address issues related to
teacher quality, teacher distribution, or teacher numbers and cost. Rather the dominant logic at
work was to expand and consolidate networks of corruption and patronage and enhance
political control. This meant maximizing teacher numbers to provide additional patronage
opportunities while expecting little of teachers in terms of accountability for educational
outcomes. One consequence was a marked growth in teacher numbers. Another was high
absenteeism rates as teachers were permitted to sacrifice their teaching responsibilities to
pursue income earning opportunities outside of school without simultaneously sacrificing their
salaries. A third consequence was a mal-distribution of teachers as political and bureaucratic
elites ensured that their friends, family and political allies gained teaching positions at schools
in urban areas near their family and social networks. Particularly privileged in this respect were
the sekolah favorit that schooled children of local government officials and other members of
the middle class.

A final consequence was poor quality teacher training, both pre-service and in-service. Until
1990, students were able to qualify as primary school teachers by graduating from senior
vocational secondary schools known as Teacher Education Schools (SPG). According to Jalal
et al (2009: 9), these offered low quality training and ‘graduates usually did not meet minimum
standards of competency.’ Tertiary teacher training colleges known as IKIP (subsequently
LPTK) were better in quality. But they still faced serious issues such as underqualified faculty,
a rigid curriculum, and inadequate facilities (World Bank 1996: 3-4). Indonesian teachers
consequently generally had poor pedagogical skills and weak subject knowledge despite efforts
from time to time to enable them to upgrade their academic qualifications.



                                                                                                 23 
 
The negative impact of this situation on the quality, equity and cost of Indonesia’s education
system soon became apparent (World Bank 1989: 3), forcing the government to look more
seriously at teacher management issues. The result was a series of initiatives during the 1980s
and 1990s aimed at improving teacher qualifications, pedagogical skills and/or distribution
including the First and Second Secondary Education and Management Projects (1984-1990 and
1990-1997 respectively), the Primary School Teacher Development Project (1992-1999) and
the Secondary School Teacher Development Project (1996-2002), all of which were funded by
the World Bank. In the end, however, these initiatives proved insufficient to fundamentally
improve the quality of Indonesia’s teachers, improve their distribution, or ensure their numbers
matched the country’s genuine need for teachers. Without the requisite political will to improve
teacher quality and promote a more efficient use of teacher resources, there was little scope for
any significant change.


4.2 The Post-New Order Period

The Asian economic crisis in 1997 and demise of the New Order regime in 1998 produced a
political context that was slightly more conducive to teacher management reform. By
precipitating widespread corporate bankruptcy, the crisis undermined the economic base of
New Order elites and their corporate clients. By simultaneously increasing the country’s public
debt and undermining sources of government revenue, it forced the government to negotiate a
rescue package with the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and accept increased aid. Both
these factors enhanced the structural power of donors, at least for the period of the crisis and
its immediate aftermath. While the IMF package did not address education policy issues beyond
the introduction of new social safety net programs, it created an environment in which
government technocrats and donors were able to exercise much greater leverage over education
policy than they had before.

In this context, government technocrats, particularly in Bappenas and MoEC, pushed hard for
teacher management reform, leveraging the support of the World Bank and other members of
the donor community. In September 1998, the Bank published a major report on Indonesia’s
education system that argued that: ‘A key part of quality improvement is teachers—having
them equitably distributed, giving them appropriate incentives, and ensuring they are
adequately trained’ (World Bank 1998: x). Immediately afterward, it then co-funded with
Bappenas the establishment of a series of Task Forces to prepare reports on key education
policy issues including teacher management (Jalal and Musthafa 2001). These Task Forces
brought together a range of key stakeholders including Bappenas officials, MoNE officials,
education academics and representatives of the PGRI. Over the next few years, donors provided
loans and grants to the Indonesian government to support a series of projects related to teacher
management reform (see Box Four).

                                         Box Four
                          Donor Projects on Teacher Management

Bermutu
The Better Education through Reformed Management and Universal Teacher Upgrading
(Bermutu) project was supported by the World Bank and the Dutch government (World Bank
2014). The project started on 5 July 2007 and finished on 31 December 2013. The objective of
Bermutu was to contribute to the improvement of the overall quality and performance of
teachers through enhancing teachers' knowledge of subject matter and pedagogical skills in the

                                                                                              24 
 
classroom. The project had 4 main components which did not change until the end. They were
(1) reforming university-based teacher education; (2) strengthening structures for teacher
improvement at the local level; (3) reforming teacher accountability and incentives systems for
performance appraisal and career advancement; and (4) improving program coordination,
monitoring and evaluation. The project was implemented in 16 of Indonesia’s 34 provinces.
Kinerja
Kinerja is a USAID initiative that was aimed improving how local governments deliver public
services (USAID 2013). It ran from September 2010 until September 2015. It worked through
local institutions to build their capacity and encourage sustainable partnerships with local
government while building on a body of existing innovative practices in local governance
programs and sector initiatives. It involved three main activities: (1) establishing incentives for
local governments to improve service delivery, (2) adopting innovative service delivery
approaches, and (3) expanding the application of improved practices to other local governments
through replication. This focus included measures related to education governance and
specifically the distribution of teachers (USAID 2014a). Kinerja was implemented in Provinsi
Aceh, Jawa Timur, Kalimantan Barat, Sulawesi Selatan, and Papua.
Prioritas
Prioritizing Reform Innovation and Opportunities for Reaching Indonesia's Teachers,
Administrators and Students) (Prioritas) is a five-year USAID-funded project designed to
improve access to quality education for children in Indonesia (USAID 2014b). It began in May
2012 and will be finished by 2017. Prioritas’s objectives are to strengthen instruction in schools
in targeted districts, improve education management and governance, and strengthen
coordination within the education system. To this end, it has concern, among other things, with
teacher deployment. It is working in seven provinces that previously partnered with USAID’s
Decentralized Basic Education (DBE) project: Aceh, Sumatra Utara, Banten, Jawa Barat, Jawa
Tengah, Jawa Timur, and Sulawesi Selatan. In April 2014, it started to work in Papua Province,
supporting the work of two nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) in the highland areas of
the province.
Prodep
Professional Development for Education Personnel (Prodep) is component 2 of the Australia’s
Education Partnership (Leslie and Strudwick 2015). It began in July 2014 and will run until
July 2016. It has been implemented in 250 districts in 32 provinces (Prodep 2015). The purpose
of Prodep is to develop a national system for the professional development of Education
Personnel and, in so doing, improve the competence and performance of school principals and
madrasah heads, supervisors, and education officials at the district and province level who are
responsible for the management and governance of schools or madrasah. Four main
professional development programs run by Prodep are: building of education capacity of local
government program, candidate principal preparation program, principal mentoring program
by supervisors, and principal professional development program.


However, in seeking to promote teacher management reform, government technocrats and their
allies in the donor community have been constrained by three factors. The first has been the
fact that they have had little direct authority over the implementation of teacher management
policy. Under the New Order, regional governments already had primary responsibility for
implementing teacher management policy notwithstanding the centralized nature of New Order
rule and despite an effort in the early 1990s by the national Department of Education and
Culture to seize that responsibility for itself (King 1995: 82-84). The introduction of new

                                                                                                25 
 
decentralization laws in 1999 and their implementation in 2001 consolidated the role of regional
governments in this respect by granting them formal authority over education policy. Central
government technocrats have accordingly been forced to rely, by and large, on central
government policy instruments that establish incentives for regional governments to act in ways
that accord with the technocratic agenda rather than direct control over implementation. The
most significant of these instruments in recent years—as we will see below—have been a
moratorium on new civil service appointments in regions that spend more than a certain
proportion of their budgets on salaries, a new national teacher certification program aimed at
improving teacher subject knowledge and pedagogical skills, and a joint ministerial regulation
instructing regional governments to address teacher distribution problems. The central
government’s lack of direct control over teacher management, however, has severely
constrained government technocrats’ ability to promote change.

The second constraint has been the continued political dominance during the post-New Order
period of military and bureaucratic officials and their corporate clients. As Vedi Hadiz (2003,
593) among others has argued, these elements were ‘able to reinvent themselves through new
alliances and vehicles’ such as political parties with the result that they have maintained
instrumental control over the state apparatus notwithstanding the shift to a more democratic
political system. The result has been that, at both national and regional levels, long-standing
patronage and political networks have remained an entrenched feature of governance.

In the education sector, for instance, senior staff at MoEC and the Ministry of Religious Affairs
(MoRA) have continued to be recruited largely from among rectors, deans and lecturers at the
public universities under these Ministries’ control, particularly those who have civil servant
status17 and are members of Muhammadiyah or Nahdatul Ulama, the country’s largest Islamic
organizations, both of which have long been integrated into state-based patronage networks in
the education sector. This has included in most cases the Ministers themselves (although the
appointment of Anies Baswedan, rector of the private Islamic Paramadina University, as
Minister in 2014 represented a break with this pattern). At the same time, positions in local
education agencies have continued to be awarded to former guru PNS who have either bought
their way into these positions or had close personal connections to more senior officials or
members of the political elite; and schools and other local-level educational institutions have
remained part of the franchise structure of the state as well as mechanisms for mobilizing votes
and exercising political control (see Box Five). In short, political and bureaucratic elites
nurtured under the New Order have continued to have enormous capacity to influence education
policy and its implementation and, in the process, undermine reform.

                                                               Box Five
                                               Teacher Deliberative and Working Groups

In theory, all Indonesian civil servant teachers should participate in local deliberative or
working groups that run activities aimed at enhancing teacher professionalism and quality.
Many guru honor—for instance, those working as primary school class teachers (guru kelas)—
are meant to participate in these groups as well. For primary school teachers, the groups are
known as Primary School Teacher Working Groups (KKGSD) while for junior secondary and
senior secondary teachers, they are known as Subject Teachers Deliberative Groups (MGMP).
Among the former, there are groups representing teachers for each year level—i.e. KKGSD
                                                            
17
  Like principals and teachers in public schools, university managers and lecturers in public universities often
have civil servant status.

                                                                                                             26 
 
Grade One, KKGSD Grade Two and so on. Among the latter, there are separate MGMP for
junior and secondary schools and for each subject on the curriculum—i.e. there are groups
called, for instance, MGMP SMP Maths, MGMP SMA Maths, MGMP SMP English, MGMP
SMA English. School principals have their own deliberative or working groups known as
School Principal Working Deliberative Groups (MKKS) which, again, are divided by school
level—i.e. there are separate groups for MKKS Primary, MKKS Junior Secondary, and MKKS
Senior Secondary. School supervisors (pengawas) also have their own bodies known as School
Supervisor Working Deliberative Group (MKPS). These various groups generally operate at
both the neighborhood (gugus/sekretariat) and district/municipality (kabupaten/kota) levels
and typically include not only teachers among their membership but also officials from the
local education agency.

Most representatives from these groups with whom we met indicated that their respective
groups met regularly and had fairly well-organized programs of activities. But generally these
tended to be oriented more towards dissemination of and discussion about changes in national
or local government education policy than activities aimed at enhancing teachers’ subject
knowledge and pedagogical skills. One commonly mentioned example was the introduction of
the new school curriculum in 2013.

In one case, the head of an MGMP for senior secondary economics teachers appeared to be
using his position for rent-seeking purposes in broad accordance with the franchise model. He
told us that the MGMP funded training for teachers by drawing on funding from two main
sources: the local education agency and local private universities. In general, he was not keen
on using the education agency funding because doing so involved a lot of administration. But
he still applied for this money because he did not want to get the education agency off-side. For
the most part, the MGMP carried out training programs in conjunction with local private
universities (in particular low-ranking ones struggling to attract students). Typically, these
programs were held as part of these universities’ student recruitment drives and involved three
components: discussion among MGMP members about substantive issues; contributions by
university lecturers related to these issues; and a marketing pitch from the university. The
teachers invited to participate in these sessions were generally those from public schools and
private schools with large student enrollments and hence the most lucrative recruitment grounds
for the private universities.

The third constraint has been the fact that democratization has opened up new opportunities for
teachers to challenge teacher management reform. It has done so in several ways:

              By allowing the PGRI greater autonomy from the government. As noted above,
               under the New Order, the PGRI was a corporatist institution that served to limit
               independent teacher activism. Since the fall of New Order, it has withdrawn
               from Golkar and declared itself officially non-partisan in party political terms.
               At the local level, it has remained closely entwined with government. It is
               common, for instance, for senior officials in local education agencies to be
               elected as head of the district/municipal arm of the PGRI. In District B, the link
               between government and the PGRI is so strong that it is the bupati’s wife who
               is the current head. But, at the national level, the PGRI’s repositioning as a
               formally independent institution has enabled it to take a more critical stance vis-
               à-vis government policy and particularly that related to teachers. It has, for
               instance, publicly challenged the notion that Indonesia has an excess number of
               teachers; argued that improvements in teacher quality should be linked to

                                                                                               27 
 
        improved teacher pay (especially via the government’s certification program);
        and contended that teacher redistribution should not be carried out as a form of
        punishment (see, for instance, PGRI 2015).

       By enabling the establishment of new organizations representing guru honor.
        The PGRI claims to represent all teachers including guru honor. But, in general,
        it is seen as prioritizing the interests of guru PNS over guru honor. This, along
        with greater freedom of organization since the fall of the New Order, has created
        space for the emergence of rival teacher representative organizations focusing
        on the latter set of teachers. Examples include the Indonesian Honorary
        Employees Community (KTSI), the Honorary Teachers’ Communication
        Forum (FKGH), and the Indonesian Honorary Teachers’ Association (IGHI).
        As with the PGRI, it is unclear how genuine or effective these organizations are
        in representing the interests of their members. Typically, such organizations
        endeavor to exercise leverage over government policy through engagement with
        the media and local and national demonstrations, although in some cases they
        also try to do so through deals with local politicians whereby they trade policy
        support and access to government grants for help in mobilizing votes. In general,
        these organizations have focused their activism in relation to teacher
        management on two specific issues: i) upgrading guru honor to civil servant
        status and ii) improving guru honor pay.

       By enabling the emergence of independent teacher trade unions: In addition to
        new guru honor organizations, the post-New Order period has also witnessed
        the establishment of a host of independent teachers unions such as the FGII,
        FAGI, and FSGI. These organizations have positioned themselves as opponents
        of the government’s education policies and been particularly vocal over issues
        such as corruption in school management and the perceived ‘privatization’ or
        ‘corporatization’ of education. Ideologically, they have drawn on left-wing and
        sometimes radical critiques of neoliberalism that emphasize notions of human
        rights and social justice. They have made extensive use of the media in
        promoting their cause, especially professionally-run national newspapers.
        Occasionally, they have held public demonstrations. They have tended to be
        based in major urban centers with independent media but not in rural or remote
        areas where the local media tends to be more closely aligned with local
        government. Some of these organizations have close links to prominent Jakarta-
        based human rights and anti-corruption NGOs, most notably the Human Rights
        Foundation (LBH) and Indonesia Corruption Watch (ICW), and Jakarta-based
        education activist networks such as the Education Forum and the Education
        Coalition. As we will see below, some of these organizations have expressed
        support for specific teacher management reform measures in their respective
        local areas, particularly where it has served their agenda of combatting
        corruption in school management and promoting rights and social justice. But,
        otherwise, they have been critical of key central government policies in this area
        in particular the Five Ministerial decree issued in 2011 (discussed below) (see,
        for instance, Pahlevi 2012).

       By creating greater scope for teachers to successfully lobby national and local
        political and bureaucratic elites. The advent of genuinely competitive elections
        at both the national and local levels, including for executive as well as legislative

                                                                                          28 
 
                             positions, has provided an opportunity for teachers to leverage their electoral
                             importance for advantage. They have accordingly targeted aspiring politicians
                             within the education bureaucracy (MoEC and local agencies), members of
                             national and regional parliaments (DPR and DPRD), and local executives (i.e.
                             bupati or mayor). In some cases, such lobbying has entailed collective action by
                             teacher representative organizations. In other cases, it has been more
                             individualized in nature and tied to specific decisions related to, for instance,
                             teacher transfers. In the later cases, teachers have been able to make use of their
                             respective social and political networks—for instance, family, friendship, or
                             clan relationships to political and bureaucratic figures—and, in some instances,
                             the support of school communities. According to the Chair of the DPRD in
                             Municipality B, most of the complaints that he receives in relation to teacher
                             transfers typically involve appeals from parents of children at sekolah favourit
                             and similar schools indicating that they do not want to lose favorite teachers.18

                            By creating new judicial pathways for challenging government policy: Judicial
                             corruption, incompetence and inefficiency have remained central features of
                             Indonesia’s court system despite democratization. However, democratization
                             and judicial reform have produced enough change in the way in which this
                             system operates that it has become a viable mechanism through which dissident
                             or disaffected teachers as well as NGO activists can challenge government
                             education policy. At the national level, the Constitutional Court (Mahkamah
                             Konstitusi) and Supreme Court (Mahkamah Agung) have been particularly
                             important institutions in this respect because of their ability to rule on the
                             constitutionality of laws and government regulations respectively (Rosser and
                             Curnow 2014; Rosser 2015). At the local level, these actors have had the option
                             of going to the local State Administrative Court (PTUN) which has authority to
                             rule on the legality of administrative decisions related to teacher management
                             such as teacher transfers and the periodization of school principals. This strategy
                             has arguably represented a last resort but, as we will see below, has been used
                             or threatened in some cases.

The overall effect of this political context has been to severely limit the extent to which
technocratic elements and their donor supporters have been able to promote teacher
management reform. Overwhelmingly, commentators on teacher management reform have
argued that the central government has made very little progress at all in improving teacher
distribution and quality and controlling teacher costs (Ilfiyah et al 2015; Al-Samarrai et al 2012;
Chang et al 2014; World Bank 2015). However, as we will see below, the disaggregated picture
is more nuanced. While technocrats and donors may have made limited overall progress, they
have achieved some important wins in relation to particular teacher management issues. In the
following section, we present this more disaggregated picture by analyzing the political and
social dynamics around several specific teacher management issues drawing in many cases on
material from our four case study regions. In so doing, we seek to identify the political and
social conditions that have made teacher management reform possible even within the context
of an overall political and social environment that has been antithetical to reform.

In this connection, as noted earlier, we suggest that teacher management reform has been
possible where:
                                                            
18
     Interview, August 2015.

                                                                                                             29 
 
       1)         the central government has had at its disposal or been able to devise policy
                  instruments that are effective in disciplining local governments and it has
                  maintained a commitment to these policy instruments even in the face of
                  opposition;
       2)         local civil society groups are present and able to launch effective public
                  campaigns demanding reform, exploiting their ability to access the
                  independent media and, if necessary, the courts; and local governments are
                  able to find effective ways of buying off the losers from reform;
       3)         mid-level government officials, especially ones at the local education agency,
                  have judged that reform initiatives can be exploited for patronage purposes;
                  secured support from above; and together with senior officials devised
                  effective strategies for managing the politics of reform (by, for instance,
                  securing the support of the DPRD and buying off the losers from reform);
       4)         reform-minded district leaders have been elected providing an imperative for
                  education agency officials to design reform programs and the latter have had
                  access to relevant ideas and policy advice as a result of contact with donors;
                  and/or
       5)         teachers and the patronage and political networks of which they are part have
                  stood to lose little from reform in the first place.



5.	Specific	Issues	

5.1 Teacher Numbers and Cost

The introduction of a new Constitutional requirement for Indonesian governments at all levels
to spend at least 20 percent of their respective budgets on education has, as noted earlier,
witnessed a massive increase in total government spending on education. Much of this new
spending has gone to teachers’ salaries as a result of three concurrent developments: strong
growth in recruitment of new teachers at all levels of the school system; large increases in
teacher pay, particularly as a result of the introduction of a new certification program in the late
2000s (see below); and the conversion of large numbers of guru honor to guru PNS, producing
a substantial increase in both their pay and their cost to the budget (World Bank 2013: 44-45).

This privileging of teacher employment and salaries as an item of education expenditure has
been consistent with the interests of political and bureaucratic elites at both the central and
regional levels as well as, of course, teachers themselves. For political and bureaucratic elites
at the central level (especially incumbent or aspiring politicians), the recruitment of additional
teachers and increases in their pay has been a way of securing political support within the school
system and potentially votes at election time. For officials within MenPAN, these policies have
represented an opportunity to sell access to a new form of state largesse—that is, additional
civil service positions. For officials at the local level, these policies have represented an
opportunity to expand and consolidate local patronage and political networks by capturing this
new form of largesse and the rent-seeking opportunities it provides. For teachers themselves,
these policies have entailed higher incomes through better remuneration and, in the case of
guru honor who have been upgraded to PNS status, both higher incomes and better conditions
of employment.


                                                                                                 30 
 
Technocratic officials in the central government and their donor supporters have not contested
the government’s decision to increase spending on education—indeed, they argued forcefully
in the early post-New Order period that the government should spend more on education in
order to improve access to and the quality of education and enhance the country’s economic
competitiveness (see, for instance, World Bank 1998; Jalal and Musthafa 2001). However, they
have queried the efficiency of increased government spending on teachers’ salaries noting that
growing teacher numbers has lowered teacher-student ratios to the point where further increases
in teacher numbers are unlikely to produce any significant educational gains (World Bank 2013:
101; Al-Samarrai et al 2012; USAID Prioritas 2015). They have also expressed concern about
both the fiscal sustainability of further rises in government spending on teacher salaries and the
potential for such spending to crowd out other important areas of investment (Jalal et al 2009:
169; Chang et al 2014: 161-162).

With the fiscal implications of these policies becoming increasingly widely recognized,
technocratic officials were able to secure a moratorium on new civil service appointments in
2011 in regions where government spending on salaries exceed 50 percent of the regional
government budget. Announcing the policy, Finance Minister Agus Martowardoyo stated that:
‘The high share of personnel costs erodes the funding available for capital expenditures. This
means we have reduced budgets for social services and infrastructure development’ (Jakarta
Post 2011). This moratorium appears to have remained in place in many regions for several
years.

In interviews with various local government officials in District A, District B, and Municipality
B—all districts that have been subject to the moratorium—we heard that the moratorium was
leading to a sharp reduction in the number of guru PNS within their respective regions and
making these regions more reliant upon guru honor to deliver the required number of classes.19
Indeed, the head of the regional civil service agency in District A declared that his district
would be a facing ‘teacher crisis’ in 2019 if the moratorium continued because of the impending
retirement of teachers who were recruited in the late 1970s.20 These teachers—many of whom
were employed through the issuance of a presidential instruction (inpres) and are consequently
referred to as guru inpres —were extremely large in number because their employment was a
key part of the New Order’s effort to dramatically expand the school system using proceeds
from the oil boom. Their forthcoming retirement is thus expected to lead to a significant
reduction in teacher numbers. In two districts—District A and District B—we heard that local
education agencies and/or regional civil service agencies were beginning to plan around longer
working weeks as a way of dealing with the looming teacher shortage.

The PGRI has made similar claims about a teacher crisis, arguing forcefully that the country in
fact is facing a severe teacher shortage (PGRI 2015; Kompas 2015b). For it, the crucial relevant
figure is not student-teacher ratios but rather the number of classes (rombel) taught by teachers
who have not yet been granted civil servant status. Using this basis of calculation, it has argued
that the country needs another 400,000 teachers at the primary level alone (PGRI 2015).

Representatives of some regional governments have pushed back against the moratorium
suggesting that it is too blunt an instrument for trying to reduce the cost of teachers’ salaries
(Boediwardhana 2011). The PGRI has claimed that the moratorium breaches the 2005 Teachers
Law to the extent that the law requires the government to fulfill teachers’ needs including in
                                                            
19
    Interviews with the Secretary of the District A Education Agency; head of the District B Education Agency;
and head of the Municipality B Education Agency.
20
    Interview, June 2015. 

                                                                                                           31 
 
terms of overall numbers (Kompas 2015b). Finally, organizations representing guru honor have
continued to organize regular demonstrations at both local sites and in Jakarta demanding that
these teachers get a better deal including conversion to PNS status. In some regions, the result
has been the introduction of new allowances for guru honor—in one, for instance, the
provincial government has recently introduced a new monthly allowance for guru honda of
Rp50,000.21

But, so far, the central government has refused to budge on the moratorium, having little room
to manoeuver in the context of slowing economic growth and a tight budget. In fact, it has
recently lowered the level at which the moratorium becomes effective from 50 to 40 percent of
the regional government budget. It has also decided recently to reduce the proportion of BOS
funds that can be used to employ guru honor from 20 percent to 15 percent, making it harder
for schools to continue employing honorary staff to replace lost guru PNS.

In the case of the moratorium, the central government’s intransigence undoubtedly reflects the
fact that it is paying the bill for teachers’ salaries while the political and patronage benefits of
guru PNS appointments accrue largely to local political and bureaucratic elites. In the case of
the cuts to the BOS funds, it also probably reflects the fact that this move has attracted little
open opposition from teachers and their unions—certainly much less than the moratorium. This
may be because, as a number of school principals noted in interviews, schools have so far been
able to retain guru honor by reassigning them to non-teaching duties. Principals appeared
during these interviews to have had a firm reluctance to dismiss guru honor for being surplus
to requirements, a pattern of behavior consistent with the logic of patronage networks.

In sum, then, the policy issue of teacher numbers and costs illustrates that reform is possible
where the central government uses or devises policy instruments that are effective in
disciplining local governments and maintains a commitment to these instruments even in the
face of opposition.


5.2 Employment and Promotion

The issue of teacher employment and promotion presents a similar story. As noted above,
MenPAN officials have been accused of exploiting their control over the number and type of
new guru PNS positions awarded to regions to ‘sell’ civil service positions to regional elites
looking for additional patronage resources. At the same time, local political and bureaucratic
elites have had control over teacher and, in particular, school principal appointments enabling
them to build patronage and political networks capable of generating sizeable rents, distributing
patronage, and mobilizing significant numbers of votes at election time. They have been able
to build such networks by i) appointing friends, family-members, and political supporters to
teacher positions and in particular school principal positions or alternatively selling such
positions to the highest bidder rather than appointing the best qualified or most capable
candidates; ii) promoting such individuals further upward into the local education agency where
even greater rent-seeking opportunities exist; and iii) ensuring that political enemies are
demoted, di-nonjob-kan, or rotated (dimutasi) to less lucrative and more remote schools. The
overall effect has been to undermine the quality of both Indonesia’s teachers and school
principals.
                                                            
21
  This policy has in turn triggered demands from guru honor appointed by school principals to have their status
changed to guru honda. Interview with a PGRI activist representing honorary teachers, Municipality B, August
2015B.

                                                                                                             32 
 
To help address this problem (and similar problems in other areas of civil service recruitment),
technocratic officials in the central government led by Vice-President Boediono, the Anti-
corruption Commission (KPK) and anti-corruption NGOs such as ICW began pushing for more
transparent and ‘objective’ civil servant recruitment processes (Lampost.co 2013; Manggiasih
2013). They were supported in this endeavor by the then Minister for the Empowerment of the
State Apparatus, Azwar Abubakar (Manggiasih 2013). The result was the introduction of new
system of civil servant recruitment that both reduced the role of regional governments in the
recruitment process and tried to make the process less susceptible to corruption and favoritism.
The key reforms were the introduction of a computer-based competency test (CBT) to replace
the previously written test—the former being less easy to manipulate than the latter—and the
transfer of responsibility for selection of successful candidates from regional governments to
the central government.22

The effect of these reforms with regards to teacher recruitment appears—at least from the
evidence we encountered—to have been dramatic. In interview, the head of the education
agency in the fifth district mentioned earlier, told us that many civil servant teachers now being
employed in her region were coming from a neighboring region rather than from local areas,
as in the past, because they tended to be better academically and hence scored higher on the
CBT. She said that the selection process was now so difficult to manipulate that the bupati’s
son/daughter (anak) had been unable to secure a civil service position, something that would
have been more or less automatic in the past. Media reports suggest that this has also been the
case in other regions (see, for instance, Tribun Pontianak 2013 and Batampos 2014).

To the best of our knowledge, there has not so far been any significant pushback from regional
elites in relation to these changes, meaning that there has been little pressure on the central
government to return to the previous system. As with the moratorium, then, the central
government has maintained its commitment to this reformist policy instrument. But the cost of
the changes to local elites—particularly in terms of their ability to lubricate patronage and
political networks—is clear. It is consequently possible that there may be concerted opposition
to the change particularly if it triggers local protests about ‘outsiders’ taking local jobs.


5.3 Teacher Certification

Technocratic officials have sought to improve teacher quality by promoting improved pre-
service training for teachers at LPTK, in particular via the application of more stringent
accreditation processes requiring LPTK to, for instance, develop curricula providing an
appropriate balance between theory and practice (Jalal et al 2009: 135). But their principal
strategy for improving teacher quality has focused on trying to improve the skills and
commitment of existing teachers through the introduction of a new certification program
linking teachers’ salaries to their qualifications, competencies, and workloads. The World
Bank-Bappenas Task Force that addressed teacher management issues in the late 1990s
explicitly recommended that the government link future pay raises for teachers to ‘an evaluation
of professional criteria which connect directly with professional development, new skill
acquisition, orientation change and learning practice, and collaboration for self-development’
(Jalal and Mustafa 2001: 152). Coinciding with demands by the PGRI for new regulations
providing for the welfare and protection of teachers (which it saw as a crucial step towards
                                                            
22
      Interview with anti-corruption activist, Jakarta, May 2015.

                                                                                               33 
 
securing increased remuneration for teachers), technocratic efforts to promote improved
teacher quality led to the passage of Law 14/2005 on Teachers and Lecturers. This law made it
compulsory for Indonesian teachers to be certified and, in conjunction with a series of
subsequent government regulations, specified the conditions under which they would be
deemed to meet certification requirements and receive an associated professional allowance
equal to teachers’ base salary, effectively doubling their income.

Led by Fasli Jalal, then Director-General of Quality Improvement of Teachers and Education
Personnel (LMPTK), and with World Bank support, a team within MoNE developed a model
for assessing teacher competence. They determined that teachers would be deemed competent
if they: i) held the equivalent of a four year higher education degree (S1); ii) taught a minimum
24 periods per week; and iii) could demonstrate competence in teaching as assessed in the
classroom by trained assessors and through a program of individualized in-service training.23

This model ran up against opposition from the PGRI and other teacher unions which saw the
competency tests as a threat to increased pay for many of their members—something they in
turn saw as a ‘right’. Led by the PGRI, they lobbied the national parliament—which had control
over the budget for implementation of the competency tests—to have this element of the model
thrown out, presumably threatening to mobilize the teacher vote against politicians who stood
in their way. The result was a compromise whereby teacher competence was assessed in two
stages. In the first stage teachers prepared a portfolio of achievement comprising documents
such as personal references, publications, certificates of attendance at ins-service courses,
model lesson plans. These were then be evaluated by local teacher education institutions
selected by MoNE. Teachers whose portfolios were approved proceeded directly to
certification. In the second stage, teachers whose portfolios were not approved were required
to attend a 90-hour training program and assessed on its content. Teachers who passed the
associated test then proceeded to certification as well (Chang et al 2014: 30).

The compromise system proved to be problematic in practice as corrupt behavior on the part of
teachers, education agency officials, and staff at teacher education institutions undermined the
assessment of portfolios and in the 90-hour training program. Teachers were soon able to buy
portfolios on the street while virtually all participants passed the 90-hour program. In response,
the central government changed the certification process so that the portfolio assessment
became a minor component and a 90 hour program of professional development became the
principal pathway to certification. But this had little impact on pass rates.24 Not surprisingly,
numerous studies of the impact of the certification program have indicated that it has had led
to little, if any, improvement in teacher subject knowledge or pedagogical skills or student
learning (see, for instance, Chang et al 2014; World Bank 2015).

The central government subsequently introduced a Competency Test for teachers (Uji
Kompetensi Guru) in 2012 aimed at assessing teachers’ subject knowledge and pedagogical
skills. Conducted using multiple choice questions and done in part on-line, the results have
provided further evidence of low teacher quality. Of 1.6 million teachers assessed in 2015, 1.3
million gained a score of below 60 on a scale from 0-100 (Kompas 2015a). The teacher unions,
including the PGRI, have strongly opposed this test, apparently fearing that it will eventually
be incorporated into the certification process in some way (Sugiharto 2012). The FSGI,
supported by the FGII, ICW, LBH and the Education Coalition, even went to the point of trying

                                                            
23
      Interview with an informed source, January 2013. 
24
      Interview with an informed source, January 2013. See also World Bank (2015: 15).

                                                                                               34 
 
to challenge the test via a judicial review request in the Supreme Court (Liputan6.com 2012).
The FSGI’s Retno Listyarti has likened the Competency Test to ‘malpractice’ arguing that
implementation of the test has often been full of errors (e.g. incomplete questions,
typographical errors, inappropriate questions given teacher’s field of expertise) and that some
teachers have to leave their classes and bear significant costs simply to take the tests (see, for
instance, Ayuningtias 2012). In the face of such concerted resistance and with fiscal
sustainability issues being addressed through the moratorium, the central government has so
far baulked at incorporating the test into the certification process.

Teachers unions have also expressed concern about the way in which the certification program
is administered, noting many districts are slow in paying the professional allowance to teachers
and that some teachers face difficulty in meeting the 24 teaching periods per week
requirement.25 But with the program generating huge unconditional pay rises for teachers, they
have staunchly defended it, framing the pay rises as essential for improved educational quality
and a matter of teachers’ rights (see PGRI 2015). In this position, they have received strong
support from regional political and bureaucratic elites, especially local education agencies, for
whom the pay rises represent an opportunity to lubricate networks of corruption and
patronage.26

It is possible that the teacher certification program has had positive ‘side-effects’, for instance,
with regards to teacher absenteeism. A recent ACER/SMERU study on teacher absenteeism in
Indonesia found that between 2003 and 2013 absenteeism rates at primary schools fell from 19
percent to 10-11 percent (McKenzie et al 2014). One possible explanation for this is that, by
linking teacher pay to the number of hours teachers carry out face-to-face instruction, the
certification program has incentivized teachers to turn up to work more often than before.
Several of our informants noted that it was commonplace for school principals to manipulate
teacher attendance data—specifically, that submitted through Dapodik, MoEC’s education
database, for the purposes of determining eligibility for the professional allowance.27 But the
methodology employed in the ACER/SMERU study accounted for this possibility through
direct observation of teachers in the classroom and cross-checking teacher attendance against
teacher rosters suggesting that the improvement in teacher absenteeism rates is real. The teacher
certification program may also have had positive side effects with regards to teacher
redistribution, as we will discuss below. However, in terms of its ostensible aim—improving
teacher subject knowledge and pedagogical skills—the evidence so far suggests that it has
failed.

In sum, then, in terms of our concern with the political and social conditions that are conducive
to teacher management reform, the certification issue illustrates again the crucial role of central
government commitment to reformist policy instruments that seek to precipitate change at the
local level, albeit indicating in this case the problems when such commitment evaporates.


5.4 Periodization of School Principals


                                                            
25
  Suryahadi and Sanbodho (2012).
26
    Interviews with local education agency officials in District A, Municipality A, District B, and Municipality B,
May-August 2015.
27
    The typical example given was of a guru PNS being recorded as teaching a class when in fact it was taught by
a guru honor.

                                                                                                                35 
 
The entrenched nature of patronage and political networks linking schools to regional
governments has resulted in, among other things, long tenures for many teachers and school
principals at particular schools. The general pattern seems to be that, so long as teachers and
school principals maintain good relations with officials in the local education agency—a
function of their willingness to provide upeti (tribute) to these officials and mobilize votes as
instructed at election time—they have been permitted to work at schools near their friends and
family and to remain there for extended periods even if this results in a gross mal-distribution
of teachers. At the same time, teachers and school principals aspiring to positions within the
local education agency and perhaps beyond or looking to secure greater rent-seeking
opportunities have been—again so long as they maintain good relations with officials in the
local education agency—recruited into positions in sekolah favorit. Those who remain in favor
have then either been promoted upward into the local education agency or permitted to remain
at sekolah favorit and enjoy the financial benefits that accrue from positions there. This in turn
has meant long tenures for some teachers and school principals at these schools as well.
To help address this situation, MoNE issued a decree early in the post-New Order period that
limited the number of periods school principals could serve. 28 This decree reflected the
reformist sentiment that accompanied the transition to democratic rule in the late 1990s and, in
particular, Constitutional changes limiting the number of terms that the President and Vice-
President could serve. It was also consistent with similar regulations introducing restrictions on
the tenure of university rectors. This decree was replaced in 2010 by a minister regulation on
the appointment of teachers as school/madrasah principals. 29 Under this regulation, school
principals are defined as teachers who have been given additional responsibilities. It stipulates
that school principals can serve a maximum of three four-year periods and to get a third period,
a school principal's performance had to be deemed 'special' (istimewa). S/he also has to be
prepared to move to a school with a lower accreditation rating.
Generally speaking, these changes in national regulations appear to have had little effect at the
local level, at least until recently. In our sample of four districts/municipalities, for instance,
only the government of Municipality A moved to implement the 2003 ministerial decree. In
2006, it issued a bupati regulation providing a local legal basis for periodization (periodisasi),
as the policy has become known. It then enforced this regulation in 2008 and 2012, resulting in
the discontinuation30 of over 500 school principals in 2012 alone. Otherwise, however, regional
governments appear to have been immobilized by the challenge that enforcement of
periodization regulations has posed to patronage and political networks.
In interviews, various local government officials in Municipality B and District B informed us
that they were now just starting to implement the periodization regulations this year.
Municipality B discontinued a small group of school principals while we were in the field (July-
August 2015).31 District B is working up a new local regulation that will provide a legal basis
for periodization and intends to enact it and implement it in the near future.32 It is not entirely
clear what has led to this change. But one possibility is that it is connected with the certification
                                                            
28
    See Keputusan Menteri Pendidikan Nasional Nomor 162/U/2003 tentang Pedoman Penugasan Guru Sebagai
Kepala Sekolah.
29
    See Peraturan Menteri Pendidikan Nasional Nomor 28 Tahun 2010 tentang Penugasan Guru Sebagai Kepala
Sekolah/Madrasah.  
30
    The word commonly used in Indonesian is diberhentikan—literally, to be brought to a stop. The school
principals were not dismissed because, as we note below, virtually all remained employed in alternative civil
service roles.
31
    Interview with the Regional Secretary, Municipality B, August 2015.
32
    Interview with the current head of education agency in District B, July 2015.

                                                                                                          36 
 
program and, in particular, teachers’ eligibility for the professional allowance. According to a
recent media report, school principals and teachers in Cianjur, West Java, have experienced
delays in receiving the professional allowance where school principals have been in place for
too long (Pikiran Rakyat 2015).33
In Municipality A, the earlier implementation of the periodization requirements reflected the
fact that FAGI and FGII, two independent teachers' groups, and the Municipality A Education
Coalition (KPKMA), an NGO group—all of which have a strong local presence—launched a
sustained campaign to demand implementation of the periodization regulations beginning in
the early to mid-2000s. This campaign was aimed at trying to i) break the networks of
corruption that exist between schools and the local education agency; ii) in so doing, improve
the quality of public school management; and iii) provide opportunities for the next generation
of teachers to gain promotion.34 It attracted significant media attention and entailed a threat to
take the local government to the State Administrative Court (PTUN). The latter was particularly
important to the extent that it opened up the possibility that local education agency officials
could be subject to extortion by the court’s judges.35
Having decided to implement periodization, the issue for the local government then became
how to manage the politics around its implementation. Periodization evoked some resistance
from school principals. 36 In the end, this was defused by promoting most outgoing school
principals to pengawas (supervisor), a decision that preserved their income levels (but also
reduced any prospective budgetary savings from the policy). Only a small number of school
principals opted to return to teaching duties. At the same time, three school principals were not
discontinued: two who headed sekolah favorit and one with strong political connections.37 The
chair of a Primary School Principals Working Group (KKKS) in District B told us that primary
school principals in his area had made it clear to the head of the local education agency branch
(UPTD) that they would prefer the government adopt this same solution, rather than returning
principals to teaching, when periodization is implemented in that district.38
In contrast to the three previous policy issues examined here, then, the issue of periodization—
and in particular the experience of Municipality A in relation to this issue—suggests that
teacher management reform can occur at the local level when three conditions are met: i)
independent civil society groups are active; ii) they are able to launch effective public
campaigns demanding reform, exploiting their ability to access the independent media and, if
necessary, the courts; and iii) local governments are able to find effective ways of buying off
the losers from reform. At the same time, the experiences of Municipality B and District B
suggest that teacher management reform is possible when it aligns with the needs of local
political and patronage networks, in particular, the need for local elites to ensure that teachers
continue, as clients within these networks, to receive all monies that are due to them.



                                                            
33
    The cause of this delay is unclear but it is possible that it is related to the introduction of Dapodik, MoEC’s new
education database. According to a local education agency official in the fifth district, Dapodik will not allow a
school principal’s name to be entered for a second four year period at the same school, jeopardizing teachers’
eligibility for the professional allowance if the school principal remains in place for more than one term. This has
led to a local policy of rotating school principals every four years.
34
    Interviews with activists from FAGI/FGII, May 2015, and KPKMA, June 2015.
35
    Interview with FAGI/FGII activist, Municipality A, May 2015. 
36
    Interview with FAGI/FGII activist, Municipality A, May 2015.
37
    Interview with FAGI/FGII activist, Municipality A, May 2015.
38
    Interview, July 2015.

                                                                                                                    37 
 
5.5 Teacher Redistribution

The entrenched nature of patronage and political networks linking schools to regional
governments has, for the reasons mentioned above, also resulted in a severe mal-distribution of
teachers. As Al-Samarrai et al (2012: 2) have explained, this mal-distribution has involved not
simply unevenness in the number of teachers across regions but also in the quality of teachers:
           It is common for rural and remote schools to have teacher shortages while urban schools have
           more teachers than national staffing standards dictate. Moreover, more qualified and experienced
           teachers are frequently concentrated in wealthier urban areas. For example, over half of all
           primary and junior secondary school teachers in urban areas have a four year university degree
           compared to only 20% of teachers in rural remote locations.

To address this problem, the Education Committee chaired by Vice-President Boediono agreed
that five central government ministers (the Minister of National Education, the State Minister
for the Empowerment of the State Apparatus and Bureaucratic Reform, the Minister of the
Interior, the Minister of Finance, and the Minister of Religious Affairs), all of whom were
represented on the Education Committee, should issue a joint regulation instructing regional
governments to redistribute teachers more equitably (Kompas 2010b). Issued in 2011, the Five
Ministerial Decree (SKB 5 Menteri), as the regulation has become known,39 threatened regional
governments with a range of sanctions if they did not comply. These included the withdrawal,
in part or full, of education funding to regional governments; delays in the granting of new civil
service teacher positions (formasi guru PNS) to regional governments; and delays in the
provision of ‘balancing funds’ (dana perimbangan) to regional governments.40
As with the earlier periodization regulations, however, this regulation appears to have had little
effect at the local level: as various commentators have noted, regional governments have in
general taken little action in response (Ilfiyah et al 2015; Republika 2014). This does not appear
to have reflected a lack of technical capacity at the local level to manage teacher redistribution:
in general, our interviews with local educational agency officials suggested that they have the
required data and analytical capacity to redistribute teachers in a more efficient and effective
way.
Rather, the obstacles appear to be political in nature. In part, the lack of action in response to
the SKB 5Menteri appears to be because regional governments have not seen the threats it
contains as credible: one of our informants noted that they would be disastrous if
implemented.41 In part, it is because they have baulked at the political challenges that teacher
redistribution entails. For reasons outlined above, teacher redistribution represents an attack on
the interests of political and bureaucratic elites and teachers, both of whom have had significant
capacity to push back against unwanted change. In the case of political and bureaucratic elites,
this is because they have controlled the local state apparatus and its policy-making and
implementation powers. In the case of teachers, it is because their electoral strength and
political and social networks have given them the ability to effectively lobby local politicians,
                                                            
39
    Its full title is  Peraturan Bersama Menteri Pendidikan Nasional, Menteri Negara Pendayagunaan Aparatur
Negara dan Reformasi Birokrasi, Menteri Dalam Negeri, Menteri Keuangan, dan Menteri Agama Nomor -
05/X/PB/2011, Nomor SPB/03/M.PAN-RB/10/2011, Nomor 48 Tahun 2011, Nomor 158/PMK.01/2011, Nomor 11
tahun 2011 Tentang Penataan dan Pemerataan Guru Pegawai Negeri Sipil.
40
    ‘Balancing funds’ are funds provided by the central government transfers to regional governments to enable the
latter to carry out their functions under decentralization. They consist of general allocation funds (DAU), DAK,
and Revenue Sharing Funds (dana bagi hasil). See Peraturan Pemerintah Nomor 55 Tahun 2005 tentang Dana
Perimbangan. 
41
    Interview with the Regional Secretary (Sekda), Municipality B.

                                                                                                               38 
 
especially members of the DPRD and regional executives (i.e. the bupati or mayor). They have
also, on occasion, been able to access the courts if necessary.
In a small number of cases, district governments have nevertheless introduced programs of
teacher redistribution (Ilfiyah et al 2015; USAID Prioritas 2014). But the introduction of these
programs has not necessarily been a response to the SKB 5 Menteri nor motivated by
technocratic/donor concerns. Where these programs have embodied such concerns, it has been
because donors have been active within the region and played a crucial role in putting ideas on
the table.

The experiences of our four focus districts illustrate the dynamics at work and the different
outcomes that have prevailed at the regional level.


5.5.1 Municipality A
Although Municipality A is a municipality and, as such, lacks remote and rural areas, it still
has significant distribution problems. Several informants noted that the city has schools with
too many teachers and others with too few, particularly with regards to subject teachers (see
also Annex One)42 Yet the city government has so far done little to address teacher distribution
problems, notwithstanding the fact that under its mayor, who was elected in 2013,
‘redistribution of quality’ (pemerataan mutu) within the school system is a key plank of the
local government’s education policy agenda. The mayor has put in place some measures—such
as the reintroduction of school catchment areas and caps on senior secondary school fees—
aimed at achieving this objective. But he has so far failed to implement teacher redistribution.
The city government’s initial response to the SKB 5 Menteri—made under the previous
mayor—was to kick the problem downstairs. In a Circulating Letter (Surat Edaran) issued in
July 2012, the then head of the local education agency instructed school principals to deal with
the problem by coordinating among themselves.43 His replacement as head, who was appointed
by the current mayor, appears to have more ownership of the problem. He has tried to produce
local regulations providing for redistribution. But these have so far been held up in the legal
section (bagian hukum) of the education agency. The problem, according to informed sources,
has been that mid-level officials within the agency have been effectively sabotaging moves to
rotate or redistribute teachers reflecting their interest in maintaining the patronage and political
networks that link them to schools and, in particular, principals and teachers in favorit schools
most likely to lose from redistribution.44


5.5.2 Municipality B

Like Municipality A, Municipality B has significant teacher distribution problems despite, as a
municipality, lacking remote and rural areas. Again, like Municipality A, these appear to center
on the distribution of subject teachers (see Annex One).45 Between 2008 and 2013, the regional
                                                            
42
    Interviews with the head of the Municipality A Education Agency, May 2015, and FAGI/FGII activist, May
2015. 
43
    Title of the regulation withheld because it identifies the municipality.
44
    Interviews, Municipality A, May 2015.
45
    Interviews with the head of Municipality B Education Agency, and the Branch head for SMP, SMA and SMK
Municipality B, August 2015. 

                                                                                                       39 
 
government did little to address this problem, the mayor and his regional secretary taking the
view that redistribution was unnecessary since the city had too many teachers.46 The Education
Board made a recommendation to the education agency at the time that it carry out a mapping
of teacher needs and allocate teachers to schools accordingly. But this was never taken up.47
One branch head (kepala bagian) in the education agency official explained that the issue of
teacher redistribution had been discussed extensively within the education agency but that there
had so far been little willingness to tackle the problem in any systematic or serious way. Indeed,
they had floated the idea of kicking the problem downstairs to the UPTD. He stated that the
key obstacle was the political challenges involved in teacher redistribution.48

Since 2013, it appears that the city education agency has, however, started to change direction
on the issue. 2013 saw two important developments. The first was the election of a new mayor
although, because of a Constitutional Court challenge to the election result, he did not take up
the job until late 2014. His choice as head of the local education agency told us that teacher
redistribution is one of his top priorities indicating that the agency may be more active in this
area in future.49 Having only been in the job for four months at the time of interview, however,
he had not yet had the chance to make much progress so far.

The second development was the introduction of new and more demanding technical guidelines
(juknis) for the professional allowance associated with the certification program. According to
the head of the junior and senior secondary education branch in the education agency, the
tighter requirements imposed by these guidelines raised the risk of a negative State Financial
Audit Agency (BPK) or State Finance and Development Supervision Agency (BPKP)50 audit
finding if city claims regarding the number of teachers who are eligible for the professional
allowance could not be fully substantiated. This in turn could trigger cuts to central government
transfers to the city government. Beginning in 2013-2014, he has consequently carried out a
detailed mapping of teacher needs in junior and senior secondary schools and been careful to
ensure that teacher transfers were done in accordance with schools’ genuine need for teachers.
In contrast to the SKB 5 Menteri, then, it would appear that, at least for this official, the new
technical guidelines for the professional allowance combined with BPK/BPKP audit processes
posed a credible threat to the city government even if the introduction of the new guidelines
may not have been directly intended to affect teacher distribution.


5.5.3 District A

District A is a large district that includes urban and rural areas, some of which are remote. Like
Municipality A and Municipality B, it has had significant teacher distribution problems,
particularly at both primary and junior secondary level (see Annex Two). In contrast to these
municipalities, however, it has been relatively active in redistributing teachers as well as
changing their type, level and/or function (jenis, jenjang, fungsi)51 for several years.


                                                            
46
    Interviews with former mayor of Municipality B and former head of the city education agency and currently
(August 2015) Regional Secretary, Municipality B, August 2015.
47
    Interview with the head of the Education Board, Municipality B, August 2015.
48
    Interview, Municipality B, August 2015.
49
    Interview, Municipality B, August 2015.
50
    These agencies are respectively the state external and internal auditors. 
51
    Change in type = e.g. maths teacher becoming a science teacher; change in level = e.g. SMA maths teacher
becoming an SMP maths teacher; change in function = e.g. teacher moving into an administrative position.

                                                                                                          40 
 
The local education agency began planning for teacher redistribution shortly after the central
government issued Government Regulation 74/2008 on Teachers. This regulation established
the 24 hour requirement and other eligibility criteria for the professional allowance. The
education agency carried out mapping (pemetaan) to establish areas of teacher shortage and
excess from 2009 but it was not until 2012 that it actually began to redistribute teachers.
Education agency figures show that, of 12,000 PNS teachers working in District A around this
time, 454 were moved in 2012, 249 in 2013, 60 in 2014 and 129 in 2015. But the 2012 figure
includes 251 who moved at their own initiative between 2009 and 2011, so the real 2012 figure
should be 203.52 The increase between 2014 and 2015 was made necessary by the introduction
of a new national curriculum in 2013 which eliminated some subjects from the curriculum. In
the wake of the new curriculum, the education agency carried out a remapping of teacher supply
and need to determine areas of shortage and excess. It then reassigned teachers to new types or
levels and in some cases new schools so that they could meet the 24 requirement.53

The key driving force of change in District A with regards to teacher redistribution has been a
concern to help teachers meet the 24 hour and linearity 54 requirements for receiving the
professional allowance attached to the certification program rather than concerns related to
budgetary efficiency or educational quality (although the latter have been recognized as
potential payoffs).55 Change has not been donor-driven. USAID’s Prioritas program, which
operates in the district, only became operational there in 2013, well after the government began
to move on redistribution, although it has provided some legitimacy to the reforms by garnering
international donor, education ministry and media attention (see, for instance, Jawa Pos
2014).56

The politics of redistributing teachers in District A had three discrete phases:

             The first phase entailed school supervisors working out that many teachers in District
              A would be ineligible for the professional allowance unless the local government
              redistributed them to places and roles that enabled them to meet the requirements of
              Government Regulation No. 74 of 2008. They did this through discussions with school
              principals and teachers as part of their supervisory responsibilities, hearing complaints
              from teachers about being short of hours. They then made a recommendation for teacher
              redistribution to the head of the education agency’s Civil Service sub-section (Kasubag
              Kepegawaian) through the School Supervisor Working Deliberative Group.57

             The second phase entailed the head of the education agency’s Civil Service sub-section
              working in conjunction with the head of the Civil Service Rotation Section (Kabid
              Mutasi Kepagawaian) at the Regional Civil Service and Training Agency (BKDD) to
              persuade the head of the education agency, the bupati, the vice-bupati and other senior
              officials to sign off on a redistribution program. Parallel processes seem to have been

                                                            
52
    Interviews with senior education agency officials, District A, June 2015.
53
    Interviews with senior education agency officials, District A, June 2015. 
54
    To receive the professional allowance, teachers have to teach subjects that are related to their academic
qualifications and field of certification—i.e. teachers with maths qualifications should be teaching maths. This is
referred to as linearity (linearitas).
55
    This came through particularly strongly in interviews with key actors within the education agency at the time.
Their respective positions and roles are discussed in the main text.  
56
    For a more general analysis of the way in which local elites exploit donor programs for political advantage, see
Choi and Fukuoka (2014).
57
    Interview with a school supervisor and education agency official, District A, June 2015.

                                                                                                                 41 
 
              going on in the local health agency with regards to PNS health workers (and perhaps
              other agencies), so it is likely that officials in these agencies were involved as well.58
              The result was the issuance of bupati regulation providing the legal foundation for
              teacher redistribution within District A as well as redistribution of other civil servants.

             The third phase entailed the local government engaging in change management—that
              is, ensuring that teacher redistribution occurred without provoking a destabilizing or
              politically damaging backlash from affected teachers. The key elements in this phase
              were threefold:
              i)      extensive and early socialization of the policy among teachers. This was carried
                      out through school principals, the PGRI, and direct visits to schools by the then
                      education agency head. In the latter case, the focus was on the opportunities
                      presented by the certification program but the need for redistribution to enable
                      teachers to meet certification requirements was also flagged.
              ii)     early engagement of the regional parliament (DPRD), particularly the
                      commission responsible for education matters (Komisi 4), to ensure that it was
                      on board.
              iii)    neutralization of protests by teachers who reacted negatively to proposed moves.
                      It appears that a small number of teachers made individual protests about
                      proposed moves through direct approaches to the education agency or the local
                      parliament. One, a teacher with preman-like tendencies, reportedly placed a gun
                      on the table in his meeting with education agency officials, a clear form of
                      intimidation. Education agency officials say that they successfully neutralized
                      most protests by pointing out the benefits from proposed moves in terms of
                      improving their eligibility for the certification program. If teachers continued to
                      object, they were allowed to stay in their existing positions (although in these
                      cases they did not receive the professional allowance if their teaching load
                      remained below 24 hours or they did not meet the linearity requirements).59

The fact that teacher redistribution was so closely linked to the requirements of the certification
program suggests that the principal motivations of the supervisors and the mid-level education
agency officials who were so crucial in pushing the process forward and the senior officials
who ultimately approved teacher redistribution were related to the dynamics of local patronage
and political networks. As patrons within the system, they had a concern to ensure their clients
at the school level received their due entitlements in order to consolidate political and patronage
networks. As rent-seekers within the system, they also had a concern to maximize amount of
the money within the school system that is available for potential appropriation.


5.5.4 District B

Like District A, District B is a large district that straddles urban and rural areas, some of which
are remote; has had significant teacher distribution problems (see Annex Two); and has been
relatively active in redistributing teachers. Indeed, of our four regional cases, it has been by far
the most aggressive reformer in this respect. Since 2007-2008, the regional government has
redistributed almost 3,000 civil servant teachers, accounting for a very large proportion of the

                                                            
58
  Interview with senior education agency officials, District A, June 2015.
59
  Interviews with senior education agency officials and a former head of the education agency, District A, June
2015.

                                                                                                             42 
 
teaching labor force. The numbers redistributed were: 644 in 2008, 0 in 2009, 344 in 2010, 360
in 2011, 552 in 2012, 502 in 2013, 166 in 2014, and 331 in 2015. Some teachers who were
transferred were moved to isolated parts of the district.

Importantly for our purposes, the first round of redistribution (2007-2008) happened just before
the central government issued Government Regulation 74/2008 which made it compulsory for
teachers to teach 24 hours face-to-face to be eligible for the professional allowance. In contrast
to District A, then, redistribution does not appear to have been conceived from the outset as a
way of ensuring that teachers receive the professional allowance. Rather technocratic concerns
seem to have had a more significant influence reflecting two factors. The first relates to the
personal capacities of the district’s bupati from 2005 to 2015. Several informants described the
bupati as ‘educated’ and ‘capable of thinking’. The second factor is his apparent political
strategy of seeking legitimacy for his education policies by securing the support of international
donors. Under his rule, District B became home to a wide range of donor education projects
including Bermutu, Prodep, and a UNICEF project on school-based management. As we note
below, this meant that local education officials had access to technocratic ideas and policy
solutions concerning teacher distribution at a crucial moment.

The politics of teacher redistribution proceeded in eight main stages.
    First, the bupati was elected in 2005 on the basis of promises to transform District B
       into a ‘Clever District’ (Kabupaten Cerdas). Teacher redistribution was not explicitly
       part of this agenda at this point. His five-year development plan for 2005-2010
       identified education as a priority sector but made no mention of teacher redistribution.60
    Second, the government of District B applied for and was selected to be part of a World
       Bank-MoEC pilot study on teacher management. This study dealt with, among other
       things, issues of teacher distribution (see World Bank and MoEC 2010). This introduced
       the regional government, in particular the education agency, to relevant technocratic
       ideas.61
    Third, recognizing that the bupati was open to ideas for reform—indeed, in all
       likelihood demanding them—education agency officials carried out a mapping of
       teacher distribution within the district and presented the results to him.62
    Fourth, education agency officials began to ‘socialize’ teacher redistribution among
       parliamentary representatives through working group meetings (rapat kerja) with
       members of the DPRD committee (Komisi 2) responsible for education.63
    Fifth, teacher redistribution was carried out in 2007-2008. This precipitated a lot of
       complaints, many of which were directed to the DPRD. According to the DPRD
       representative that we interviewed, the DPRD held firm, having agreed to the policy.64
       The Bermutu project started in 2008—District B was one of the project’s pilot regions.
       This project focused mainly on teacher training but also had a component related to the
       development of a teacher database.
    Sixth, teacher redistribution was subject to challenge in the local state administrative
       court (PTUN) around 2008-2009 (the dates are a little unclear). Only a small number of
       teachers were involved in the PTUN case (between 1 and 3 depending on the source of
                                                            
60
    Interviews with the current head of education agency in District B who was the head of the Basic Education
branch in the mid-2000s, District B, July 2015; and the former rector of the local state university (former IKIP).
District B, August 2015. 
61
    We wish to thank Susi Iskandar for her advice on this point. 
62
    Interview with the head of education agency in District B, July 2015. 
63
    Interview with a member of Komisi 2, District B, July 2015.
64
    Interview with a member of Komisi 2, District B, July 2015. 

                                                                                                               43 
 
        information). The case was expensive: for instance, it entailed flying in experts from
        Gadjah Mada University and elsewhere and hiring lawyers. This suggests that the
        teachers had financial support from other sources. Who backed the dissident teachers is
        unknown. However, several informants suggested that their motivation was to damage
        the bupati in the run-up to the 2010 district head and 2011 gubernatorial elections, so
        the backer may have been a rival politician or one of his supporters. In any event, they
        lost the PTUN case: the court found in favor of the government of District B.
       Seventh, the district government introduced an isolated areas allowance (tunjangan
        daerah terpencil) figuring that this would reduce resistance in the future.
       Eighth, the district government passed a regional regulation (perda) and series of bupati
        regulations (perbup) to provide a regulatory framework for teacher management and
        constrain future governments.


5.5.5 Summary
In sum, then, the four cases above illustrate that teacher redistribution has posed significant
political challenges for regional governments, explaining why—in the context of no credible
threat of sanctions from above—most regional governments have baulked at addressing teacher
distribution problems. At the same time, however, they also illustrate that redistribution has
been possible where:

       as in District A, mid-level government officials, especially ones at the local education
        agency, have judged that reform initiatives can be exploited for patronage purposes;
        secured support from above; and devised effective strategies for managing the politics
        of reform (by, for instance, securing the support of the DPRD and buying off the losers
        from reform);
       as in District B, reform-minded district leaders have been elected providing an
        imperative for education agency officials to design reform programs and they have
        access to relevant ideas and policy advice; or
       as recently in Municipality B, the central government has devised and implemented
        policy instruments that, accidently or otherwise, provide regional governments with an
        incentive to carry out teacher redistribution;



5.6 School Mergers and Multigrade Teaching

The entrenched nature of patronage and political networks linking schools to regional
governments has also led to inefficiencies with regards to the number of schools and class sizes.
It is not uncommon in Indonesia to find several schools sharing the same campus or closely
located to one another that have vastly different enrollments and class sizes. This is particularly
the case in Java and in urban areas. Education agency officials in our four focus districts
suggested that schools with low enrolments have typically been permitted to continue operating
as stand-alone entities rather than merged with nearby schools, at least until one of the relevant
school principals retires. Likewise, schools have been permitted to maintain small class sizes
rather than merge them in order to ensure that class and subject teacher positions are
maintained. It has only been when school principals retire that local education agencies have
moved to merge schools. At this point, the politics of mergers becomes a lot easier because the
patronage and political networks that might potentially oppose reform have little to lose.


                                                                                                44 
 
This situation is inefficient to the extent that it results in duplication of work and sub-optimal
class sizes. But it has made perfect sense in terms of the logic of the local patronage and political
networks linking schools and teachers with the local government. Decisions with regards to the
establishment, closure or merger of schools appear to have been driven largely by a desire to
create and maintain civil service positions in geographic locations attractive to teachers rather
than a concern to ensure equitable access to quality schooling across geographic locations. The
challenge of delivering education to students living in remote locations has led to the existence
of small schools with small class sizes in these locations. But this is a distinct problem that in
fact reflects some attempt by government to address equity issues.
For the most part, governments in our four focus regions had done little to address these
problems through the implementation of either school mergers or multigrade teaching. In
District A, for instance, the local education agency carried out a mapping (pemetaan) exercise
in 2006-2007, that identified 172 primary schools as suitable (layak) for mergers. In November
2012 letter, the then head of the education agency asked the bupati to issue a bupati decree (SK
bupati) providing for the merger of four schools in one sub-district.65 Another 10 schools were
merged in 2015, although it was not clear where.66 In interview, the then head of the education
agency said that the education agency had adopted a softly-softly approach in relation to school
mergers, carrying out socialization first and then waiting for the schools concerned to indicate
that they are interested in merging.67 It often still waits until school principals retire before
merging schools. The agency has also introduced multigrade teaching but it has done so only
in a small number of schools, mainly in isolated areas.68
Municipality A has been a little more successful in carrying out school mergers but only a little
more so. Independent teacher groups and NGOs have called for school mergers since the early
2000s,69 propelling the city government to introduce a program of school mergers at primary
school level around 2007. But this program has progressed very slowly. The key reason appears
to be an expectation on the part of senior government officials that mergers would generate a
backlash from school principals, teachers and local communities. In 2009, the then head of the
city education agency told the media that school mergers ‘could not be done quickly because
everything has to fit with the needs and conditions in the field including recruitment of school
principals, the retirement age of school principals and other matters so that it does not cause a
shock (gejolak) in the field’. 70 In May 2015, the current head of the education agency in
announced that the city government would merge two-thirds of the 800 primary schools deemed
to fall into the above categories. It remains to be seen how quickly it will act on this policy.


In Municipality B, school mergers have also been uncommon. However, recently the local
government has engineered some mergers of both public and private schools to ensure class
sizes are sufficient to enable the teachers responsible for the relevant classes to meet
certification requirements.71


                                                            
65
    Interview with the current head of the District A Education Agency, June 2015.
66
    Interview with senior education agency officials, District A, June 2015.
67
    Interview, District A, June 2015.
68
    Interview with senior education agency officials, District A, June 2015.
68
    Interview, District A, June 2015. 
69
    Interview with FAGI/FGII activist, Municipality A, May 2015.
70
    Reference withheld because it identifies the municipality. 
71
    Interview with the current head of the Municipality B Education Agency.

                                                                                                  45 
 
One issue with regards to school mergers is how mergers would impact on honorary teachers
(guru honor). In interview, the current head of the Honorary Teachers Communication Forum
(FKGH), an organization representing honorary teachers, argued that school mergers had in
some cases resulted in honorary teachers losing their livelihoods (although he also indicated
that so far FKGH has sought to address this issue through efforts to seek redress at the school
level—including by threatening to take matters to the State Administrative Court, PTUN—
rather than by opposing school mergers as policy).

In sum, then, the issue of school mergers and multigrade teaching illustrates clearly the political
limits to teacher management reform. In this case, reform has only occurred when patronage
and political networks have stood to lose little from reform and it has consequently been easy
in political terms.


6.	Conclusion	

Indonesia faces serious problems with regards to teacher numbers and cost, teacher quality and
teacher distribution. This report has sought, using a political economy framework, to explain
the origins of these problems, identify the political obstacles to teacher management reform,
and specify the political conditions under which the country has made progress in promoting
reform.

With regards to the first two of these matters, we have argued that these problems have their
origins in the way in which political and bureaucratic elites have for decades used the school
system to accumulate resources, distribute patronage, mobilize political support, and exercise
political control. Under this system of school management, teachers have been incorporated
into patronage and political networks the logic of which has been to position them as clients,
vote mobilizers, and agents of political control and rather than agents of education and equity.
While government technocrats and their donor supporters have endeavored to promote a range
of teacher management reforms embodying an alternative logic—namely, improving
educational outcomes with maximum budgetary efficiency—they have generally lacked the
political power to have a significant impact. The collapse of the New Order in the late 1990s
created a political context more conducive to reform by undermining the economic base of New
Order elites and their corporate clients and enhancing the structural power of donors. But the
continued political dominance of elements nurtured under the new Order at both the national
and local levels of government has ensured that the results of reform initiatives have so far been
modest, although technocrats and donors have managed to achieve some wins.

With regards to the conditions under which reform has been possible, the report has pointed to
five sets of conditions: namely when 1) the central government has had at its disposal or been
able to devise policy instruments that are effective in disciplining local governments and it has
maintained a commitment to these policy instruments even in the face of opposition; 2) local
civil society groups are present and able to launch effective public campaigns demanding
reform, exploiting their ability to access the independent media and, if necessary, the courts;
and local governments have been able to find effective ways of buying off losers from reform;
3) mid-level government officials, especially ones at the local education agency, have judged
that reform initiatives can be exploited for patronage purposes; secured support from above;
and together with senior officials devised effective strategies for managing the politics of
reform; 4) reform-minded district leaders have been elected providing an imperative for
education agency officials to design reform programs and the latter have had access to relevant

                                                                                                46 
 
ideas and policy advice as a result of contact with donors; and/or 5) teachers and the patronage
and political networks of which they are part have stood to lose little from reform.

Broadly speaking, these findings suggest that technocrats and donors’ strategy for promoting
further teacher management reform in Indonesia should incorporate five components. We label
these respectively the ‘disempowerment’ component, the ‘disciplinary’ component, the
‘working with the grain’ component, the ‘activism’ component, and the ‘facilitative’
component. Each component is underpinned by a different theory of change and entails a
different set of policy interventions. The different components can be thought of as lying along
a spectrum—in the order listed above—according to the degree of direct central government
intervention they imply (Figure One). At one end of the spectrum, the disempowerment
component entails more or less total central government control over policy and
implementation. At the other end of the spectrum, the facilitative component entails the central
government supporting district government steps towards teacher management rather than
seeking to precipitate change from above. Each component should also be thought of as
appropriate for particular political contexts at the local level. Specifically, the facilitative
component is appropriate for contexts where reform-minded leadership exists at the local level
and the task is accordingly to help change along. The other components, by contrast, are for
employment in contexts where such leadership has not yet emerged and the political challenge
is to precipitate change, potentially in the face of resistance.


Figure One
Component Spectrum

    Extensive and                                                                     Limited and
    direct central                                                                    indirect
    government                                                                        central
    intervention                                                                      government
                                                                                      intervention
    Disempowerment                  Disciplinary   Working with     Activist          Facilitative
                                                   the grain



The Disempowerment Component
The purpose of this component is to reduce the ability of political and bureaucratic elites and
the patronage and political networks they control, particularly ones at the regional level, to
resist teacher management reform by transferring authority over the implementation of teacher
management policy to the central government. It presumes that shifting authority over teacher
management to the central level will in general produce better teacher management decisions
by placing decision-making authority in the hands of officials who do not have direct personal
relationships with the teachers concerned and/or are not part of the local patronage and political
networks that link schools with local education agencies. In terms of the policy initiatives we
have analyzed above, the recent changes to civil service recruitment provide a model of how
this component of the strategy can work. It would be useful to extend this initiative to the
selection of school principals and perhaps teacher transfers/distribution (although the latter
could also be addressed through other components). The process employed for teacher
recruitment provides a template that could be used to devise a similar system for school
principal selection while the establishment of Dapodik means that the central government now
has the data required for it to manage teacher transfers.


                                                                                               47 
 
There are three questions in relation to this approach. The first is whether such changes are
politically possible given that, under the country’s decentralization laws, responsibility for
education policy lies with local governments and local political and bureaucratic elites have a
clear incentive to oppose any loss of power. The fact that teacher recruitment has been re-
appropriated by the center suggests that it may be. The second is whether transferring greater
authority to the central government level would simply see a relocation of the patronage- and
politically-oriented behavior that has shaped school principal promotions and teacher transfers
to that level. The available evidence so far in relation to the operation of the new civil service
recruitment system would suggest that this need not occur. The final question relates to the
central government’s willingness to take on responsibility for school principal promotions and
teacher transfers. This cannot be assumed, particularly if central government officials see
assuming such responsibility as a burden.72

The Disciplinary Component
The purpose of this component is to alter the incentives that political and bureaucratic elites at
the regional level face with regards to teacher management reform by presenting regional
governments with a credible threat that they will be punished if they do not implement teacher
management reforms and/or a credible commitment that they will be rewarded if they do. It
presumes that the central government has the political will to design and enforce effective
policy instruments or, if it does not, the ingenuity to devise alternative ones to which it can
credibly adhere. In terms of the policy initiatives we have analyzed above, the central
government moratorium on new civil service appointments constitutes the model to be
replicated (although district-level concerns about a looming teacher crisis suggest that an
alternative basis for imposing the moratorium—e.g. teacher-student ratios—may be necessary).
The teacher certification program and SKB 5 Menteri illustrate the risk that weak central
government commitment poses to the effectiveness of such instruments. But, in the case of the
latter, they also illustrate the potential for such instruments to be reinvented in a potentially
more effective form: at the time of writing, the central government is reportedly preparing a
government regulation replacing the SKB 5 Menteri that offers financial rewards to regional
governments that implement teacher management reforms rather than imposes sanctions on
those that do not (Suara Karya 2015). The crucial issues with regards to this new regulation
will be whether the financial inducement on offer to regional governments is sufficient to
precipitate change in the way in which local political and bureaucratic elites approach teacher
management and the central government remains committed to providing rewards in the face
of any concern about their budgetary impact.

Working with the Grain Component
The purpose of this component is to promote teacher management reform by exploiting
opportunities presented by the certification program, in particular, the financial incentive it has
created for teachers to move schools in order to meet certification requirements, to replace
school principals, and carry out school mergers. This component presumes that teacher
                                                            
72
   For instance, provincial governments (which represent the central government in the regions) do not appear to
have been overly thrilled with at least some of the additional powers over the school system recently invested in
them by Law 23/2014 on regional governance. This law transfers authority over senior secondary schools from
district-level governments to provincial governments. It also gives provincial governments authority to address
teacher distribution issues across districts. In interview, two provincial government representatives indicated that
they were interpreting the latter power as applying only to the distribution of teachers at senior secondary level,
not the primary and junior secondary levels as well (Interviews in Municipality A and Municipality B). It is
possible that provincial governments have taken this position because they simply do not want the headache of
dealing with redistributing teachers at these lower levels given that there are many more teachers employed at
these levels than at the senior secondary level.

                                                                                                                 48 
 
management reform is easier when it accords with or, at least, does not fundamentally
contradict the logic underpinning local patronage and political networks—it is in that respect
that it is about ‘working with the grain’.73 The fact that teacher redistribution in District A was
driven predominantly by a concern to ensure that teachers met certification requirements and
only secondarily by a concern to improve educational equity and quality suggests that the
former concern is a more powerful precipitant of change than the latter. So, too, does
Municipality B’s response to the introduction of more stringent technical guidelines for the
professional allowance, the recent moves by Kota Goronalo and District B to implement school
principal periodization, and Municipality B’s experience with school mergers.

For government technocrats and donors, this in turn suggests a need to reappraise their so far
overwhelmingly negative view of the certification program (see, for instance, Chang et al 2014;
World Bank 2015). While certification may so far have produced little benefit in terms of its
ostensible objective—to improve teacher subject knowledge and pedagogical skills—it may
just be the key to solving other teacher management problems and, in particular, those related
to teacher distribution, school principal tenure, and school mergers. The certification program
is probably here to stay, notwithstanding its weaknesses and considerable impact on the
government budget, because the political cost to elites of axing it or even significantly reducing
its financial benefits for teachers would be high. Technocratic officials and donor agencies may
as well make use of it to promote a more equitable and efficient distribution of teachers,
regeneration in school leadership positions, and efficiencies through school mergers. In this
respect, they should think about the way in which the incentives created by the certification
program might dovetail with other central government processes to shift incentives for reform
at the local level. Municipality B’s experience suggests that linking the certification program
to state audit processes, for instance, may be one particularly promising way forward in this
respect.

The Activism Component
The purpose of this component is to alter the incentives that political and bureaucratic elites at
the regional level face with regards to teacher management reform by empowering local
proponents of reform through the provision of financial, moral or other forms of support. This
component presumes that local proponents of reform exist at the local level and that they have
the capacity to apply pressure on the local government to implement reform by accessing the
local media or courts. It also presumes that they would be more effective in these respects if
better resourced and connected to more powerful actors. As we have seen above, there has been
some support for teacher management reform—or at least some specific reforms—within the
NGO community and among independent teacher organizations. Yet such organizations
generally exist only in major urban centers with substantial middle classes, independent media,
and strong civil society movements, not in predominantly rural districts, small municipalities
or remote areas. Municipality A’s experience vis-à-vis the periodization of school principals
illustrates the potential that these groups have to promote reform. But the fact that they tend to
exist only in major urban centers is a key constraint. Another is the fact that these groups have
generally been critical of the technocratic and donor agenda in relation to education policy,
particularly anything seen as embodying neoliberal principles, making partnerships difficult.

The Facilitative Component
As noted above, the purpose of this component is to facilitate teacher management reform in
regions where the political preconditions for reform are already in place because the local
                                                            
73
      See Kelsall (2008) for a broader discussion of the notion of ‘working with the grain’.

                                                                                                49 
 
leadership is supportive of reform. In these cases, technocrats and donors do not need to find
ways of forcing or cajoling local elites into adopting teacher management reforms. Rather they
simply need to provide them with ideas for reform and political cover and legitimacy by
offering support. Among policy initiatives we have analyzed above, the World Bank and Dutch
Embassy’s support to District B through the pilot teacher management study and then the
Bermutu project provide the best example of this component in action. The key constraint to
this approach is that reformist leadership such as that in District B appears to be very rare and
may not endure where it emerges. For this reason, proponents of reform should consider taking
advantage of ‘moments’ of reformist leadership to enact local regulations (perda) providing for
the reform. Such regulations will not constrain future governments where the local legislature
and executive oppose teacher management reform—in these cases, they will simply overturn
the regulations. But they may where opinion is divided.

Putting the Components Together
There are numerous different ways in which these various components might be assembled to
produce an overall strategy for promoting teacher management reform in Indonesia. The key
constraints in this respect is that the disempowerment component cannot be used in conjunction
with any of the other components because it implies direct central government control while
the other components imply that district-level governments have primary responsibility for
decision-making and the task of central government is accordingly to influence their decision-
making. Otherwise, however, the components are not mutually exclusive and could be used to
devise multi-pronged approaches to addressing specific problems. Table One below
summarizes one way in which these components might be assembled to address various teacher
management problems based on the analysis above. We have omitted teacher certification from
the table because it is a predominantly central government-run scheme.

Table One
Proposed Use of Strategy Components

                       Strategy        Component 1                Component 2            Component 3
    Problem
    Teacher Numbers and Cost             Disciplinary
                                      Continued use of
                                    moratorium, possible
                                  extension of moratorium
                                     to all regions using
                                   teacher-student ratio as
                                     basis for imposition
    Teacher Employment and            Disempowerment
    Promotion                       Continued use of new
                                  civil servant recruitment
                                    process, extension to
                                       school principal
                                         promotions
    Teacher Distribution
    – Option 1                       Disempowerment
                                     Centralization of
                                   decision-making over
                                    teacher placements
    - Option 2                          Disciplinary          Working with the grain       Facilitative
                                  New central government       Linking certification   (cases with reform-
                                  regulations establishing    program incentives to     minded leadership
                                  credible threats/rewards     state audit processes          only)
                                                                 and other central


                                                                                                         50 
 
                              to create new incentives        government           Provision of
                                 at the district level        mechanisms         technical advice,
                                                                                 ideas, legitimacy
    Periodization of School   Working with the grain             Activist           Facilitative
    Principals                Linking school principal    Supporting NGOs and   (cases with reform-
                               tenure to certification       teacher groups      minded leadership
                                program incentives          campaigning for            only)
                                                              periodization        Provision of
                                                                                 technical advice,
                                                                                 ideas, legitimacy
    School Mergers and        Working with the grain             Activist           Facilitative
    Multigrade Teaching           Linking school          Supporting NGOs and   (cases with reform-
                                mergers/multigrade           teacher groups      minded leadership
                              teaching to certification     campaigning for            only)
                                program incentives           school mergers        Provision of
                                                                                 technical advice,
                                                                                 ideas, legitimacy




                                                                                                  51 
 
7.	References	

Al Samarrai, S. et al (2012) Making Better Use of Teachers: Strengthening Teacher
Management to Improve the Efficiency and Equity of Public Spending, Jakarta: World Bank.
Amelia R. (2012) ‘Angelina Faces 20 Years in Jail as Bribery Trial Begins’, Jakarta Globe, 7
September.

APINDO (2014) Stengthening Business Competitiveness For a Prosperous Indonesia: Findings
from APINDO’s 2014 Survey on Business Competitiveness in ndonesia, Jakarta: APINDO.  

Aspinall, E. (2014) ‘Health Care and Democratization in Indonesia’, Democratization, 21 (5),
pp.803-823.

Ayuningtias, R. (2012) ‘FSGI Nilai Uji Kompetensi Guru Bentuk Malpraktek’, Tribun News,
1 August, available at: http://www.tribunnews.com/nasional/2012/08/01/fsgi-nilai-uji-
kompetensi-guru-bentuk-malpraktek, accessed 14 September 2015.

Balikpapanpos (2014) ‘2015, Anggaran Tunjangan Profesi Guru Capai Rp80 Triliun’, 21
October, available at: http://www.balikpapanpos.co.id/berita/detail/138484-2015-anggaran-
tunjangan-profesi-guru-capai-rp80-triliun.html.
Batampos (2014) ‘Putri Bupati Bintan Ansar Ahmad Tak Lulus Tes CPNS’, available at:
http://batampos.co.id/27-12-2014/putri-bupati-bintan-ansar-ahmad-tak-lulus-tes-cpns/,
accessed 13 November 2015.

Beteille, T. (2009) Absenteeism, Transfers and Patronage: The Political Economy of Teacher
Labor Markets in India, unpublished PhD dissertation, Stanford University.

Bjork, C. (2003) ‘Local Responses to Decentralization Policy in Indonesia’, Comparative
Education Review, 47 (2), pp.184-216.
Boediwardhana, W. (2011) ‘Civil Servant Recruitment Moratorium Opposed’, Jakarta Post, 6
September, p.5.
Buehler M. (2009) ‘Decentralisation and Local Democracy in Indonesia: The Marginalisation
of the Public Sphere,’ in E. Aspinall and M. Mietzner (eds.) Problems of Democratization in
Indonesia: Elections, Institutions and Society, Singapore: ISEAS.

Chang, M., S. Shaeffer, S. Al-Samarrai, A. Ragatz, J. de Ree, and R. Stevenson (2014) Teacher
Reform in Indonesia: The Role of Politics and Evidence in Policy Making, Washington DC:
World Bank.Gaynor, C. (1998) Decentralization of Education: Teacher Management,
Washington DC: World Bank.
Grindle, M. (2004) Despite the Odds: The Contentious Politics of Education Reform, Princeton:
Princeton University Press.
Grindle, M. (2007) ‘Reform Despite the Odds: Improving Quality in Education’, Rev.
Pensiamento Educativo, 40 (1), pp.131-152.



                                                                                          52 
 
Guharoy, D. (2008) ‘Without Quality Education, The Country Will Change Fundamentally,’
Jakarta Post, 4 March.

Hadiz, V. (2003) ‘Reorganizing Political Power in Indonesia: A Reconsideration of So-called
‘Democratic Transitions’, Pacific Review, 16 (4), pp.591-611.
Hadiz, V. (2010) Localizing Power in Post-Authoritarian Indonesia: A Southeast Asia
Perspective, Stanford: Stanford University Press.
Hameiri, S. (2007) ‘Failed States or Failed Paradigm? State Capacity and the Limits of
Institutionalism’, Journal of International Relations and Development, 10, pp.122-149.
Hudson, D. and A. Leftwich (2014) From Political Economy to Political Analysis, Canberra:
Developmental Leadership Program.
Ilfiyah, A., F. Hendri, R. Rasiki, and R. Yudhistira (2015) Kegagalan Pemerataan Guru:
Evaluasi SKB 5 Menteri Tahun 2011 Tentang Penataan dan Pemerataan Guru PNS di
Indonesia, Jakarta: ICW.
Irawan A., Eriyanto, L. Djani, and A. Sunaryanto (2004) Mendagangkan Sekolah, Jakarta:
Indonesia Corruption Watch.

Jakarta Post (2011) ‘Govt to Cap Local Budgets for Personnel’, 14 September, p.13.
Jalal F. and B. Musthafa (eds.) (2001) Education Reform in the Context of Regional Autonomy:
The Case of Indonesia, Jakarta: MoNE, Bappenas, and World Bank.
Jalal F, M. Samani, M. Chang, R. Stevenson, A. Ragatz, and S. Negara (2009) Teacher
Certification in Indonesia: A Strategy for Teacher Quality Improvement, Jakarta: MoNE,
World Bank, and Dutch Embassy.
Jawa Pos (2014) ‘Empat Daerah Sukses Program Pemerataan Guru’, 14 October, available at:
http://www2.jawapos.com/baca/artikel/8100/empat-daerah-sukses-program-pemerataan-guru.
Kelsall, T. (2008) Going With the Grain in African Development? Africa Power and Politics
Discussion Paper No 1, London: Overseas Development Institute.
King, D. (1995/6) ‘Bureaucracy and Implementation of Complex Tasks in Rapidly Developing
States: Evidence From Indonesia’, Studies in Comparative International Development, 30 (4),
pp.78-92.
Kingdon, G. and M. Muzammil (2009) ‘Political Economy of Education in India: The Case of
Uttar Pradesh’, Oxford Developmemt Studies, 37 (2), pp.123-144.
Kompas (1970) ‘PGRI Bernaung Dibawah Sekber Golkar’, 11 July.
Kompas (2002) ‘Penerimaan CPNS di Daerah Bernuansa KKN’, 14 November, p.19.
Kompas (2010b) ‘PGRI Desak Surat Edaran Menpan Dicabut’, 26 November.
Kompas (2010b) ‘SKB Redistribusi Guru Disiapkan’, 9 June, available at:
http://edukasi.kompas.com/read/2010/06/09/20065384/SKB.Redistribusi.Guru.Disiapkan,
accessed 14 September 2015.Kompas (2015a) ‘Kualitas Guru Masih Rendah’, 8 July, p11.


                                                                                         53 
 
Kompas (2015b) ‘PGRI: Moratorium CPNS Berdampak Pada Krisis Guru’, 5 July, available
at:
http://edukasi.kompas.com/read/2015/07/05/14184321/PGRI.Moratorium.CPNS.Berdampak.
pada.Krisis.Guru, downloaded 16 September 2015.
Lampost.co (2013) ‘Wapres: Perbaiki Cara Rekrutmen PNS Dengan Obyektif’, available at:
http://lampost.co/berita/wapres-perbaiki-cara-rekrutmen-pns-dengan-obyektif, accessed 17
September 2015.

Leftwich, A. (2010) ‘Beyond Institutions: Rethinking the Role of Leaders, Elites and Coalitions
in the Institutional Formation of Developmental States and Strategies,’ Forum for Development
Studies, 37 (1), pp.93-111.

Leslie, S. and J. Strudwick (2015) Education Partnership Annual Partnership Performance
Report:      Management       Response,     available     at:    https://dfat.gov.au/about-
us/publications/Documents/2014-indonesia-education-annual-parthership-performance-
report-management-response.pdf, accessed 21 September 2015.

Liputan6.com (2012) ‘Gugat Uji Kompetensi Guru ke MA’, available at:
http://m.liputan6.com/news/read/429859/gugat-uji-kompetensi-guru-ke-ma, accessed 14
September 2015

Manggiasih, B. (2013) ‘Rekrutmen PNS Pintu Masuk Korupsi’, Tempo.co, 4 December,
available at: http://nasional.tempo.co/read/news/2013/12/04/173534672/rekrutmen-pns-pintu-
masuk-korupsi, accessed 17 September 2015.
McKenzie, P. et al (2014) Study on Teacher Absenteeism in Indonesia 2014, Jakarta: ACDP.
McKinsey and Co (2012) The Archipelago Economy: Unleashing Indonesia’s Potential,
McKinsey and Co.
McLeod, R. (2000) ‘Soeharto’s Indonesia: A Better Class of Corruption’, Agenda, 7 (2), pp.99-
112.
Mulkeen, A. (2010) Teachers in Anglophone Africa: Issues in Teacher Supply, Training, and
Management, Washington DC: World Bank.
Mustakim (2015) ‘Retno Listyarti, Guru Pejuang Pendidikan’, available                       at:
http://m.news.viva.co.id/news/read/615290-retno-listyarti--guru-pejuang-pendidikan/2,
accessed 14 November 2015.
Padmawati (2010) Kajian Yuridis Status Hukum Tenaga Guru Honorer Pemerintah Kota
Surakarta Pada Dinas Pendidikan Pemuda dan Olahraga Kota Surakarta Menurut Undang-
Undang Nomor 43 Tahun 1999 Tentang Pokok-Pokok Kepegawaian, Skripsi, Fakultas Hukum,
Universitas Sebelas Maret Surakarta.
Pahlevi, R. (2012) ‘SKB 5 Menteri Rugikan Guru’, Inilah.com, available at:
http://m.inilah.com/news/detail/1863163/skb-5-menteri-rugikan-guru, accessed 22 September
2015.
PGRI (2015) Teachers Problems and its Solution, position paper.


                                                                                            54 
 
Pierskalla, J. and A. Sacks (2015) ‘Patronage Cycles: Evidence from Local Elections in
Indonesia’,                                 available                               at:
https://www.dropbox.com/s/hypuuw0q8bwoq8s/PBC_November_2015.pdf?dl=0, accessed 12
November 2015.
Pikiran Rakyat (2015) ‘Masih Banyak Kepsek Duduki Jabatan Lebih Dari 12 Tahun’, 19 Mei,
available at http://www.pikiran-rakyat.com/pendidikan/2015/05/19/327796/masih-banyak-
kepsek-duduki-jabatan-lebih-dari-12-tahun, accessed 18 September 2015.
Pisani, E. (2013) ‘A Nation of Dunces?’ Inside Indonesia, 114 (Oct-Dec).
Prawiro, R. (1998) Indonesia’s Struggle for Economic Development: Pragmatism in Action,
Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Prodep (2015) “No Title.” available at: http://prodep.kemdikbud.go.id/index.php, accessed 21
September 2015.

Ray, D. and G. Goodpaster (2003) ‘Indonesian Decentralization,’ in D. Kingsbury and H.
Aveling (eds.) Autonomy and Disintegration in Indonesia, London: RoutledgeCurzon. 

Reeve, D. (1985) Golkar of Indonesia: An Alternative to the Party System, Singapore: Oxford
University Press.

Republika (2014) ‘Ini Kabupaten yang Berhasil Melakukan Pemerataan Guru’, 20 October,
available    at:      http://www.republika.co.id/berita/nasional/umum/14/10/20/ndpeob-ini-
kabupaten-yang-berhasil-melakukan-pemerataan-guru, accessed 21 September.
Robison, R. (1996) ‘The Middle Class and the Bourgeoisie in Indonesia,’ in R. Robison and D.
Goodman (eds), The New Rich in Asia: Mobile Phones, McDonalds and Middle Class
Revolution, London: Routledge: 79–104.
Robison, R. and V. Hadiz (2004) Reorganizing Power in Indonesia: The Politics of Oligarchy
in an Age of Markets, London: Routledge.
Rodan G., K. Hewison, and R. Robison (eds) (2006) The Political Economy of South-East Asia:
Markets, Power and Contestation, Melbourne: Oxford University Press.
Rosser, A. (2015) ‘Law and the Realisation of Human Rights: Insights from Indonesia's
Education Sector,’ Asian Studies Review, 39 (2), pp.194-212.
Rosser, A. and A. Joshi (2013) ‘From User Fees to Fee-Free: The Politics of Realising
Universal Free Basic Education in Indonesia’, Journal of Development Studies, 49 (2), pp.175-
189.
Rosser, A. and J. Curnow 2014  ‘Legal Mobilisation and Justice: Insights from the
Constitutional Court Case on International Standard Schools in Indonesia’, The Asia-Pacific
Journal of Anthropology, 15 (4), pp.302-318.
Rosser, A. and P. Sulistiyanto (2013) ‘The Politics of Universal Free Basic Education in
Indonesia: Insights from Yogyakarta’, Pacific Affairs, 86 (3), pp539-560.




                                                                                          55 
 
Rosser, A. and I. Wilson (2012) ‘Democratic Decentralisation and Pro-poor Policy Reform in
Indonesia: The Politics of Health Insurance for the Poor in Jembrana and Tabanan’, Asian
Journal of Social Science, 40 (5-6), pp. 608-634.
Schiller, J. (1999) ‘The 1997 Indonesian Elections: “Festival of Democracy” or “Costly
Fiction”’, University of Victoria Occasional Paper No 22, May.
Schiller J. (2009) ‘Electing District Heads in Indonesia: Democratic Deepening or Elite
Entrenchment,’ in M. Erb and P. Sulistiyanto (eds.) Deepening Democracy in Indonesia?
Direct Elections for Local Leaders (Pilkada), Singapore: Institute of Southeast Asian Studies,
pp.147-173.
Setuningsih N. (2012) ‘KPK Calls University Heads in Investigation Linked to Angelina,
Nazaruddin’, Jakarta Globe, 21 June 21.

Suara Karya (2015) ‘Pemerintah Godok PP Pemerataan Guru’, available at:
http://www.suarakarya.id/2015/03/15/pemerintah-godok-pp-pemerataan-guru.html, accessed
15 August 2015.
Sugiharto, S. (2012) ‘Just Remove Competency Test, Trust Teachers’, Jakarta Post, 4 August,
http://www.thejakartapost.com/news/2012/08/04/just-remove-competence-test-trust-
teachers.html, accessed 14 September 2015.
Suryahadi, A. and Sanbodho, P (2012) Assessment of Public Policies to Improve Teacher
Quality and Reduce Teacher Absenteeism, SMERU Working paper, November.
Tendler, J. (2002) The Fear of Education, Background Paper for Conference on Inequality and
the State in Latin America and the Caribbean, Washington, DC: The World Bank.

The Economist (2014) ‘Schools In’, 13 December.

Tribun Pontianak (2013) ‘Anak Bupati dan Keponakan Istri Bupati Sintang Tak Lulus CPNS’,
30 December, available at: http://pontianak.tribunnews.com/2013/12/30/anak-bupati-dan-
keponakan-istri-bupati-sintang-tak-lulus-cpns, accessed 13 November 2015.
Turner, M. and O. Podger (2003) Decentralisation in Indonesia: Redesigning the State,
Canberra: Asia Pacific Press.


UNCEN, UNIPA, SMERU, BPS and UNICEF (2012) “We Like Being Taught”: A Study on
Teacher     Absenteeism     in     Papua    and     West    Papua,  available at:
http://www.unicef.org/indonesia/Teacher_Absenteeism_Study_Papua_ENGLISH.pdf,
accessed 22 September 2015.

USAID (2013) Audit of USAID/Indonesia’s Kinerja Program, available                         at:
https://oig.usaid.gov/sites/default/files/audit-reports/5-497-14-001-p.pdf, accessed       21
September 2015.

USAID (2014a) Tata Kelola Distribusi Guru Secara Proporsional (DGP), available at:
http://www.kinerja.or.id/pdf/242948cf-ebe1-41b8-9dc0-ad052ef35324.pdf, accessed 21
September 2015.


                                                                                           56 
 
USAID (2014b) Prioritizing Reform, Innovation, and Opportunities for Reaching Indonesia’s
Teachers, Administrators, and Students (USAID PRIORITAS) Annual Report, October 2013–
September 2014, available at: http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/PA00KKMD.pdf, accessed 21
September 2015.

USAID Prioritas (2014) ‘Berhasil Dalam Penataan dan Pemerataan Guru’, Prioritas
Pendidikan, October-December, p. 2.
USAID Prioritas (2015) Policy Brief: Teacher Deployment in Indonesia, Jakarta: USAID
Prioritas.
Vice President of Indonesia (2011) ‘Memanfaatkan Tambahan Anggaran untuk Pendidikan:
Wakil Presiden Memimpin Rapat Komite Pendidikan’, 13 Juli, available at:
http://wapresri.go.id/index/preview/berita/1449.
Widoyoko, D. (2005) ‘The Education Sector: The Fragmentation and Adaptability of
Corruption’ in E. Aspinall and G. Van Klinken (eds.) The State and Illegality in Indonesia,
Leiden: KITLV Press.
Winters, J. (2010) Oligarchy, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
World Bank (1989) Indonesia: Second Secondary Education and Management Project, World
Bank Staff Appraisal Report.
World Bank (1996) Staff Appraisal Report: Indonesia: Secondary School Teacher
Development Project, Washington DC: World Bank.

World Bank (1998) Education in Indonesia: From Crisis to Recovery, Washington DC: World
Bank.

World Bank (2010a) Transforming Indonesia’s Teaching Force: Volume One: Executive
Summary, Jakarta: World Bank.
World Bank (2010b) Transforming Indonesia’s Teaching Force: Volume Two: From Pre-
service Training to Retirement: Producing and Maintaining a High-Quality, Efficient, and
Motivated Workforce, Jakarta: World Bank.
World Bank (2013) Spending More or Spending Better: Improving Education Financing in
Indonesia, Jakarta: World Bank.

World Bank (2014) Indonesia - Better Education through Reformed Management and
Universal     Teacher      Upgrading       (BERMUTU)        Project,     available     at:
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/2014/06/19789951/indonesia-better-education-
through-reformed-management-universal-teacher-upgrading-bermutu-project, accessed 212
September 2015.

World Bank (2015) Indonesia: Teacher Certification and Beyond, Report No. 94019-ID,
Washington DC: World Bank.


                            	


                                                                                        57 
 
Annex	One

Table on Case Studies


                                          Need for Reform                      Reform Initiatives
                                       TSR
                            TSR SD     SMP
    District Name           < 26       <20       prpnsdist jspnsdist
                                                 (median     (median =
                                                 =.096)     0.189)
                              2010      2010          2010        2010
    District B                Yes        Yes          0.115      0.229            TR, RG, MG
    District A                Yes        No           0.114      0.168           Some TR, MG
                                                                                 Recently some
    Municipality B            Yes         Yes           0.079        0.153       period and TR
    Municipality A            Yes         Yes           0.041        0.149         RG, period
Notes: i) TR = teacher redistribution; RG = regrouping of schools; MG = multi-grade classes;
period(isasi) = dismissal of school principals after two terms; ii) prpnsdist and jspnsdist are measures
of the extent to which civil servant teachers can be redistributed in a region at the primary and junior
secondary levels respectively.




                                                                                                     58 
 
