                                                     WPS8178


Policy Research Working Paper                       8178




           Politics, Public Works and Poverty
   Evidence from the Bangladesh Employment Generation
                Programme for the Poorest

                                  Iffath Sharif
                                 Ummul Ruthbah




Social Protection and Labor Global Practice Group
  &
Jobs Cross Cutting Solution Area
August 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 8178


  Abstract
  Public works programs can be effective safety nets if they                         show access to local politicians is a significant determinant
  help allocate resources toward poor households. By set-                            of participation, and can increase the relative probability of
  ting wages lower than market rates public works programs                           participation by 110 percent. Participation has a positive
  identify poor households reasonably well. When these                               impact on food and nonfood consumption of poorer partic-
  programs are oversubscribed and lack beneficiary selection                         ipants. The same is not true for less poor participants. The
  rules however, discretion by local politicians can influence                       results suggest rather than relying on local politicians, public
  their distribution and their effectiveness as safety nets. This                    works aiming to maximize their impact on poverty should
  paper tests this hypothesis using household survey data on                         rely on an objective and transparent targeting system that
  a seasonal public works program in Bangladesh. The results                         ensures participation of larger numbers of poorer households.




  This paper is a product of the Social Protection and Labor Global Practice Group and the Jobs Cross Cutting Solution
  Area. It is part of a larger effort by the World Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to
  development policy discussions around the world. Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://
  econ.worldbank.org. The authors may be contacted at isharif@worldbank.org.




          The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
          issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
          names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
          of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
          its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                        Produced by the Research Support Team
                          Politics, Public Works and Poverty:
   Evidence from the Bangladesh Employment Generation Programme for the Poorest*




                                            Iffath Sharif
                                          Ummul Ruthbah




JEL classification: H53, H75, I38, J43

Keywords: Public works program, Political access, Poverty, Bangladesh
Acknowledgements

We are grateful to Mitra & Associates and Afra Chowdhury for their contribution during the data collection
and preparation process. Md. Abir Hasan provided excellent research assistance. Helpful comments on
earlier version of the paper were received from Pablo Gottret, Tekabe Belay, Celine Ferre and Yoonyoung
Cho. Financial support for this research was provided by the Trust Fund for Environmentally & Socially
Sustainable Development, Gender Trust Fund and the Rapid Social Response MDTF of the World Bank.




Acronyms

 BDT              Bangladeshi Taka

 BISP             Benazir Income Support Program

 DiD              Difference in Difference

 EGPP             Employment Generation Program for the Poorest

 HIES             Household Income and Expenditure Survey

 MP               Member of the Parliament

 PFDS             Public Food Distribution System

 PSM              Propensity Score Matching

 PSU              Primary Sampling Unit

 UNO              Upazila Nirbahi Officer

 BDT              Bangladeshi Taka




                                                    2
1. Introduction

        Public works programs (PWPs) are a type of safety net that can serve as effective means to alleviate

poverty if they help to redistribute resources toward disadvantaged groups in a welfare-enhancing manner

(Subbarao, 2003; Grosh et al, 2009; Subbarao et al, 2013). There are also clear political motivations in

setting up PWPs, especially during periods of crisis when governments need to be seen to create “noticeable

employment.”1 PWPs serve a dual purpose of offering temporary income support via employment while

serving infrastructure requirements. The design of these programs thus varies widely, depending on the

motivation for their implementation. The emphasis of the design can either be on their safety net function

or on fulfilling infrastructure needs, or both. The main attractive feature of PWPs is that by setting the wage

rate below the market rate, these programs are able to offer a transparent mechanism of targeting those who

need the employment the most – those with lower opportunity costs generally self-select themselves into

these programs.

        Evaluations of various PWPs designed as safety nets suggest wide use of this instrument but with

mixed results. Many of the limitations found in these programs have to do with the appropriate wage rates.

For instance, Indonesia’s JPS Padat Karya program, which targeted those affected by the 1998 global

financial crisis, had a high incidence of misallocation of resources as the wages were too high relative to

the minimum wage (Pritchett et al, 2002; Samurto et al, 2000). Similar problems with the wage rate were

also found in the case of the Philippines, Botswana, India and Kenya (Subbarao, 1997; Datt and Ravallion,

1994). The Jefes Program in Argentina put in place in response to the 2002 severe economic crisis but used

a below market wage rate. Evaluations of the program suggest it helped to reduce extreme poverty and

contributed to protecting the poor during that crisis (Ravallion and Galasso, 2004). These studies suggest

PWPs are appropriate forms of safety nets for populations who are unemployed, and whose opportunity

cost of participating in PWPs is lower than the wage transfers they receive.




1
 Franklin Roosevelt’s New Deal was famous for its emergency relief and public works programs initiated in the
1930s.

                                                       3
         A question that remains to be answered in the literature on PWPs is what happens when given

budget constraints these programs are oversubscribed and the somewhat “fixed” wage rate is unable to

ration the distribution of the resources across those who want to participate in the PWP. In such situations

in which PWP resources essentially become discretionary at the local level, this paper argues that local

politicians determine who benefits from these programs. The theory that vote-maximizing behavior of

politicians influences the allocation of discretionary social assistance is well established and empirically

shown in the literature on “pork barrel” politics (Cox and McCubbins, 1986; Lindbeck and Weibull, 1987;

Dixit and Londregan, 1996; Schady, 2000; Case, 2001; Dahlberg and Johansson, 2002; Sharif, 2011). A

"pork-barrel" project is a publicly funded project promoted by a politician to bring money and jobs to his

or her own district. The "pork" is allocated not on the basis of need, merit or entitlement; it is solely the

result of political patronage, the desire of politicians to promote the interests of their own district, and

thereby build up their local support or “vote-banks.” There is also a growing literature in political science

on patronage and clientelism in Latin America (Diaz-Cayeros et al., 2006; Calvo and Murillo, 2004; Stokes,

2005; Weitz-Shapiro, 2005) that shows political parties may use discretionary access to state programs as

a form of patronage, even if they do not generally operate major welfare networks independently from the

state.

         The role of politicians in determining participation in PWPs is not widely studied.2 Analyses on the

role of politicians in determining who gets to join PWPs, and the subsequent impact on household poverty

can provide useful insights on ways in which these programs can function more effectively as safety nets.

This is an important policy question given that public works are a relatively expensive way to transfer

income to the poor.3 Using survey data on the largest PWP in Bangladesh – the Employment Generation

Programme for the Poorest (EGPP) – this paper addresses two questions: one, whether household access to



2
  There are many studies that have looked at the determinants of participation in means tested benefit programs
(Blundell et al, 1988; Chraig, 1991; Stark & Fry, 1993; Hoynes, 1996; Walter & Bengley, 1997; Blundell et al,
2000; Micklewright et al, 2004; Parker et al, 2005) but few shed light on the role of politicians.
3
  If poverty alleviation is the main objective, then a simple cash transfer would be less costly given lower
administrative costs.

                                                         4
politicians plays a role in determining participation in the program; and two, whether participation in the

program has a positive impact on household poverty.

        The panel survey data we use contain information on participants of the EGPP program and similar

households, including their access to local politicians. Further, the surveys were designed to collect

information on the three stages of program participation – having access to knowledge about the program;

submitting an application; and being selected by the program. Such detailed data allow us to unpack the

relative importance of the role of politicians at the various stages of the program participation process.

Using design features of the baseline and follow up surveys, we also assess the impact of participation in

EGPP on household consumption expenditure as a proxy measure of poverty. Our results suggest that when

EGPP is oversubscribed, politicians are likely to influence who benefits from the program. We also find

that poorer households benefit relatively more from participation in EGPP than the less poor. These results

emphasize the disadvantageous position of poor households who may not have access to local politicians,

and provide some insights on how the Government of Bangladesh could best manage its public works

interventions to ensure the most effective use of public resources earmarked for poverty reduction.

        The paper is organized as follows. The next section briefly describes the Bangladesh context and

the design of the EGPP program. Section 3 discusses the analytical framework and empirical strategy.

Section 4 offers a description of the data and presents the main findings of the paper while section 5

concludes.

2. Context and program description

        Since the 1990s Bangladesh has experienced a steady decline in poverty, which has gone hand-in-

hand with remarkable improvements in human development indicators. This remarkable reduction in

poverty in recent years helped Bangladesh attain both the MDG goals of halving the poverty headcount and

the depth-of-poverty. Survey-based estimates using national poverty lines show that the pace of poverty

reduction in Bangladesh picked up considerably during 2000-2010 compared to that observed during 1990s.

The steady decline in poverty rates has been sufficient to ensure substantial reductions over the decade in

the number of people living in poverty — from nearly 65 million in 2000 to 48 million in 2010, or a 26

                                                    5
percent decline. The number of extreme poor people also declined from 45 million in 2000 to 26 million in

2010 – a massive 41 percent decrease. Large numbers of people however still remain poor, and an even

larger number are vulnerable to falling into poverty.4 Rural households that are engaged in casual farm

labor are particularly vulnerable, and their situation can get aggravated by recurring natural disasters and

strong seasonal variations in food production. Seasonal poverty, induced by agricultural cropping patterns,

is often a characteristic feature of rural poverty in Bangladesh. Agricultural casual laborers typically face

two lean seasons – one before harvest and another before planting – that render them temporarily

unemployed. During these two lean seasons many male casual farm laborers migrate to cities looking for

work leaving their families behind. This brings about an added vulnerability for these temporary female-

headed households in rural areas. Female employment is traditionally low, and in rural areas it is primarily

confined to unpaid home-based work. While seasonality is fairly predictable, a household’s decision

regarding which coping mechanism to choose depends on a combination of household-level factors, leading

to the use of both informal mechanisms as well as formal options offered by government policies and

programs. Bandyopadhyay and Skoufias (2012) provide empirical evidence that intra-household

employment diversification prevails in rural Bangladesh as a coping mechanism. Additional coping options

include migrating to cities for temporary employment, using credit to smooth consumption, and using

transfers from social safety nets (World Bank, 2013).

        Bangladesh has a long history of implementing a wide spectrum of safety net programs that include

both cash and in-kind programs. Early efforts in social protection were rolled out as emergency relief

measures in response to a cyclone or a famine crisis. The frequency and scale of efforts instilled a culture

of experimentation and innovation in these responses: the nature of the crisis determined the nature of

instruments. The structure of Bangladesh’s social protection landscape, which consists of a large number

of fragmented cash and in-kind transfer programs, was largely determined by these initial conditions. PWPs


4
  The consumption distribution based on the nationally representative Household Income and Expenditure Survey
2010 is such that there is a wide band of households living around the poverty line making those living above the
poverty line vulnerable to falling into poverty in face of shocks. In 2010 52 million non-poor people consumed less
than 1.5 times the value of the poverty line (World Bank, 2013).

                                                         6
historically have been the government’s main response to poverty and vulnerability. This approach stems

from the practical need to rebuild community infrastructure while providing a safety net in the aftermath of

the famines and catastrophic natural disasters Bangladesh faced in the 70s and 80s.

        Building on this tradition of crisis response, the Government of Bangladesh introduced the 100-

day Emergency Employment Program in 2008 to cushion the poor against the immediate impact of the rise

in global food prices. Low levels of food stock availability in the Public Food Distribution System (PFDS)5

in the wake of the 2007 global food crisis prompted the government to introduce the country’s first cash

based emergency workfare program. Following the abatement in the global food price crisis, and based on

rapid assessments, the program underwent multiple iterations of design changes and eventually evolved

into the current flagship titled Employment Generation Program for the Poorest (EGPP) in 2009. The follow

on EGPP aims to mainly address seasonal poverty by providing cash for work during the two lean seasons

every year. To maintain its primary focus on its safety net function the work requirements are minimal, and

are aimed to essentially help with the maintenance of small scale community infrastructure.

        EGPP provides 40 days of employment during each of the two lean seasons6 – March to April, and

September to November, in rural areas. The first experimental phases of EGPP were implemented in

September 2009 and March 2010 in only 16 districts, lessons from which were used to initiate the

implementation of the program nationwide from September 2010.7 Implemented by the Ministry of Disaster

Management and Relief, the total program budget of about $200 million is distributed at the Upazila8 level

based on the proportion of poor population, with the total number of worker slots of about 1.6 million, or

about 800,000 in each phase. Like other PWPs, EGPP sets wages below the prevailing market wage for




5
  As part of the PFDS the government procures rice stocks to manage market prices as well as stock up for
emergency purposes. Surplus stocks are then channeled via food based safety net programs (Food for Works, Test
Relief, Vulnerable Group Feeding, Vulnerable Group Development).
6
  To accommodate rising real rural wages since 2007 and help maintain the size of beneficiaries, the number of work
days was reduced from 100 to 40.
7
  The nationwide implementation of the program was supported by partially by financing from the World Bank
under the Employment Generation Program for the Poorest Project.
8
  Upazila or sub-district is the second lowest level of administrative unit in rural Bangladesh.

                                                        7
unskilled manual workers to facilitate self-selection of the poorest households into the program.9 Where

there are more applications than worker slots a household categorical criteria is expected to be used to select

participants: households whose heads are manual laborers and own less than 0.5 acre of land10 are eligible

to apply. Beyond that there are no clear guidelines on how rationing of worker slots will happen if the

program is oversubscribed in each Union.11 Workers are selected on an annual basis based on fresh

applications at the local level. In each phase, an enrolled participant is entitled to receiving up to BDT 8000,

or about $104, or a little over $200 if work if taken up in both seasons for the full number of days. This

implies that on a monthly basis, over the course of a year, an EGPP worker can receive a maximum of

monthly transfer of BDT 1300 (USD 16), or about 15 percent of the estimated average monthly per capita

expenditure of the targeted extreme poor population who are expected to consume at around the lower

national poverty line estimated for 2015.12 The nature of the works supported under the program are locally

identified and implemented. Ministry level officials with the help of local government officials implement

the program.

         For the purpose of this paper, it is also important to understand the political context within which

programs like EGPP are implemented in rural Bangladesh. While not widely documented with evidence, it

is generally understood that both informal and formal social protection is provided through local patronage

politics (Ahmed et al, 2004). The role of local politicians in beneficiary selection is encouraged by the lack

of formal national targeting system and weak administrative capacity of many safety net programs (World

Bank, 2008 and 2013). Local politicians play a particularly crucial role in preparing beneficiary lists, and

sometimes in the delivery of benefits as well (Ibid). Such a context allows for an ideal setting to study the

links between politicians and participation in PWPs, and the impact of participation on household poverty.




9
  Currently the wage is below the market rate at BDT200 per day. This rate is adjusted for inflation over time.
10
   These two variables are highly correlated to poverty in rural Bangladesh. The definition of functionally landless in
Bangladesh is landownership of less than 0.5 acre.
11
   Union is the lowest local administrative unit in rural Bangladesh.
12
   Calculations are based on the 2010 national poverty line (adjusted for inflation). The benefit size is almost 2.5
times the average benefit offered by other safety net programs in Bangladesh.

                                                          8
3. Analytical Framework and Empirical Strategy

3.1 Assessing Determinants of Participation in EGPP

         To assess the role of politicians and participation in EGPP, we use a model for program

participation based on the model for benefit take up developed by Micklewright et al (2004) and Pundey et

al (2002). Suppose U0 is the household’s level of utility if it does not participate in the EGPP and Up is the

level of utility if it does. Here U0 is a function of household’s original income (y), given the observed and

unobserved household characteristics (X). Up is a function of (y, B, C), where B is the amount of benefit

the household receives if it participates, and C is any cost of participation incurred by the household, given

X. The household will participate in the program if and only if Up > U0. Assuming that the utility functions

are monotonous and continuous in income we have,

                           −    >	        	–                                           (1)

Where          	 is the level of income that a household with utility level Up needs to reach its pre participation
level utility U0. Following Parker et al (2005), we can write,

                               	–   +   =	        	                                      (2)

Where u is the unobserved household characteristics affecting C. Substituting (2) into (1) we get,

                           >        +                                                    (3)

The probability that a household will participate in EGPP can then be written as,

                     Pr(                  ) = Pr( <         −     )=	 (           )      (4)

           	
Where,         =   ( ) and F is the cumulative distribution function of the variable u/σ. We assume that u/σ

follows a logistic distribution.

         However a simple participation regression as in equation 4 that does not disaggregate the

determinants of each of the participation stage may hide important information about underlying factors

that govern the process of overall participation. There are essentially three stages or conditional steps

required for any household to participate in the EGPP. First, the household must be aware of the existence

of the program. Second, having the knowledge, the household must decide to participate in the program



                                                        9
and therefore lodge an application. Finally having applied the household must be selected by the program

authorities as eligible to participate. Thus the participation regression can be broken down as follows:

                Pr(participation) =

                Pr(selection| knowledge, application).Pr(application|knowledge).Pr(knowledge)         (5)

        While a simple participation regression can answer the question on whether politicians play a role

in determining participation in EGPP, breaking down the participation process as per equation 5 provides

us with more information on the relative role of politicians in each of the three stages of the participation

process. The household’s knowledge of the program, ability to apply as well as selection into the program

may also depend on the household’s social networks and connections to local level administrative

government officials.    There could also be other factors that influence the different stages of the

participation process. For example, knowledge about the existence of the program may depend on the age,

sex and years of education of the household head. Given rural social norms that limit women’s mobility, a

male household head is more likely to know about safety net programs compared to a female household

head. More educated household heads are more likely to know and understand the program and the process

of how it works. Household location may also be a factor, i.e. the proximity of the household to certain

locations such as markets, roads, post offices, bus stations etc. can allow for increased information flow,

thereby affecting household knowledge about EGPP, their ability to apply, and even their probability of

being selected given their application. Households that experienced any kind of shock may be more likely

to participate in a safety net program. Similarly, households who participate in other safety net programs

may be more aware of EGPP, and hence more likely to apply. Both these factors may have separate

independent effects on the various stages of participation in EGPP.

        Given that the benefit level (wage/per day) is fixed for each household, each of the three

components on the right-hand side of equation (5) can be estimated as functions of household’s

demographic and socio-economic characteristics as follows:

                     Prob(event) = F(Xβ)                                            (6)



                                                     10
        where X is a set of household characteristics that determine the participation process outcomes. To

test our hypothesis we include a “political access” index as a proxy for household access to local elected

politicians where it takes the value 1 if the household has access to either the Union Parishad or Council

member or chairman, two if the household has connection with both, and zero if it does not have any links

with these individuals.13 We also include dummy variables to reflect household access to administrative

officials at the Upazila level as well as access to a powerful relative.

        We estimate four separate equations: (i) a simple participation regression to assess whether the

“political access” index is a significant determinant of participation in EGPP; (ii) a knowledge regression

to assess whether the “political access” index is a significant factor that determines a household’s ability to

know about EGPP; (iii) an application regression conditional on household knowledge of EGPP to assess

whether “political access” is significant for lodging an application to EGPP; and (iv) a selection regression

conditional on household knowledge and application to the program to assess whether political access also

plays a role in the final selection into EGPP. The same equations are run to estimate all four regressions.

This allows us to understand the relative significance of the factors that affect these three participation

stages, and thus help us understand why and how the “political access” index matters for EGPP

participation. We estimate these equations using the baseline survey only.14


3.2 Assessing Impact of Participation in EGPP on Poverty

        Participation in EGPP, in principle, is supposed to provide employment to those households

engaged in casual labor in agriculture as they are likely to face unemployment during agricultural lean

seasons. Thus, participation in EGPP is expected to mitigate a temporary drop in consumption resulting




13
   We also conduct some robustness checks with two dummy indicators, one taking the value 1 if the household had
access to the UP chairman, and another one taking the value 1 if the household had access to a UP member. These
results are provided in the Appendix.
14
   The baseline has a balanced sample of participants and non-participants as it was constructed according to the
sampling strategy. Two third of the participants became non-participants in the endline survey therefore not making
it an appropriate sample for addressing any questions on participation.



                                                        11
from otherwise lack of demand for farm labor during lean seasons. In addition, there could be a direct

increase in income if the size of the transfer is larger than the consumption smoothing requirements of

affected households, thereby have a long term impact on household overall consumption. To assess the

impact among EGPP participants we use both estimates of the monthly food and nonfood consumption

reported at the time of the survey as well as total annual household consumption estimated across the year

as proxies of poverty. However, identifying any program impact on poverty will depend on having

information on the counterfactual consumption levels of EGPP beneficiary households in a without-

program situation during a specific lean season. The survey questionnaire instrument allows us to identify

beneficiary households in the various phases of the EGPP under implementation in each calendar year.

Thus we take advantage of the design and timing of the household survey questionnaire to identify a

reasonable comparison group of households to estimate the impact of participation in EGPP on: (i) monthly

consumption at the time of the survey; and (ii) annual consumption within the past year of the survey. For

(i) we compare monthly consumption among EGPP beneficiary households who participated in different

EGPP phases at endline (i,e. identification is based on with or without treatment); while for (ii) we compare

annual consumption among EGPP beneficiaries households with varying levels of participation in EGPP

phases (i.e. identification is based on the intensity of the treatment). We use these differences in the timing

of participation in EGPP among beneficiaries during the baseline and endline to run a set of difference-in-

difference regressions, controlling for differences in observable household characteristics:

                    Yit =  +  Ti +  t +  Ti t +  Xit +i + it                      (7)

        where t stands for the period (t = 0 for the baseline, and 1 for the endline). Yit is the outcome of

household i in period t. Ti represent the treatment status of the household: it takes the value 0 if the

household is in the control group and 1 if it is in the treatment group. Xit is a set of additional observable

characteristics, i is unobserved time invariant household specific factors that may affect consumption

and participation in EGPP, and it is an error term.  measures the difference between treatment and




                                                       12
control at baseline,  shows the difference in outcomes between baseline and endline in the absence of

the program, and  is our coefficient of interest and the estimated impact of the program on Y.

        Further, we also assess whether the relative impact of participation varies across participant

households living above and below the poverty line. This exercise is motivated by the fact that among the

participant households, there are households who have consumption levels above the poverty line: 36.07

percent were above the 2010 national poverty line. Figure 1A shows that the distribution of EGPP

participant households from the 2010 EGPP survey and compares it to the distribution of the national

population in 2010 (drawn from the nationally representative 2010 Household Income and Expenditure

Survey).

        The key assumption of the difference-in-difference (DiD) method is that the treatment and control

groups have parallel time trends. This is equivalent to the assumption that in the absence of the intervention,

the difference in the outcomes between treatment and control groups would move in tandem, decreasing or

increasing at the same pace. This condition will not hold if household characteristics or initial conditions

affect subsequent changes in the outcome variables such that their distributions among the treatment and

control groups differ from each other. Since we do not have additional observations before the baseline, it

is not possible to test the hypothesis of parallel time trend between the treatment and control groups.

However it is reasonable to assume that they share similar trends in the outcome variable – household

consumption expenditure - since they are drawn from the same villages. Any exogenous shock that may

affect the control group as a whole would affect the treatment group in the same way over time. Our data

show that both control and treatment households share very similar characteristics at baseline as presented

in Table 1A in the Appendix.


3. Data and Results

4.1. Sampling and Timing of Surveys

        The baseline survey, collected during November – December 2010, consists of information at the

initial nationwide roll out of EGPP following its previous experimentation stage conducted in limited areas.


                                                      13
The follow up or endline survey was conducted during November – December 2012, after two years of

implementation of the program. The baseline survey consists of 3,195 households, of which 1,594

participated in the EGPP (or beneficiaries) and the rest belong to a comparison group who did not participate

but nevertheless were eligible based on the two targeting criteria (or eligible non-beneficiaries). The survey

follows a multistage clustered sampling design. Initially 5 upazilas from each of the seven divisions in the

country were selected depending on the proportion of people living in poverty in each upazila. Then in the

next stage two unions from each upazila were selected with probability proportional to the population.

Finally, from these 70 selected unions, two villages/mauzas were selected which constitute the primary

sampling units (PSU). The villages/mauzas were also selected with probability proportional to the

population of the village/mauza. In order to identify the EGPP participants and the corresponding

comparison group a census of all households in the selected 140 PSUs was conducted. A total of 34,369

non-participant households and 2,540 participant households living 140 clusters were listed in the census

(Mitra and Associates, 2010). Then for each PSU, 12 non–beneficiary households and 12 beneficiary

households were randomly selected from the set of eligible non-participant and participant households. In

areas where there were less than 12 participating households all were selected for the baseline survey. The

household level eligibility criteria, i.e. household land ownership and the occupation of the household head

as a casual laborer, were used to identify similar non-beneficiary households who would otherwise be both

willing and eligible to participation in EGPP.15

         When conducting the endline survey, 207 households or about 6.5 percent of the baseline

respondents were not found, and 127 new “replacement households”16 were added in the end-line survey.

The number of the original EGPP participants in the survey sample declined from baseline to end-line -

only a third of the baseline beneficiary households continued to receive benefits from the program during

the endline survey (see Table 1). This reduction in the number of observations of “baseline” EGPP


15
   90% of the participant/beneficiary households have < 0.4 acres of land while all the non-participant/non-beneficiary
households have <0.32 acres of land. 95% of the household heads of the beneficiary households were casual laborers
whereas the corresponding figure for the non-beneficiary households is 92%.
16
   Replacement households were selected from the original sample list prepared during the baseline survey.

                                                          14
beneficiary households in the endline survey is likely to be due to the process of annual beneficiary selection

done at the program level.


           Table 1. Distribution of households across the surveys

                                          EGPP Non-EGPP Total Attrition Replacement

                     Baseline survey      1594         1601        3195

                     End-line survey       563         2553        3116       207            128



           However, the number of households interested to participate in the program did not decrease much

during this period. Of the 1,957 households who had knowledge about the program during both the survey

rounds 66.8% were repeat applicants. Of the non-participating households who knew about EGPP in the

baseline sample, 43.47% applied for the program but did not get in, while 45.66% of the households in the

endline sample applied for the EGPP but did not get in. This implies some level of oversubscription to

EGPP and the exclusion of households from participating in the program despite their interest to do so.17

           The household surveys also include information on household level demographic status, spending

on food and nonfood items, asset endowments, access to facilities, savings and loans, employment

activities, food insecurity and shocks, as well as information on participation in EGPP across the various

phases. The two phases of the program implementation reflecting the two lean seasons (i.e. phase 1

representing the October – December lean season, and phase 2 representing the March-April lean season)

allow us to identify reasonable control groups for our impact analysis (see Table 2). For instance, we are

able to identify the same EGPP households who were covered during the baseline and endline surveys

except for one difference: one set of households participated in November 2010 and 2012 lean seasons (first

set of treatment households or T1), while another set of households participated in November 2010 lean

season and in March 2012 lean season but not in the November 2012 lean season (first set of control

households or C1). We expect that both treatment and control households face seasonal poverty (as


17
     Due to the sampling strategy we are not able to quantify the level of oversubscription at the PSU level.

                                                            15
evidenced by their participation in EGPP) but the only difference between the two groups is that during

2012 each received EGPP assistance in different lean seasons. We are also able to identify households who

participated in both November 2010 and March 2012 (second set of control households, or C2) while

another group participated in November 2010, March 2012 and November 2012 (second set of treatment

households, or T2).


                      Table 2. Timing of participation in EGPP across the seasons

                                                                               Baseline           Endline

 Total EGPP households                                                         1594               563

 EGPP households who participated in November 2010 and 2012 lean                           119
 seasons only (T1)

 EGPP households who participated in November 2010 and in March 2012                       106
 lean seasons only (C1)

 EGPP households who participated in November 2010, March 2012 and                         247
 November 2012 lean seasons (T2)

 EGPP households who participated in November 2010 and March 2012                          106
 lean seasons only (C2)

 Total non-EGPP households                                                     1601               2553




4.2 Descriptive statistics

        To conduct our analysis, we compare socio-economic and demographic characteristics of three sets

of sampled households (see Tables 1A and 1B). Table 1A compares the beneficiaries with eligible non-

beneficiaries in the baseline survey. These households constitute the sample for identifying the determinants

of participation in EGPP and the role of access to local politicians on participation. Table 1B contains the

second and third set of comparisons between the two sets of Treatment and Control households for

analyzing the impact of EGPP participation on household consumption expenditure based on varying timing

of participation across the different lean seasons.

                                                      16
4.2.1 Differences between EGPP beneficiaries and eligible non-beneficiaries

        Columns1-5 of Table 1A compare the socio-economic and demographic characteristics between

EGPP beneficiary and non-beneficiary households in the baseline survey and show that the two groups had

similar socio-economic characteristics. The EGPP and non-EGPP households appear to have no significant

differences in their value of assets, and other poverty correlates such as housing characteristics, access to

electricity and other services. There are also no significant differences in monthly per capita food

(BDT1071.44 and BDT1085.25) and non-food consumption (BDT578.9` and BDT571.15), and the average

poverty rates in the corresponding Upazilas (34.25 and 33.15 percent) they live in. There are also no

significant differences in the ownership of common assets except for cassette player. Landlessness patterns

are also similar: 37% of the beneficiary households and 36 percent of the comparison households are

landless in the baseline sample. We find that on average an EGPP beneficiary households have larger

household sizes with older household heads. A significantly lower percentage of EGPP household heads

are male (88 percent) compared to non-EGPP households (91 percent).

        The data shows no significant differences in housing conditions between the two groups. Only 4.99

percent of the program households have a separate dining room, 63.51 percent possess a separate kitchen,

40% live in houses that have walls made of corrugated sheet or wood while 85 percent have roofs made of

corrugated sheet. The corresponding figures for the comparison households are 4.04, 60.20, 35.85 and 83.32

percent. 51 percent of the EGPP participants use sanitary (flush, water seal and pit) latrine, 95 percent have

access to tube-well water, 21.15percent households have electricity. Among the comparison households 52

percent use sanitary latrine, 94.64percent have access to tube-well water and only 18.41 percent households

have electricity. However, the beneficiary households have on average significantly more rooms in the

households (1.57) than the non-beneficiary households (1.48).

        Both the program and comparison households use similar energy sources for cooking and lighting.

21 percent of the beneficiary households use wood, 8.72 percent use dung, 0.03 percent use solar energy

for cooking. Among the non-beneficiaries, 21.15 percent use wood, 8.39 percent use dung and 0.04 percent

use solar energy for cooking. Of the program households, 79.09 percent use kerosene and 19.39 percent

                                                     17
use electricity for lighting whereas the respective shares among the comparison households are 80.99

percent and 17.05 percent. The survey collected data on the distances of sample households from the nearest

facilities – primary school, secondary school, primary health-care center, paved road, bus stop, hat/bazaar,

NGO office and bank. There is no significant difference in these variables among the beneficiary and non-

beneficiary households. There is a significant difference however in access to local politicians between

these two groups of households: the share of EGPP beneficiary households with some level of contact with

local politicians within the last year (either a Union Parishad Chair or a Union Parishad member)18 is 93

percent, compared to only 70 percent among the non-beneficiary households (see Table 3).

                               Table 3: Access to Local Politicians at Baseline

                                                                    Beneficiary Non-beneficiary           All

       Hh has previous contact with UP Chair                           0.639              0.417          0.454
       Hh has previous contact with UP member                          0.906              0.673          0.712
       PAI*: 0 = No contact                                            0.062              0.293          0.254
                1= Contact with either UP chair or member              0.33               0.325          0.326
                2= Contact with both                                   0.608              0.382          0.420
         *Political Access Index.

         We define the ability to make contact with politicians as access to them. A key limitation of this

approach is that it does not provide any information on the nature of the contact with local politicians. To

assess the extent to which access to politicians may affect participation in EGPP, we create an index of

political access (PAI) where it is zero if the household has had no contact with either the UP chair or a

member; 1 if it has had contact with one of the two; and 2 if it has had contact with both the UP chair and

a member. The mean PAI for the EGPP participants was 1.55 and for the non-participants it was 1.09. This

difference is significant at the 1 percent level. Given the similarities in characteristics between beneficiary

and non-beneficiary households, we test whether the difference in relative access to local politicians is

significant in determining participation in the program.19


18
   UP Chair is the leading politician at the Union level and the chair of the Union Parishad or Council, the main
governing body of catchment area within the Union. The Union Parishad (UP) is composed of 12 elected members.
19
   We do not expect the few significant differences between beneficiaries and non-beneficiaries (e.g. owning a cassette
player or being larger households or having an older household head) are correlated with household access to

                                                          18
4.2.2    Differences between treatment and the control households

         Columns 1-3 in Table 1B compare the socio-economic and demographic characteristics among the

first Treatment (T1) and Control (C1) households to ascertain that the control households are reasonable

counterfactuals for assessing the impact of EGPP participation to mitigate seasonal poverty. There were

no significant differences between the two groups in their demographic characteristics, their consumption

levels, asset ownership, housing characteristics, nor in their household location variables. There are also no

significant differences in the ownership of common assets except for ownership of a tube-well.

Landlessness patterns are also similar: 36.59 percent of the Treatment households and 34.59 percent of

the Control households are landless. Household size of the two groups are similar as is the proportion of

these households with a male head, though the household head has a significantly lower level of education

in Control households (1.4 years) compared to Treatment ones (2.1 years).

         The data shows no significant differences in housing conditions between the two groups. Only 5

percent of the Treatment households have a separate dining room, 64 percent possess a separate kitchen,

50 percent live in houses that have walls made of corrugated sheet or wood while 88 percent have roof

made of corrugated sheet. The corresponding figures for the Control households are 5, 60, 39 and 89

percent. 43 percent of the Treatment households use sanitary (flush, water seal and pit) latrine, and 96

percent have access to tube-well water. Among the Control households, 43 percent use sanitary latrine and

96 percent have access to tube-well water. The two groups differ though in terms of their source of lighting:

34 percent of Treatment households have access to electricity compared to only 19 percent among Control

households; the latter group is more likely to use kerosene for lighting – 81 percent compared to 66 percent

among Treatment households. Both groups use similar energy sources for cooking: 26 percent of the



politicians. A greater concern would be whether political connection is endogenous to EGPP participation, i.e. in the
process of participation in EGPP, households develop political connections. As shown in Table 2A between baseline
and endline, the majority of EGPP beneficiaries continued to approach local religious leaders to seek help with EGPP
application (80% at baseline while 89% at endline). The relative figures for approaching the UP Chair was 11.5% and
17% at baseline and endline respectively. Even fewer households approached a member of the UP (5% at baseline
and 4% at endline). These figures while are unable to rule out the notion that participation in EGPP can lead to greater
access to politicians, our analysis only uses data at baseline when EGPP reforms were rolled out, and thus by definition
access to politicians in our regression is exogenous to participation in EGPP.

                                                          19
Treatment households and 19 percent of Control households use wood. These groups are also similar in

terms of the distances from the nearest facilities – primary school, secondary school, primary health-care

center, paved road, bus stop, hat/bazaar, NGO office and bank. There is no significant difference in these

variables among the two groups. It appears unlikely for the time trends to be different between these two

groups. Table 1B also shows there was no significant difference in total, food and non-food consumption

expenditures20 of these households at baseline. However, the consumption patterns of these households in

November 2012 have significant differences. These differences also hold when we disaggregate the sample

by poverty status. These figures are presented in Table 4.


                  Table 4: Monthly Consumption expenditure at endline (in ‘000BDT)

                            Full Sample      p-value              Poor        p-value        Non-poor      p-value
                            T1      C1                       T1          C1                  T1    C1
                             (1)      (2)                  (3)        (4)                    (5)     (6)
 Fooda (A)                  5.83     4.84       0.30      5.32       4.59      0.32         6.64    5.33    0.43
 Non-foodb (B)              3.15     2.18       0.02      2.67       2.09      0.03         3.92    2.33    0.09
 Non-food (monthly)a        0.90     0.68       0.02      0.95       0.65      0.02         0.81    0.74    0.56
 Total (A+B)                8.98     7.02       0.08      7.99       6.69      0.12         10.56   7.66    0.15
                                                 a                                      b
Notes: T1=Treatment group, C1= Control group. For the month of November 2012. non-food annual expenditure


        While there is no significant difference in food consumption between these two groups of

households, the differences in total non-food consumption expenditure and non-food expenditure incurred

monthly are statistically significant at 5 percent level. These are presented in columns 1 and 2 of Table 4.

Columns 3 and 4 present the same results for households who are poor and columns 5 and 6 present those

for the non-poor households.21 Since EGPP essentially offers wage income to households during lean

seasons, we expect to see some increase in their consumption expenditures relative to similar non-EGPP

households. This is consistent with what we see in Table 4. Since consumption data was calculated in the



20
   Food expenditure was collected for last seven days, non-food monthly expenditure was collected for last one
month and non-food annual expenditure were collected for last one year. All of these items were then converted to a
30-day expenditure to generate monthly consumption expenditure.
21
   Households with consumption expenditure below or above the 2010 national poverty line are defined as poor and
non-poor households respectively.

                                                        20
month of November, the data suggests those who participated in November had higher consumption of

monthly food and non-food items during that month compared to those who participated in March. Similar

differences also hold for poor households but not for non-poor households: the differences in different

measures of consumption expenditures are not statistically significant for the non-poor households.

        The last three columns of Table 1B provides differences between the second set of Treatment (T2)

and Control (C2) households at baseline. As with the first set of Treatment and Control households we find

no significant differences between them. The households in the treatment (T2) and control (C2) groups

have similar demographic and socio-economics characteristics. Only 4 percent of the Treatment households

have a separate dining room, 58 percent possess a separate kitchen, 46 percent live in houses that have walls

made of corrugated sheet or wood while 89 percent have roof made of corrugated sheet. The corresponding

figures for the Control households are 5, 60, 39 and 89 percent. 51 percent of the Treatment households use

sanitary (flush, water seal and pit) latrine, and 96 percent have access to tube-well water. Among the Control

households, 43 percent use sanitary latrine but the same proportion have access to tube-well water. The two

groups do not differ in terms of their source of lighting, nor in their use energy sources for cooking. These

two groups are also similar in terms of the distances from the nearest facilities – primary school, secondary

school, primary health-care center, paved road, bus stop, and NGO office. The only main difference is that

the treatment households are significantly further away from bazaars and banks compared to the control

households. Given these similarities it appears unlikely for the time trends to be different between these

two groups allowing us to conduct DiD techniques to identify the impact of participation in EGPP.

        When we look at differences in total consumption expenditure between T2 and C2 at endline we

find that they are not statistically significant (Table 5). There are also no significant differences in food,

nonfood and total consumption between poor treated and control households and between non-poor treated

and control households. The data seems to suggest an additional EGPP phase may not necessarily lead to

higher consumption expenditure.




                                                     21
                Table 5: Monthly Consumption expenditure at endline* (in ‘000BDT)

                           Full Sample        p-value             Poor        p-value   Non-poor       p-value
                           T2      C2                        T2          C2             T2    C2
                            (1)      (2)                      (3)     (4)                (5)     (6)
 Food                      4.93     4.84        0.86         4.75    4.59      0.77     5.18    5.33     0.86
 Non-food                  2.44     2.18        0.17         2.16     2.1      0.67     2.81    2.22     0.20
 Total                     7.36     7.02        0.54         6.94    6.69      0.68     7.99    7.66     0.78
Notes: T2=Treatment group, C2= Control group. *Includes total annual expenditure converted to a 30 day expenditure



4.3 Does Political Access Affect EGPP Participation?

        We run four sets of logistics regressions to assess the role of access to politicians in determining

participation in EGPP. The odds ratio of the logistic estimates of equation 6 are presented in Table 6.

Column 1 shows the odds ratio for the simple participation regression. Column 2 presents the odd ratio of

the household’s probability of having knowledge about EGPP, while column 3 presents the odds ratio of

the probability that the household applies to join EGPP conditional on having knowledge about EGPP.

Column 4 presents the relative probability that a household is selected given their knowledge of EGPP and

application to receive EGPP benefits. Comparisons of the results in column 1 with columns 2-4 help to

unpack how “political access” influences the various stages linked to participation in EGPP.

        Results presented in column 1 suggest that having “political access” is a significant determinant of

participation in EGPP. A higher “political access” index is associated with a higher probability of

participating in EGPP, and is significant at the 1 percent level. The results suggest that among eligible

households, those who have contacts with local politicians appear to have a 110 percent higher odds of

participating in EGPP. When we compare the effect of the political access index across the three stages of

participation, we find it is also highly significant in determining each of the three stages underlying

participation but the magnitude of effects vary. Political access appears to matter most when households

apply to EGPP conditional on knowledge of EGPP: political access increases the relative probability of




                                                        22
knowledge by 69.9 percent, the relative probability of application given knowledge by 107 percent and the

relative probablity of selection condional on knowledge and application by 38 percent. 22


                        Table 6: Determinants of EGPP Participation (Odds Ratio)

                                     Participate in       Knowledge of         Application to         Selection into
                                        EGPP                 EGPP             EGPP conditional      EGPP conditional
                                                                               on knowledge         on knowledge and
                                                                                                       application
                                           (1)                   (2)                   (3)                  (4)
 PAI                                   2.105***              1.699***              2.078***              1.382*
                                         (0.18)                (0.23)                (0.23)               (0.24)
 Minority                                0.513                0.272**                1.591                 0.84
                                         (0.22)                (0.11)                (0.86)               (0.55)
 Minority*PAI                           1.846**              2.156***                0.811                1.483
                                         (0.53)                (0.63)                (0.28)               (0.59)
 Contact with UNO                        1.151                 1.358                 1.062                0.919
                                         (0.22)                (0.49)                (0.41)               (0.30)
 Minority*contact with UNO               2.063                 3.207                 0.752                   .
                                         (2.51)                (3.86)                (0.83)                  .
 Powerful relative                     2.001***                0.931               3.150***               1.587
                                         (0.42)                (0.29)                (0.89)               (0.49)
 Minority*powerful relative              1.138                  1.04                    .                 0.599
                                         (1.29)                (1.38)                   .                 (1.24)

 Household characteristics                Yes                   Yes                  Yes                    Yes
 Asset ownership                          Yes                   Yes                  Yes                    Yes
 Distance to facilities                   Yes                   Yes                  Yes                    Yes

 Observations                           3,191              3,191                2,382                      1,919
Note: Standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. PAI = Political access index.


         The important role of local politicians in facilitating the participation process in EGPP is also

supported by the results we find on the probability of knowledge about EGPP among the religious minority.

We find that households belonging to a minority religion are less likely to participate in EGPP, although

the result is not statistically significant. However, minority households who have higher access to local


22
   To ensure that our results are not sensitive to the design of the political access index we also estimate participation
regressions with different measures of political access and present the results in the Appendix. For example we use a
separate dummy for access to Union Parishad Chairman, Union Parishad member and UNO. We also estimate these
relationships using a single dummy for access to any of the three above mentioned individuals. In all the cases the
coefficients on the political access dummy are found to be statistically sinificant at 5% level and the relative
magintudes remain the same. We also estimate the disaggregated effect of PAI by estimating the effect of having one
political connection as opposed to two. The results show that having two political connections has a larger effect on
participation than having just one.


                                                           23
politicians, have a significantly higher chance of participating in EGPP. The magnitude of this effect is

almost the same as the independent effect of the political access index on the average household probability

of participating. When we explore the interaction effect of being a minority and the political access index

across the different stages of the participation process, we find that a lower probability associated with

having access to knowledge about EGPP: compared to others, being a minority household significantly

reduces the probability of having access to knowledge of EGPP. The probability of having access to

knowledge is significantly increased when the minority household has access to local politicians, as shown

by the odds ratio of the interaction term between the dummy variable representing minority households and

the index representing access to local politicians.

         Hou et al (2009) find that having other social contacts can also help with participation in safety nets

in Pakistan. We also find similar results: we find that while access to an Upazila Nirbahi Officer (UNO)

does not increase the probability of participation but access to a powerful relative does. This result suggests

that administrative officers at the sub-district level do not play any role in determining participation in

EGPP. Even when we assess the role of these officers in the underlying processes of participation, we find

that they are not of any help in providing access to information on EGPP or with helping with the application

process, nor do they have any significant impact on the selection process of the beneficiary. This result is

consistent with the ground realities in that selection happens at the Union and not at the Upazila level. With

regards to having access to a powerful relative, we find that this access helps households in being able to

apply to EGPP, but it does not have any bearing on the selection process.23

         Overall the results suggest that local politicians play a de facto role in beneficiary targeting of

EGPP. Informally they help to fill an important void in the administration procedures relating to

dissemination of information on EGPP to potential beneficiaries, helping potential beneficiaries with

application to EGPP as well as supporting their selection into the program. The results imply that when the


23
  The two other household variables that are significant for affecting the probability of participation in EGPP
include the age of the household head and the household access to remittances. The higher the age of the
households head the higher is the probability of the household participating in EGPP, while having access to
remittances significantly reduces the probability of participating in EGPP.

                                                         24
program is oversubscribed, households with access to local politicians have an edge in participating in the

program over those who do not. Such discretionary targeting of EGPP benefits would be an acceptable

solution if the policy maker’s objective is to ensure a full uptake of the program. It is not clear however

whether this would be the appropriate solution if the policy maker’s objective is to maximize the impact of

EGPP on poverty reduction. The vote-maximizing behavior of politicians would suggest an unwillingness

on their part to differentiate between the poor and nonpoor when facilitating their participation into EGPP.

The data supports this notion - access to politicians does not appear to be significantly different between

poor and nonpoor beneficiary households (see Table 3B in the Appendix).24 This is also consistent with the

sample of EGPP beneficiaries in which about one in three beneficiaries had consumption levels above the

poverty line (as shown in Figure 1A). The following section therefore explores the effects of such informal

and discretionary targeting of EGPP benefits on the overall program objective of reducing seasonal poverty.


4.4 Impact of EGPP participation on consumption expenditure

         Table 7 presents the DiD estimates that try to capture the impact of participation in EGPP on

household consumption during the November 2012 lean season among the first set of Treatment and

Control households, controlling for household level observable characteristics.25 The results show that on

average “treatment” households had BDT 1,492 more household consumption expenditure compared to

“control” households. To understand the pathways of how EGPP participation contributes to household

consumption increase, we also look at the impact on both food and nonfood expenditures. While the

difference in food expenditure is not significant, differences in non-food expenditure is significant. We also

estimate the impact on household expenditure on monthly non-food items to further focus on the short term

impact of participation in non-food expenditure, and find that EGPP households spend BDT346 more on




24
   Interacting the PAI with household poverty status does not change the results in the participation regressions as
one would expect.
25
   We use the same set of household characteristics used when determining participation, e.g. household head
gender, age, religion and education, household asset ownership, political access, household location and housing
characteristics (roof, walls, latrines, tube well, electricity), participation in other safety nets, shocks faced by
household, and access to remittances.

                                                          25
monthly nonfood items than non-EGPP households. This differences is significant at the 5% level. The

results suggest that participation in EGPP has a significant impact on the monthly household consumption,

but that beneficiaries essentially use EGPP transfers to meet their monthly non-food consumption needs.


                     Table 7. Impact of EGPP participation on household expenditure


                                        Total          Food        Non-food         Nonfood (monthly itemsa)

                                     1,492.29**       302.25      1,190.04***                 346.44**
    Impact of EGPP (δ)
                                      (536.48)       (488.61)        (38.33)                  (139.28)

                                       -914.19       -456.11         -458.08                    -76.16
    Trend for non-recipients (γ)
                                      (635.97)       (630.45)       (350.72)                   (68/27)

    Controls                             Yes           Yes             Yes                       Yes

    R2                                  0.285         0.287           0.168                     0.23
    Df                                   91            91              91                        91
    No. of obs.                          223           223             223                       223
a
 This includes only monthly non-food expenditure on fuel, cleaning, cosmetics, travel and transportation. Standard
errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1


          Given that a sizeable number of the poorer households are not able to participate in EGPP, we are

interested to assess any heterogeneous impact of the program based on the income levels of households.

Accordingly, we divide the sample households between two groups – poor and non-poor – and perform the

above analysis for each separately. We use the 2010 weighted poverty line of BDT1601.2 (HIES 2010) as

the poverty cut-off to determine these two categories of households. The impact results for the two groups

of households are presented in Table 8. Participation in EGPP has a significant on the total consumption of

both poor and nonpoor households, but this impact is much larger for the nonpoor (BDT. 5178) than poor

(BDT. 938). There are differences however in the channels through which total consumption is affected.

We find that for the poor, contrary to the results in Table 7, participation in EGPP has a significant impact

on food consumption – poor EGPP beneficiaries were able to increase their food consumption by BDT. 708

compared to non-EGPP poor households. The impact on food consumption of the non-poor however is not


                                                        26
significant. For poor households participating in EGPP also has a significant positive impact on the

consumption of monthly non-food items. The same is not true for non-poor households. When we compare

the non-poor EGPP participants to the non-poor comparison group, we find while the EGPP participation

led to a significantly more total consumption, but is only driven by increases in non-food consumption.


        Table 8: Impact of EGPP participation on household expenditure, by poverty status


                            Total            Food         Non-food          Non-food (monthly items)
    Poor HH               938.27**        708.490**         229.79                  364.65***
                          (417.85)        (342.488)        (225.02)                 (134.658)
     Controls               Yes              Yes             Yes                       Yes

       R2                   0.46             0.55            0.46                     0.40
       Df                    77               77              77                       77
   No. of obs.               143             143             143                       143
   Less poor HH          5,177.95**        1,985.55       3192.40**                  170.132
                         (2,535.20)       (2,567.24)       (977.34)                 (153.271)
     Controls               Yes              Yes             Yes                       Yes

        R2                  0.48             0.40           0.50                       0.38
        Df                   48               48             48                         48
    No. of obs.              80               80             80                         80
        Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1


        The results suggest while participation in EGPP has a significant impact on household non-food

consumption, the impact for the poor households are positive for both monthly food and nonfood

consumption. The results lend support to the important role EGPP may play for poor households in

mitigating seasonal poverty. We test the robustness of our results presented in Table 8 by using an

interaction term between participation and poverty status to measure the additional impact of the treatment

on the different income groups. These results are presented in Table 7A in the Appendix, and are consistent

with those presented in Table 8.

        The results presented in Tables 7 and 8 capture the impact of EGPP during a lean season. Table 9

presents the DiD estimates that try to capture the impact of the intensity of participation in EGPP by



                                                    27
comparing the second set of Treatment and Control households, controlling for household level observable

characteristics.26


     Table 9: Impact of Intensity of participation in EGPP on household consumption expenditure

 Full sample                             Total           Food             Non-food         Non-food (monthly items)

 Treatment                                1275.712*         735.704          540.008                 83.171
                                           (718.809)       (582.552)        (341.208)               (56.116)
 Time effect on non-participants           -1040.21        -603.866         -436.344                 -74.029
                                           (692.891)       (635.932)         (343.4)                 (62.33)
 Controls                                     Yes             Yes              Yes                     Yes
 No. of obs.                                  350              350             350                     350

 Poor HHs
 Treatment                                1077.522*         958.88*          118.641                 75.449
                                           (620.793)       (565.188)        (179.325)               (53.254)
 Time effect on non-participants           348.601         -127.387        475.988**                 -14.081
                                           (428.173)       (386.621)        (158.403)               (45.141)
 Controls                                     Yes             Yes              Yes                    Yes
 No. of obs.                                  215              215             215                     215

 Non-poor HHs
 Treatment                                 2265.166        1061.422        1203.744*                 82.612
                                          (2000.665)      (1861.341)        (622.469)               (117.424)
 Time effect on non-participants          -4181.808        -2183.463      -1998.345**               -180.972
                                           (2131.31)      (2024.604)        (739.13)                (124.721)


 N                                           135            135                135                     135
Standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1

         The results show that on average “treatment” households who had participated in an additional

phase of EGPP had significantly higher total consumption expenditure compared to their comparison group

of households. The results are not significant when we disaggregate total consumption into food and non-

food consumption. The impact estimates are consistent with results in Table 8 in that the poorer households


26
  We use the same set of household characteristics used when determining participation, e.g. household head
gender, age, religion and education, household asset ownership, political access, household location and housing
characteristics (roof, walls, latrines, tube well, electricity), participation in other safety nets, shocks faced by
household, and access to remittances.

                                                          28
benefit significantly from one additional phase of EGPP participation when it comes to their food

consumption. When we disaggregate the sample into poor and non-poor households, we find that the impact

of one additional phase of EGPP participation has a significant increase in total and food expenditure for

the poor households. We find no significant impact of participation among non-poor households on total or

food consumption. However, the impact on monthly nonfood consumption is significant at the 10 percent

level, as are all of the other results in Table 9.


5. Conclusion

         The results presented in this paper suggest while EGPP is an effective safety net during lean

seasons, especially for the poorer beneficiaries, the ability to benefit from EGPP depends on household

access to local politicians. When the program is oversubscribed, access to local politicians is a significant

determinant of participation. The results suggest local politicians play an important role during each stage

of the participation process, i.e. in providing access to information about EGPP, in helping households

submit applications, and in helping to get selected by the program. The important role of politicians in the

allocation of EGPP resources is further emphasized by the result that minority households are able to

significantly increase their probability of participation when they have access to local politicians. The

results lend support to the main argument of the paper that when PWP resources are oversubscribed and

become discretionary at the local level, household access to local politicians determines who benefits from

these programs. These results are consistent with the broad literature on “pork barrel” politics.27

         Who benefits from EGPP is an important question to assess the overall ability of PWPs to be

effective safety net instruments. The results suggest that on average households who participate in the

program are able to significantly increase their household expenditure. Taking advantage of the timing of

household participation in the various EGPP phases that are aligned with the different lean seasons, we are

able to estimate the impact of EGPP on consumption among EGPP beneficiary households who participated


27
  The findings of the paper also lend support to literature on social capital which suggests it is not “what you know”
but “who you know” that matters in the well-being of the poor (Narayan and Woolcock, 2000).


                                                         29
in different EGPP phases at endline (i,e. identification is based on with or without treatment); as well on

annual consumption comparing EGPP beneficiary households with varying levels of participation in EGPP

phases (i.e. identification is based on the intensity of treatment). When we disaggregate the beneficiary

households into below and above the national poverty line however, we find that beneficiary households

below the poverty line benefit from EGPP both in terms of monthly food and non-food consumption,

whereas there is no significant impact of the same among nonpoor households. These results indicate

EGPP’s potential to mitigate household consumption poverty particularly during lean seasons. The results

also indicate that increasing the program’s impact on poverty reduction will require increased targeting of

poorer households.

        The paper raises a number of policy implications for PWPs. One, we find that PWPs can be an

effective tool to mitigate seasonal poverty especially for the poor, and thus can be important safety net

instruments. Two, when oversubscribed and there is a lack of selection rules, local politicians can help to

fill the administrative gap but such informal mechanisms may not help with pro-poor targeting of program

benefits to help maximize the impact of PWPs on poverty. Three, PWPs require an objective and transparent

targeting system to ensure that larger number of poorer households, who are more likely to benefit more

than less poor households, are able to participate in these programs. Household ranking by poverty or

Poverty score cards for instance can be a simple mechanism to facilitate the selection of beneficiaries from

the bottom of the consumption distribution.




                                                    30
References


Azam, M., Ajwad, M. I., & Ferre, C. (2012). Did Latvia's PWP Mitigated the Impact of the 2008-2010
      Crisis. Discussion Paper No. 6772.

Berg, Erlend, Bhattacharyya, S., Rajasekhar, D., & Ramachandra, M. (2012). Can Rural Public Works
        Affect Agricultural Wages. Working Paper WPS/2012-15.

Berhanne, Guush, Hoddinat, J., Kumar, N., & Taffese, A. S. (2011). The impact of Ethiopia's Productive
       Safety Nets and Household Asset Building Programme: 2006-2010. Washington DC:
       International Food Policy Research Institute.

Blundell, R., Duncan, A., McCrae, J., & Meghr, C. (2000). The Labour Market Impact of the Working
       Families’ Tax Credit. Fiscal Studies.

Blundell, R., Fry, V., & Walker, I. (1988). Modelling the Take-up of Means-Tested Benefits: The Case of
       Housing Benefits in the United Kingdom. The Economic Journal.

Case, A. 2001. Election Goals and Income Distribution: Recent Evidence from Albania,” European Economic
        Review, Vol. 45, 405-423.

Chacaltan, & J, J. (2003). Impacto del Programa ‘A Trabajar Urbano’: Ganancias de ungreco de ingreso
       y utilidad de las obras. Lima: Centro de Estudios para el Desarrollo y la Participación.

Cox and McCubbins, 1986; Cox, G. W., and M. D. McCubbins. 1986. “Electoral Politics as a Redistributive
        Game,” The Journal of Politics, 48: 370-89.

Craig, P. (1991). Costs and Benefits: A Review of Research on Take-up of Income-Related Benefits.
        Journal of Social Policy.

Dahlberg, M. and E. Johansson. 2002. “On the Vote-Purchasing Behaviour of Incumbent Governments,” The
       American Political Science Review, 96 (1): 27-40

Deininger, K., & Liu, Y. (2013). Welfare and Poverty Impacts of India's national Rural Employment
       Gurantee Scheme. Evidence From Andhra Pradesh. Policy Research Working Paper 6543.

Departamento Nacional de Planeación. (2004). Programa Empleo en Acción: Condiciones Iniciales de los
       Beneficiarios e Impactos de Corto Plazo. Bogota: Evaluación de Políticas Públicas.

Devereux, Stephen, Sabates-Wheeler, R., Slater, R., & Tefera, M. (2008). Ethiopia’s PSNP: 2008
       Assessment. Sussex, U.K.: Institute of Development Studies, University of Sussex,.

Dixit, A. and J. Londregan. 1996. “The Determinants of Success of Special Interests in Redistributive Politics,”
         The Journal of Politics, 58 (4): 1132-55.

Duclos, J. Y. (1995). Modelling the Take-Up of State Support. Journal of Public Economics.

Gilligan, Daniel, Hoddinott, J., Kumar, N., & Taffesse, A. S. (2009). An Impact Evaluation of Ethiopia’s
        Productive Safety Nets Program. Washington DC: International Food Policy Research Institute.

                                                      31
Heckman, J. J., & Smith, J. A. (2003). The Determinants of Participation in a Social Program: Evidence
      from a Prototypical Job Training Progam. NBER Working PaperSeries 9818.

Hou, X., Mete, C. and Rashid, M. 2009. Pakistan - Rapid Assessment Survey of the Benazir Income
       Support Program 2009. manuscript

Hoynes, H. (1996). Welfare Transfers in Two-Parent Families: Labour Supply and Welfare Participation
       Under AFDC-UP. Econometrica.

Lindbeck, A. and J. W. Weibull. 1987. “Balanced Budget Redistribution as the Outcome of Political
       Competition,” Public Choice, 52: 273-97.

Michelle, Adatto', & Haddad, L. (2001). How Efficiently Do PWPs Transfer Benefits to the Poor?
       Evidence from South Africa. Discussion Paper 108.

Micklewright, J., Coudouel, A., & Marine, S. (2004). Targeting and Self-Targeting in a New Social
       Assistance Scheme. IZA Discussion Paper No. 1112.

Mitra and Associates. (2010). Baseline Survey of Employment Generation Program for the Poorest
        (EGPP) 2010 (Implementation Report).

Parker, D., Coady, P., & Susan, W. (2005). Program Participation Under Means-testing and Self-
        selection Targeting Methods.

Pundey, S., Hernandez, M., & Hancock, R. (2002). The welfare cost of means-testing: Pensioner
       participation in income support.

Rahman, H. Z. (2011). Employment Generation Program for the Poorest (EGPP) A Qaualitative
      Assessemnt . Dhaka.

Ravallion, M., & Galasso, E. (2004). Social Protection in a Crisis: Argentina's Plan Jefes y Jefas. In
        World Bank Economic Review 18 (3) (pp. 367-99).

Schady, N. 2000. “The Political Economy of Expenditures by the Peruvian Social Fund (FONCODES), 1991-
        95,” American Political Science Review, 94 (2): 289-304

Sharif, I. (2011). Does Political Competition Lessen Ethnic Discrimination? Evidence from Sri Lanka, in
         Journal of Development Economics (94) (pp. 277-289).

Sharif, I. (2009). “Building a Targeting System in Bangladesh based on Proxy-Means Testing,” World
         Bank Social Protection Discussion Series No. 0914..

Stark, V., & Fry, G. (1993). The Take-Up of Means-Tested Benefits, 1984-1990. London IFS.

Subbarao, Kalanidhi. (2003). Systemic Shocks and Social Protection: Role and Effectiveness of Public
       Workfare Programs. Social Protection Discussion Paper 0302.

Subbarao, K., del Ninno, C., Andrews, C., and Rodriguez-Alas, C. 2013. "Public Works as a Safety Net:
       Design, Evidence, and Implementation." World Bank: Washington DC.


                                                     32
Walter, P., & Bengley, I. (1997). The Labour Supply, Unemployment and Participation of Lone Mothers
        in In-Work Transfer Programmes. Economic Journal.

Woolcock, M and Narayan, D. (2000). Social Capital: Implications for Developmetn Theory, research,
      and Policy. The World Bank Research Observer; Aug 2000; 15 (2) (pp.225-249)

World Bank. 2008. “Bangladesh Poverty Assessment: Creating Opportunities and Bridging the East West
       Divide”, Washington DC: World Bank

World Bank. (2010). Project Appraisal Document on a Proposed Credit in the Amount of SDR 96.4
       Million to the Peoples Republic of Bangladesh for an EGPP Project. World Bank Report No:
       52886 - BD.

World Bank. (2011). Process Evaluation of the Employment Generation for the Poor (EGPP), Baseline
       survey 2010 –Bangladesh, Preliminary Report. World Bank.

Yetna, B., Prospere, Mungai, R., Tismpo, C., & Zampaglione, G. (2011). “Ex Post Assessment of the
        Impact of Public Works in Liberia.” Washington DC: The World Bank.




                                                 33
Appendix

Table 1A: Household Characteristics at Baseline: Comparisons between EGPP beneficiary and
non-beneficiary

 Variable                                 Beneficiary           Non-Beneficiary    P-valuea
                                         Mean      Std. error    Mean Std. error

                                        (1)          (2)        (3)       (4)          (5)
 Monthly consumption (‘000 in Taka)
 - Total                               7.15          7.09       6.85       7.11        0.16
 - Per capita total                    1.57          1.30       1.59       1.30        0.70
 - food                                4.89          4.06       4.65       4.07        0.06
 - Per capita food                     1.07          0.79       1.08       0.79        0.56
 - Per capita non-food                 0.57          0.84       0.57       0.85        0.83
 - Non-food                            2.62          4.40       2.47       4.41        0.39
 Asset (in ‘000 BDT)                   6.87         35.44       5.65      35.52        0.10
 Savings (in ‘000BDT)                  1.81         28.19       2.67      28.25        0.26
 Loans (in ‘000BDT)                    9.47         27.12       9.69      27.18        0.79

 Remittances (in ‘000BDT)              1.12         6.42        1.55      6.43         0.05

 Demographics
 Characteristics of household head
   - Age (years)                       44.61        0.36        41.8     0.46         0.00
  - Education (years)                   1.49        3.04        1.49     3.05         1.00
  - Male (%)                           0.88         0.34        0.91     0.34         0.02
  - Married (%)                        0.87         0.38        0.90     0.38         0.02
   - Minority (%)                      0.07         0.79        0.08     0.79         0.45
 PAI                                   1.55         1.68        1.09     1.69         0.00
 1 if hh received remittances (%)      0.17         0.75        0.23     0.75         0.00
 Household size                         4.71        2.23        4.55     2.23         0.04
 Experienced shock last year (%)        0.57        0.85        0.54     0.85         0.38
 Landless (%)                          37.41        0.03        36.2      0.3         0.65
 Asset Ownership (%)
 Radio                                 0.05         0.30        0.05      0.30        0.93
 Cassette                              0.02         0.09        0.01      0.10        0.02
 Cycle                                 0.11         0.70        0.14      0.70        0.07
 Fan                                   0.12         0.70        0.11      0.70        0.42
 TV                                    0.07         0.53        0.10      0.53        0.10
 VCR                                   0.01         0.12        0.01      0.12        0.59
 Dish connection                       0.00         0.03        0.00      0.03        0.18
 Tube-well                             0.27         1.14        0.29      1.14        0.27
 Mobile                                0.34         0.82        0.36      0.82        0.31


                                               34
 Variable                                         Beneficiary             Non-Beneficiary          P-valuea
                                                 Mean      Std. error      Mean Std. error

                                               (1)           (2)          (3)          (4)             (5)
 Housing characteristics
 Tin roof (%)                                 0.85         0.69           0.83         0.69           0.39
 Straw roof (%)                               0.15         0.69           0.16         0.69           0.49
 No latrine (%)                               0.08         0.77           0.10         0.77           0.14
 Sanitary latrine (%)                         0.51         1.18           0.52         1.18           0.68
 Kacha latrine permanent (%)                  0.21         0.74           0.18         0.75           0.05
 Kacha latrine temporary (%)                  0.19         0.80           0.19         0.80           0.95
 Brick wall (%)                               0.02         0.25           0.04         0.25           0.07
 Mud wall (%)                                 0.21         1.30           0.25         1.30           0.10
 Tin wall (%)                                 0.40         1.08           0.36         1.08           0.14
 Straw wall (%)                               0.34         1.18           0.34         1.18           0.91
 No. of rooms                                 1.57         1.30           1.48         1.31           0.01
 Separate dining room (%)                     0.05         0.26           0.04         0.26           0.25
 Electricity connection (%)                   0.21         0.85           0.18         0.85           0.16
 Separate kitchen (%)                         0.64         1.25           0.60         1.26           0.19
 Access to tube-well (%)                      0.95         0.61           0.95         0.61           0.31
 Use wood (fuel) (%)                          0.21         0.81           0.21         0.81           0.87
 Use kerosene (lighting) (%)                  0.79         0.85           0.81         0.86           0.20
 Distance from (in Kilometers)
 Primary. School                              0.13         0.02           0.16         0.03           0.23
 Secondary. School                            1.42         0.12           1.54         0.16           0.19
 Primary health clinic                        0.79         0.08           0.79         0.08           0.98
 Paved road                                   1.02         0.09           1.02         0.09           0.97
 Bus stop                                     0.44         0.07           0.44         0.09           0.99
 Bazar                                        2.58         0.25           2.37         0.22           0.19
 NGO office                                   0.98         0.10           1.00         0.11           0.72
 Bank                                         2.02         0.14           2.02         0.18           0.98
 Post office                                  3.01         0.22           3.14         0.29           0.50
 No. of obs.                                        1594                        1601
Notes: P-value >0.05 implies that the difference in mean is not statistically significant at 5%.




                                                     35
Table 2B: Household Characteristics at Baseline: Comparisons between EGPP beneficiary
Treatment and Control Households

 Variable                     Treatment         Control           P-       Treatment           Control           P-
                              group 1           group 1           valuea   group 2             group 2           valuea
                                        Std.               Std.                         Std.              Std.
                               Mean    error    Mean      error            Mean        error   Mean      error
                                (1)       (2)    (3)      (4)      (5)      (6)        (7)      (8)      (9)      (10)
 Monthly consumption (‘000 in Taka)
 - Total                    7.57       7.65     7.74      7.22    0.83     6.96    11.00       7.76      7.21     0.26
 - Per capita total         1.58       1.31     1.68      1.24    0.42     1.66    1.89        1.69      1.24     0.8
 - food                     5.28       5.82     5.17      5.49    0.87     4.71    8.36        5.18      5.48     0.37
 - Per capita food          1.08       1.04     1.13      0.98    0.62     1.11    1.50        1.14      0.98     0.73
 - Per capita non food      0.56       0.64     0.61      0.60    0.43     0.63    0.93        0.62      0.61      0.8
 - Non-food                 2.71       4.21     2.94      3.97    0.57     2.55    6.10        2.94      3.99     0.34
 Asset (in ‘000 BDT)            8.13   20.53    7.29      22.2    0.81     9.59    2.17        7.29      2.15     0.46
 Savings (in ‘000BDT)          1.50     4.07    1.41      6.66    0.90     1.58    0.53        1.41      0.64     0.83
 Loans (in ‘000BDT)            13.11   14.45    5.41      12.6    0.01     8.15    1.23        5.41      1.22     0.10

 Remittances (in ‘000BDT)      0.93    7.08     2.12      9.88    0.25     0.88    0.22        2.12      0.95     0.21

 Demographics
 Characteristics of household head
  - Age (years)               43.50    1.25     46.65     1.23    0.06     46.2    0.99        46.65     1.23     0.79
  - Education (yrs)            2.16    3.77      1.41     3.54    0.09     1.05    5.42         1.41     3.53     0.37
  - Male (%)                   0.85    0.43      0.86     0.41    0.92     0.86    0.62         0.85     0.41     0.94
  - Married (%)                0.82    0.53      0.84     0.50    0.77     0.86    0.76         0.84      0.5     0.75
  - Minority (%)               0.08    0.16      0.03     0.15    0.12     0.07    0.22         0.03     0.15     0.18
 PAI                           1.80    0.89      1.76     0.85    0.74     1.47    1.12         1.56     0.73      0.3
 HH received remittances
                               0.16    0.46     0.18      0.43    0.68     0.19    0.66        0.18      0.43     0.79
 (%)
 HH size                       4.98    2.04     4.63      1.93    0.26      4.4    2.94        4.63      1.92     0.29
 Experienced shock last
                               0.59    0.54     0.66      0.51    0.32     0.59    0.78        0.66      0.51     0.22
 year (%)
 Landless (%)                 36.58     0.5     34.58     0.6     0.78     0.39    0.04        0.35      0.06    0.51
 Asset Ownership (%)
 Radio                         0.03    0.43     0.08      0.41    0.19     0.06    0.62        0.08      0.41     0.69
 Cassette                      0.02    0.08     0.01      0.08    0.31     0.01    0.12        0.01      0.08     0.93
 Cycle                         0.10    0.36     0.09      0.34    0.83     0.09    0.51        0.09      0.34     0.89
 Fan                           0.18    0.42     0.10      0.39    0.19     0.13     0.6         0.1      0.39     0.46
 TV                            0.09    0.29     0.05      0.27    0.35     0.08    0.41        0.05      0.27     0.41
 VCR                           0.03    0.11     0.01      0.11    0.46     0.01    0.16        0.01      0.11     0.78
 Dish connection               0.02    0.12     0.01      0.12    0.83       0     0.17        0.01      0.11     0.57
 Tube-well                     0.16    0.59     0.33      0.56    0.01     0.28    0.86        0.33      0.56     0.42
 Mobile                        0.40    0.56     0.33      0.53    0.31     0.32    0.81        0.33      0.53     0.97
 Housing characteristics
 Tin roof (%)                  0.88    0.39     0.89      0.36    0.82     0.89    0.56        0.89      0.37      1

                                                        36
 Variable                    Treatment         Control           P-       Treatment            Control           P-
                             group 1           group 1           valuea   group 2              group 2           valuea
                                        Std.              Std.                          Std.              Std.
                              Mean     error   Mean      error            Mean         error   Mean      error
                               (1)      (2)     (3)       (4)     (5)      (6)          (7)     (8)       (9)     (10)
 Straw roof (%)              0.09      0.39    0.11      0.36    0.66     0.1          0.56    0.11      0.37     0.89
 No latrine (%)              0.09      0.38    0.09      0.35    0.91     0.1          0.55    0.09      0.36     0.74
 Sanitary latrine (%)        0.43      0.68    0.43      0.64    0.99     0.51         0.97    0.43      0.64     0.21
 Kacha latrine permanent
                             0.26      0.66    0.22      0.63    0.48     0.22         0.96    0.22      0.63     0.96
 (%)
 Kacha latrine temporary
                             0.21      0.62    0.26      0.59    0.45     0.17         0.89    0.26      0.59     0.14
 (%)
 Brick wall (%)              0.00      0.12    0.01      0.12    0.31     0.03         0.17    0.01      0.11     0.23
 Mud wall (%)                0.14      0.57    0.21      0.54    0.22     0.19         0.82    0.21      0.53     0.63
 Tin wall (%)                0.50      0.63    0.39      0.59    0.18     0.46          0.9    0.39      0.59      0.3
 Straw wall (%)              0.29      0.74    0.35      0.70    0.36     0.29         1.07    0.35       0.7     0.34
 No. of rooms                1.63      0.77    1.64      0.98    0.97     1.58         1.49    1.64      0.98     0.62
 Separate dining
                             0.05      0.26    0.05      0.21    1.00     0.04         0.01    0.05      0.02     0.68
 room (%)
 Electricity connection (%)  0.34      0.46    0.19      0.56    0.06     0.21         0.04    0.19      0.05     0.71
 Separate kitchen (%)        0.64      0.52    0.60      0.61    0.63     0.58         0.04    0.60      0.06     0.78
 Access to tube-well (%)     0.96      0.20    0.96      0.26    0.92     0.96         0.06    0.96      0.03     0.94
 Use wood (fuel) (%)         0.26      0.44    0.19      0.48    0.27     0.19         0.03    0.19      0.05     0.95
 Use kerosene (lighting) (%) 0.66      0.45    0.81      0.56    0.05     0.79         0.03    0.81      0.05     0.72
 Distance from (in Kilometers)
 Primary. school             0.14      0.04    0.12 0.04         0.68     0.16          0.7    0.12     0.46      0.52
 Secondary. school           1.00 0.18         1.14    0.20      0.59     1.27         3.13    1.14     2.05      0.51
 Primary health clinic       0.67      0.10    0.71 0.12         0.80     0.76         1.92    0.71     1.26      0.72
 Paved road                  0.91      0.17    0.91    0.16      0.99       1          2.52    0.91     1.65      0.63
 Bus stop                    0.23      0.05    0.40    0.10      0.10     0.44         1.62     0.4     1.06       0.7
 Bazar                       2.42      0.43    1.95    0.30      0.33     3.54         4.75    1.95     3.11      0.02
 NGO office                  0.74      0.14    0.83 0.14         0.63     1.05         2.25    0.83     1.47      0.21
 Bank                        1.88      0.18    1.86    0.25      0.97      2.3         3.96    1.86     2.59      0.09
 Post office                 3.37      0.42    2.63    0.30      0.11     3.59         4.63    2.63     3.03      0.03
 No. of obs.                       119             106                           247                106
Notes: During baseline both the treatment and control groups participated in EGPP. During end line the
control group 1 participated in March and the treatment group 1 participated in November. During endline
the control group 2 participated in March while the treatment group 2 participated in March and
November




                                                      37
Figure 1A: Distribution of EGPP households



       .0008
 .0004 .0006                              Kernel density estimate
 Density
       .0002
       0




               0 1601.2            5000               10000              15000     20000
                                                  Monthly per capita expenditure

                                                   EGPP      Households
                                                   HIES 2010 Households
               kernel = epanechnikov, bandwidth = 113.2429




                                                     38
Table 2A: Person approached by sample households for participating in the EGPP (percent)

  Person approached                                                         Baseline   End-line
  Non-elected local influential person                                        4.17       3.63
  Government employee                                                         0.37       0.20
  Village leader                                                             30.84      7.98%
  Religious leader                                                           80.16      89.12
  Friend/family                                                               1.00       095
  Union Parishad chairman                                                    11.58      16.98
  Another member of Union Parishad committee                                  5.03       3.97
  Other                                                                       1.48       2.87
  Number of Households                                                        1428       981




                                               39
Table 3A: Determinants of Participation (Logistic Estimation – Marginal Effects)

                                    Participate in      Knowledge of        Application to        Selection into
                                       EGPP                EGPP            EGPP conditional     EGPP conditional
                                                                            on knowledge        on knowledge and
                                                                                                   application
                                          (1)                   (2)                (3)                  (4)
PAI                                   0.744***              0.530***           0.731***              0.323*
                                        (0.09)                (0.13)             (0.11)               (0.17)
Minority                                -0.668              -1.300**             0.464               -0.176
                                        (0.43)                (0.39)             (0.54)               (0.65)
Minority*PAI                           0.613**              0.768***            -0.209                0.394
                                        (0.29)                (0.29)             (0.34)               (0.40)
Contact with UNO                        0.141                 0.306               0.06               -0.084
                                        (0.19)                (0.36)             (0.39)               (0.33)
Minority*contact with UNO               0.724                 1.165             -0.286                   .
                                        (1.22)                (1.21)             (1.11)                  .
Powerful relative                     0.693***               -0.071            1.147***               0.462
                                        (0.21)                (0.31)             (0.28)               (0.31)
Minority*powerful relative               0.13                 0.039                 .                -0.513
                                        (1.13)                (1.33)                .                 (2.07)

Household characteristics               Yes                   Yes                 Yes                 Yes
Asset ownership                         Yes                   Yes                 Yes                 Yes
Distance to facilities                  Yes                   Yes                 Yes                 Yes

 Observations                           3,191              3,191                2,382                 1,919
Note: Standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1. PAI = Political access index.


Table 3B: Differences in access to local politicians between poor and non-poor households

 Panel A                                             Poor                       Non-poor                P value
                                            Mean              SD           Mean          SD
 All households                             1.15             0.044         1.20        0.413       0.18
 Participants                               1.52             0.032         1.57        0.043      -0.36
 Non-participants                           1.07             0.049         1.12        0.047       0.30
 Panel B
 All households                          0.74           0.022          0.75          0.016         0.72
 Participants                            0.94           0.010          0.93          0.018         0.35
 Non-participants                        0.70           0.025          0.72          0.021         0.67
Note: In Panel A, PAI = 0 if household has no connection to local politicians, 1 if has connection with
either the UP chair or the UP member and 2 if has connection with both. In Panel B, PAI =0 if household
has no connection with local politicians and 1 if has connection with either the UP chair or the UP
member or both.




                                                        40
Table 4A: Determinants of Participation (Logistic Estimation with alternative formulation of
political access index)


                               Participate in      Knowledge of       Application to       Selection into
                                  EGPP                EGPP           EGPP conditional          EGPP
                                                                      on knowledge        conditional on
                                                                                          knowledge and
                                                                                            application

1 if minority                      -0.084            -0.233**                0.104             -0.011
                                  (0.076)             (0.091)               (0.15)            (0.192)
PAIa                             0.222***            0.221***             0.251***           0.199***
                                  (0.026)             (0.043)              (0.041)            (0.063)
Minority*PAI                        0.119              0.173                -0.073              0.102
                                  (0.077)             (0.112)              (0.158)            (0.203)
Contact with UNO                   0.038               0.079                 0.064             -0.007
                                  (0.024)             (0.075)               (0.08)            (0.073)
Minority*contact with
UNO                                0.135                  0.347             -0.058               .
                                  (0.153)                (0.256)           (0.233)               .
1 if have powerful
relative                         0.091***                 -0.015          0.242***             0.105
                                  (0.026)                (0.062)           (0.062)            (0.069)
Minority*powerful
relative                           0.044                  0.082               .                -0.112
                                  (0.131)                (0.245)              .               (0.476)

Household characteristics           Yes                   Yes                Yes                Yes
Asset ownership                     Yes                   Yes                Yes                Yes
Distance to facilities              Yes                   Yes                Yes                Yes
No. of obs.                         3,191                3,191                2,382            1,919
Standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
a
  Political Access Index (PAI) = 1 if the household has contact with either the UP chair or Member or
both, 0 otherwise




                                                    41
Table 5A: Determinants of Participation (Logistic Estimation using separate dummy variables for
political access)

                              Participate in      Knowledge of    Application to     Selection into
                                 EGPP                EGPP        EGPP conditional        EGPP
                                                                  on knowledge      conditional on
                                                                                    knowledge and
                                                                                      application

1, if minority                    -0.089            -0.228**           0.03             0.017
                                 (0.064)             (0.077)         (0.135)            (0.17)
1, if has contact with UP
chair                           0.059***                0.007       0.180***             0.03
                                 (0.017)               (0.035)       (0.042)           (0.042)
Minority*Contact with
UP chair                          0.076              0.263**          -0.174             0.13
                                 (0.052)             (0.122)         (0.117)           (0.094)
1, if has contact with UP
member                          0.156***            0.214***         0.120**           0.144**
                                 (0.024)              (0.04)         (0.045)           (0.071)
Minority*Contact with
UP member                         0.083                 0.041         0.122               0
                                 (0.059)               (0.101)       (0.156)           (0.169)
1, if has contact with
UNO                               0.025                  0.09         0.008             -0.011
                                 (0.024)               (0.075)       (0.084)           (0.072)
Minority*contact with
UNO                               0.089                 0.202         -0.029               .
                                 (0.157)               (0.247)       (0.238)               .
1, if has powerful
relative                        0.087***                -0.022      0.245***            0.098
                                 (0.026)               (0.062)       (0.058)           (0.067)
Minority*powerful
relative                          0.016                 0.005           .               -0.114
                                 (0.141)               (0.265)          .              (0.456)

Household characteristics          Yes                  Yes            Yes               Yes
Asset ownership                    Yes                  Yes            Yes               Yes
Distance to facilities             Yes                  Yes            Yes               Yes
No. of obs.                        3,191               3,191          2,382             1,919
Standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                  42
Table 6A: Determinants of Participation (Odds Ratio using number of political connection)

                               Participate in      Knowledge of       Application to       Selection into
                                  EGPP                EGPP           EGPP conditional          EGPP
                                                                      on knowledge        conditional on
                                                                                          knowledge and
                                                                                            application

1 if minority                       0.52              0.320**                1.62               0.95
                                   (0.31)              (0.15)               (1.13)             (0.83)
PAIa                             5.593***            2.950***             3.202***           2.486***
                                   (1.07)              (0.64)               (0.65)             (0.73)
Minority*PAI                        2.52                2.33                 0.71               1.60
                                   (1.50)              (1.28)               (0.52)             (1.48)
Contact with UNO                   1.345               1.473                1.345              0.967
                                   (0.25)              (0.54)               (0.50)             (0.32)
Minority*contact with
UNO                               2.846                  5.451             0.762                 .
                                  (3.38)                 (6.78)            (0.82)                .
1 if have powerful
relative                         2.020***                0.928            3.076***            1.619
                                   (0.41)                (0.28)             (0.91)            (0.51)
Minority*powerful
relative                          1.403                  1.493                .               0.598
                                  (1.42)                 (1.78)               .               (1.30)

Household characteristics           Yes                   Yes                Yes                Yes
Asset ownership                     Yes                   Yes                Yes                Yes
Distance to facilities              Yes                   Yes                Yes                Yes
No. of obs.                        3,191                 3,191              2,382              1,919
Standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1
a
  Political Access Index (PAI) = 1 if the household has contact with either the UP chair or Member or
both, 0 otherwise




                                                    43
Table 6B: Determinants of Participation (Odds ratio using separate dummy variables for political
access)

                              Participate in      Knowledge of    Application to     Selection into
                                 EGPP                EGPP        EGPP conditional        EGPP
                                                                  on knowledge      conditional on
                                                                                    knowledge and
                                                                                      application

1, if minority                     0.5               0.327**          1.154             1.082
                                 (0.25)               (0.13)          (0.74)            (0.85)
1, if has contact with UP
chair                           1.582***               1.036        2.339***            1.145
                                  (0.21)               (0.18)         (0.49)            (0.22)
Minority*Contact with
UP chair                         1.814                 3.631*          0.44             1.815
                                 (0.73)                (2.17)         (0.25)            (0.78)
1, if has contact with UP
member                          3.367***            2.865***         1.762**           1.938**
                                  (0.65)              (0.59)          (0.37)            (0.65)
Minority*Contact with
UP member                        1.909                 1.225          1.783             0.999
                                 (0.88)                (0.61)         (1.32)            (0.77)
1, if has contact with
UNO                              1.217                 1.556           1.04              0.95
                                 (0.23)                (0.58)         (0.42)            (0.31)
Minority*contact with
UNO                              2.007                 2.698           0.87                .
                                 (2.45)                (3.26)         (0.98)               .
1, if has powerful
relative                        1.969***               0.896        3.178***            1.569
                                  (0.40)               (0.27)         (0.90)            (0.48)
Minority*powerful
relative                         1.135                 1.027            .               0.593
                                 (1.25)                (1.34)           .               (1.24)

Household characteristics          Yes                  Yes            Yes               Yes
Asset ownership                    Yes                  Yes            Yes               Yes
Distance to facilities             Yes                  Yes            Yes               Yes
No. of obs.                        3,191               3,191          2,382             1,919
Standard errors in parentheses. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1




                                                  44
Table 7A: The heterogeneous effect of EGPP on household expenditure: using poverty interaction
term

                                                                                            Non-food
                                                Total            Food        Non-food       (monthly)

 Effect EGPP on non-poor ( )                  3600.735*         893.195     2707.540***      309.462*
                                              (1864.356)      (1701.299)      (891.88)       (179.966)

 Time effect between the poor and non-       4907.760***       2263.438     2644.322***     264.706**
 poor in the control group ( )
                                              (1805.485)      (1647.943)     (767.929)      (127.245)

 Difference in treatment effect between       -3222.648        -849.505     -2373.142**        77.759
 poor and non-poor ( )
                                              (2272.328)      (2067.607)     (965.619)       (147.992)

 Time effect for the control non-poor        -4043.062**      -1893.502     -2149.56***      -242.7*
 ( )
                                              (1777.778)      (1666.056)     (753.245)       (133.52)

 Household characteristics                       Yes             Yes             Yes            Yes
 Asset ownership                                 Yes             Yes             Yes            Yes
 Distance to facilities                          Yes             Yes             Yes            Yes
 No. of obs.                                      223             223            223           223
Note: The underlying regression equation here is          =	 +         +       +     +       +         +
       +        + Θ + . In the first difference form we can only estimate the parameters , , ,
and Θ. Here     measures the time difference in the dependent variable for the non-poor households in the
control group, measures the treatment effect for the non-poor households, measures the difference in
time effects between the poor and non-poor households in the control group and measures the difference
in treatment effect between the poor and non-poor households. If the program had heterogeneous effects
on the poor and non poor households we would have a statistically significant .




                                                   45
