                                                  WPS8184


Policy Research Working Paper                    8184




         When is the Government Transfer
                Multiplier Large?
                             Eric Giambattista
                              Steven Pennings




Development Research Group
Macroeconomics and Growth Team
September 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 8184


  Abstract
  Transfers to individuals were a larger part of the 2009 U.S.                       of inflation. Targeted transfers provide the same boost to
  stimulus package than government purchases. Using a                                demand as purchases, but lower aggregate supply relative
  two-agent New Keynesian model, this paper shows analyt-                            to purchases, as those receiving transfers want to work
  ically that the multiplier on targeted transfers to financially                    less. When the aggregate demand curve inverts, such as
  constrained households is (i) larger than the purchase mul-                        when the zero lower bound binds, the extra inflation from
  tiplier if the zero lower bound (ZLB) binds, and (ii) is                           lower supply boosts the multiplier. This result also holds
  more sensitive to the degree of monetary accommodation                             quantitatively in a medium-scale version of the model.




  This paper is a product of the Macroeconomics and Growth Team, Development Research Group. It is part of a larger
  effort by the World Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions
  around the world. Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The authors
  may be contacted at spennings@woldbank.org.




          The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
          issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
          names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
          of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
          its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                        Produced by the Research Support Team
   WHEN IS THE GOVERNMENT TRANSFER MULTIPLIER LARGE?

                         ERIC GIAMBATTISTA AND STEVEN PENNINGS




                                        1. Introduction

  In the years preceding the Global Financial Crisis, the role of macroeconomic management
had largely fallen to central banks, with ﬁscal policy playing a secondary role. But with the
magnitude of the global recession, and the Zero Lower Bound (ZLB) on nominal interest
rates binding in the United States and other countries, ﬁscal policy has now taken a more
prominent role in policymakers’ attempts to stimulate the economy. This has led to a renewed
interest in the response of output to an increase in government purchases: the government
purchase multiplier.
  Despite the focus on the government purchase multiplier in the literature (Woodford
(2011), Christiano et al (2011), Cogan et al (2010), Werning (2012), Eggertsson (2010b)),
the majority of the increase in government spending during the Global Financial Crisis con-
sisted of government transfers to households, not government purchases. According to Oh
and Reis (2012), 75 per cent of the increase in US government spending between 2007 and
2009 consisted of transfers, with similar proportions for other OECD countries. Transfers
were around 35-80% of the 2009 American Recovery and Reinvestment Act (ARRA) (de-
pending on the classiﬁcation of intergovernmental payments), and consisted of the bulk of

Date : August 2017.
JEL: E63 E62; Keywords: Fiscal Transfers, Fiscal policy, Fiscal stimulus, Government spend-
ing, Multipliers, New-Keynesian models, Zero Lower Bound, Monetary policy; URL: ht-
tps://sites.google.com/site/stevenpennings/ Giambattista: SGX Analytics, 40 Wall Street, 11th Floor,
New York, NY 10005 (email: emg394@nyu.edu and ericgiambattista@gmail.com) Pennings (corresponding
author): Development Research Group, World Bank, 1818 H St NW, Washington DC 20433 USA (email:
spennings@worldbank.org or steven.pennings@nyu.edu). Helpful comments have been received from
anonymous referees, Eric Leeper, Mariano Kulish, Jonathan Kearns, Tommaso Monacelli, Mark Gertler,
Taisuke Nakata, Alex Heath, Tim Cogley, Virgiliu Midrigan, Jess Benhahib, John Leahy, Leon Berkelmans,
Gianluca Violante, and seminar participants at the 2012 Midwest Macro Meetings, New York University
and the Reserve Bank of Australia.
                   WHEN IS THE GOVERNMENT TRANSFER MULTIPLIER LARGE?                                       2

earlier stimulus packages in 2001 and in 2008.1 In representative agent models, government
transfers have no eﬀect. This has led Cogan and Taylor (2010) to conclude: “Basic economic
theory implies that temporary increases in transfer payments have a much smaller impact
than government purchases” (p22).
    This paper examines the determinants of the government transfer multiplier in a closed-
economy two-agent model with nominal rigidities where around a third of the population
is ﬁnancially constrained. In our model, the ﬁscal package consists of a targeted trans-
fer to ﬁnancially constrained households, funded by lump-sum taxes on the unconstrained
households. The targeted transfer doesn’t represent a speciﬁc stimulus measure, but rather
provides an analytical benchmark which (i) isolates eﬀects of transfers on supply (which have
been overlooked in the literature) and (ii) can be easily adjusted for the level of targeting of a
particular policy (by scaling the multiplier by the degree of targeting).2 We call the transfer
multiplier “large” if it is (i) greater than the purchases multiplier (for analytical results),
and/or (ii) greater than one (for quantitative results).3
    Our main result is that the transfer multiplier is extremely sensitive to the monetary policy
rule of the central bank — much more so than the purchases multiplier. When the central
bank responds aggressively to inﬂation, the transfer multiplier is small — often close to zero
for very aggressive monetary policy rules — and is smaller than the purchases multiplier.
However, when the Zero Lower Bound (ZLB) on nominal interest rates binds, the targeted
transfer multiplier is almost always larger than the purchases multiplier, and is usually larger
than one.
    The transfer multiplier is extremely sensitive to the central bank’s monetary policy rule
because targeted transfers generate more inﬂation than government purchases. While both

1
 See Online Appendix 8 for a discussion. According to NIPA deﬁnitions, 89% of ARRA current expenditures
were classiﬁed as transfer payments. Drautzburg and Uhlig (2015) argue that 59% of the ARRA is transfers.
2
 An alternative assumption is that transfers are completely untargeted, which would usually underestimate
the transfer multiplier, and requires a less straightforward adjustment for imperfect targeting. In Section 5
(extensions) we report untargeted multipliers.
3
 The government purchases multiplier literature focuses on a multiplier greater than one — the cutoﬀ we
follow here — because it means that the government purchase must crowd in private sector activity, and
consumption or investment. One could argue that an analogous approach would suggest that the transfer
multiplier is large if it is above zero, though we prefer the more conservative threshold of unity.
                   WHEN IS THE GOVERNMENT TRANSFER MULTIPLIER LARGE?                                      3

targeted transfers and purchases boost aggregate demand, only purchases increase aggregate
supply (as wealth eﬀects on labour supply cancel across households for transfers). In normal
times (when the central bank follows a Taylor rule), this extra inﬂation reduces the transfer
multiplier relative to the purchase multiplier: the central bank raises real interest rates,
reducing consumption demand from unconstrained households. However, when the ZLB
binds, the extra inﬂation increases the transfer multiplier relative to the purchases multiplier,
as it reduces real interest rates (increasing demand from unconstrained households). We show
analytically in Section 3 that the transfer multiplier is larger than the purchases multiplier
whenever the economy’s aggregate demand (AD) curve inverts — that is, an increase in
inﬂation is associated with higher aggregate demand. The AD curve is always inverted
at the ZLB, and is occasionally inverted away from the ZLB as higher inﬂation can also
raise consumption demand from constrained households (through lower markups and higher
wages).4
    A secondary ﬁnding is that sticky wages reduce the diﬀerence between the targeted transfer
multiplier and the purchases multiplier (we show this numerically in Section 4.1). As wages
become increasingly sticky, wealth eﬀects on labour supply become weak, and hence the
aggregate supply response to transfers is similar to that of purchases. Targeted transfer and
purchase multipliers are also identical when preferences imply that wealth eﬀects on labour
supply are zero (such as Greenwood–Hercowitz–Huﬀman (GHH) preferences).5 Given the
importance of this mechanism, we review the evidence on labour supply elasticities in Section

4
 We call the tendency for higher inﬂation to reduce demand from unconstrained households the Taylor Prin-
ciple Eﬀect. As the model also includes ﬁnancially constrained households, inﬂation has a secondary eﬀect:
higher inﬂation reduces markups, increasing wages, incomes and hence demand of constrained households.
We call this increase in demand from constrained households the Disposable Income Eﬀect. When the Dis-
posable Income Eﬀect outweighs the Taylor Principle Eﬀect, the aggregate demand curve inverts. While
the ZLB binding is a suﬃcient condition for the inversion of the aggregate demand curve, inversion can also
occur under a Taylor rule when ﬁscal policy is not very persistent, the share of constrained households is
high, or prices are very sticky.
5
 In the absence of wealth eﬀects, the eﬃcacy of transfer-based stimulus comes down to targeting transfers at
constrained households — halving the fraction of transfers going to constrained households also halves the
transfer multiplier. Without wealth eﬀects, imperfect targeting means that the transfer multiplier would be
smaller than the purchase multiplier conditional on the same expenditure proﬁle over time — the basis of
the traditional intuition that purchase-based stimulus is more eﬀective. On the other hand, it is easier to
implement immediate transitory increase in transfers — which has the highest multipliers under a Taylor
rule — whereas a timely implementation of a transitory increase in government spending is very diﬃcult.
                    WHEN IS THE GOVERNMENT TRANSFER MULTIPLIER LARGE?                                         4

3.1 and Online Appendix 9, and ﬁnd that the literature does ﬁnd evidence in favour of wealth
eﬀects on labour supply, albeit ones that are modest in size.
    What does this mean for the quantitative size of transfer multipliers? In Section 4, we
calculate the size of output multipliers using a medium-scale DSGE model calibrated to
match the response of consumption to a transfers shock from the 2001 Bush tax rebates, as
estimated by Johnson et al (2006).6 We ﬁnd that a once-oﬀ 1 per cent of GDP targeted
transfer or government purchase raises the present value of output by about 0.9 per cent.7
Policies with a persistence similar to that of the transfer component of the 2009 US stimulus
package (quarterly auto-correlation of 0.9), have a long-run present value multiplier of around
0.25 for targeted transfers, or 0.4 for purchases in normal times. If monetary policy is
constrained by the ZLB for ﬁve years, the targeted transfer multiplier is around 1.3 for once-
oﬀ stimulus, and 1.7 for persistent stimulus (with purchase multipliers being around 1.3 in
either case). If transfers are completely untargeted, the transfer multiplier is around 0.5
(with 5 years of ZLB), though it can be above one if the ZLB binds for an extended period
with a slightly higher share of constrained households (for example, during a recession with
tightened borrowing constraints).
    For policymakers seeking to stimulate the economy during a recession, our results suggest
that the transfer multiplier tends to be large when (i) transfers are targeted at the ﬁnancially
constrained (who are more likely to spend the transfer); and, (ii) the ZLB binds during the
time of the ﬁscal stimulus (when wealth eﬀects on labour supply increase inﬂation).8
    Related Literature Although there are many recent papers examining the eﬀect of
government purchases in DSGE models (for example, Christiano et al (2011), Cogan et

6
 Johnson et al (2006) ﬁnd that around 20-40 per cent of once-oﬀ Bush transfers were spent in the months that
they arrived, and the consumption response was around one-for-one for those with low levels of liquid assets
and close to zero for those with high levels of liquid assets. This is inconsistent with a standard frictionless
model, where only the present value of the payments — and not their timing — aﬀect consumption, but
consistent with our model where around a third of households are ﬁnancially constrained.
7
 That is, the multiplier for a policy similar to the 2001 Bush tax cuts would be around 0.3 (0.9×1/3) if it
was untargeted.
8
 The ﬁndings of this paper apply most closely to once-oﬀ small cash stimulus payments like the 2001 and
2008 Bush tax rebates, rather than unemployment transfers, which might have additional eﬀects. As our
model is linear, the eﬀect of the transfer does not depend on either the size of the payment or how far output
is below steady state.
                   WHEN IS THE GOVERNMENT TRANSFER MULTIPLIER LARGE?                                      5

al (2010), Woodford (2011) and Uhlig (2010), Eggertsson (2010b)), there are only a few
papers that consider transfers in a setting similar to ours. One of the closest papers is
contemporaneous work by Bilbiie, Monacelli and Perotti (2013) who use a saver-borrower
New Keynesian model and ﬁnd a positive transfer multiplier with sticky prices, and a small
or zero transfer multiplier with ﬂexible prices. We also ﬁnd these results, but we extend
the literature to (i) study the transfer multiplier at the ZLB, and (ii) compare the size of
purchase and transfer multipliers (neither of which are discussed by Bilbiie et al 2013).
    Our paper is also related to Mehrotra (2017), who studies the eﬀect of untargeted transfers
in a two-agent New Keynesian model with a debt-elastic interest spread. Mehrotra (2017)
also ﬁnds a transfer multiplier close to zero with ﬂexible prices, a modest transfer multiplier
with sticky prices and a Taylor Rule, and a larger transfer multiplier at the ZLB (though
smaller than the purchase multiplier). Mehrotra’s transfer multipliers are generally smaller
than ours because (i) his “borrower” households face a debt-elastic interest spread rather than
being fully ﬁnancially constrained, (ii) for most of the analysis he considers deﬁcit-ﬁnanced
untargeted transfers, rather than (mostly) targeted transfers as we do. Mehrotra (2017) does
not characterise the transfer multiplier analytically in the general case with either a Taylor
Rule or at the ZLB, though he does consider analytical expressions in a number of special
cases. Neither Mehrotra (2017) nor Bilbiie et al (2013) include a medium-scale model with
features like capital and sticky wages in order to quantify the eﬀects of a transfer shock.
    Several papers ﬁnd an inverted aggregate demand curve or the Keynesian “paradox of
toil” (Bilbiie 2008, Eggertsson and Krugman 2012, Eggertsson 2012, 2010a, 2010b), but
none of these papers considers transfers.9 Coenen et al (2012) (among others) consider the
eﬀects of ﬁscal stimulus in large scale DSGE models used at policy institutions. While their
quantitative transfer multipliers are broadly similar to ours, the use of large models makes it

9
 Kaplan and Violante (2014) show that wealthy households can behave in a hand-to-mouth fashion if they
hold low levels of liquid assets, but they do not discuss the eﬀects of transfers on output. Monacelli and
Perotti (2011) use a model similar to Bilbiie et al (2013) and ﬁnd that the government purchase multiplier
is larger when taxes are levied on the savers (rather than the borrowers). They brieﬂy discuss the eﬀects of
ﬁscal transfers, and ﬁnd a positive impact multiplier. Drautzburg and Uhlig (2015) investigate the eﬀects of
the ARRA in a model similar to Smets and Wouters (2007) with distortionary taxes. While they do consider
transfers (as it was part of the ARRA), it is not a focus of their paper.
                   WHEN IS THE GOVERNMENT TRANSFER MULTIPLIER LARGE?                                     6

diﬃcult to describe mechanisms (which is a focus of our paper). Coenen et al (2012) also do
not mention our key ﬁnding: that transfer multipliers are much more sensitive to the degree
of monetary accommodation (relative to purchase multipliers).
     More broadly, our paper is related to Oh and Reis (2012) and Athreya et al (2016),
who study transfers in a heterogeneous agent model and ﬁnd small (positive or negative)
multipliers. While these papers provide a much more detailed characterization of the income
distribution, transfer policies and savings behaviour, they also simplify the monetary policy
response — usually to a strict form of price-level targeting. We take the opposite path
of simplifying the income distribution, but analysing a range of monetary policy responses.
Interestingly, we also ﬁnd small transfer multipliers with a strict form of price-level targeting,
even when transfers are targeted at households with a high MPC. This reinforces our main
ﬁnding that the degree of monetary accommodation is a key determinant of the transfer
multiplier — without allowing for some monetary accommodation of inﬂation, the transfer
multiplier is likely to be small.10
     The rest of the paper is organised as follows: Section 2 presents the model; Section 3
presents analytical results in a simpliﬁed model; Section 4 presents quantitative results using
the full model; Section 5 presents several extensions and Section 6 concludes.

                                               2. Model

     We examine the eﬀect of government transfers and purchases in a New Keynesian DSGE
model with two types of agents that diﬀer in their access to ﬁnancial markets. The uncon-
strained Ricardian household (agent 1) has full access to ﬁnancial markets, and the con-
strained Hand-to-Mouth household (agent 2, HtM) consumes his entire income each period
in a hand-to-mouth fashion as in Galí et al (2007). Although simple, the two agent setup
captures a number of empirical regularities such as a positive propensity to consume out of
temporary transfers (Johnson et al 2006), a positive response of consumption to government
10
  A number of papers, including Davig and Leeper (2011) and Leeper et al (2017), ﬁnd that a combination
of an active ﬁscal policy and passive monetary policy can generate large ﬁscal multipliers. In contrast, in
our paper ﬁscal policy is always passive. Although we assume a balanced budget in every period, we also
assume taxes are lump sum and only levied on the unconstrained households who are Ricardian. Hence the
timing of tax payments and the size of the government deﬁcit do not aﬀect the economy.
                   WHEN IS THE GOVERNMENT TRANSFER MULTIPLIER LARGE?                                      7

purchase shocks (Galí et al 2007) and imperfect consumption smoothing (Campbell and
Mankiw 1989).
  In our setup, the government levies lump-sum taxes on the Ricardian household to pay for
government purchases and transfers to the HtM household. The Ricardian household owns
capital (which they rent to intermediate goods ﬁrms). Retailers then transform intermediate
goods into ﬁnal goods. Retailers’ prices are sticky in the Calvo sense and so aggregate
demand and monetary policy will matter for real outcomes. Wages are sticky as in Erceg et
al (2000) and Galí (2008). We log-linearise the model, and solve it quantitatively in Section
4. In Section 3 we present a simpliﬁed version of the model which can be solved analytically.
A full list of non-linear and linearised equations are listed in Online Appendix 6.



2.1. The Ricardian household’s problem. The Ricardian household consists of a unit
mass of individuals, indexed by i ∈ [0, 1]. Diﬀerent individuals within the household provide
diﬀerentiated labour inputs to intermediate-goods producers (see Online Appendix 6 for
more detail on the HH’s problem). The only heterogeneity across individual members of the
household is whether they are able to change their nominal wage each period (as wages are
sticky in a Calvo sense). There are complete markets within the household, so consumption
and all other variables are equalised across individuals and so we drop the i index for these
variables.11 Actual hours are determined by the demand of the ﬁrm at the given (sticky) wage
(discussed further in Section 2.4 below). Each individual chooses real consumption (c1,t ),
desired labour hours (L1,t (i)), real debt (−bt ) and investment (It ) to maximise his utility,
taking real interest rates (Rt−1 /πt ), lump-sum taxes (T axt ), real wages (w1,t (i) = W1,t (i)/Pt ),
the real gross rate of return on capital (M P Kt ) and proﬁts from retailers (Πt ) as given.12
Therefore the Ricardian household member’s problem is:


11We   omit these Arrow securities from the household’s budget constraint.
12In  the full model, we assume that the HtM HH receives a transfer of 1 − α share of steady state capital
income (net of depreciation) and retailers’ proﬁts, and pays a share 1 − α of government spending (though
new government spending is paid for by the Ricardian HH). This means that the HtM HH receives a share
of 1 − α of total consumption, which equalizes steady state labour supply across households, which simpliﬁes
the steady state.
                  WHEN IS THE GOVERNMENT TRANSFER MULTIPLIER LARGE?                            8




                                                             ∞
(2.1)                       max{c1,t ,bt ,It ,L1,t (i)} E0         (β )t U (c1,t L1,t (i))
                                                             t=0


                                       Lϕ +1
                                        1,t (i)
where U (c1, L1,t (i)) = ln(c1,t ) −            and subject to budget, capital accumulation, and
                                        ϕ+1
labour demand constraints:



(2.2)      c1,t + It + bt = (Rt−1 /πt )bt−1 + M P Kt Kt−1 + w1,t (i)L1,t (i) + Πt − T axt




(2.3)                         Kt = (1 − δ )Kt−1 + [1 − S (It /It−1 )]It




(2.4)                               L1,t (i) = (W1,t (i)/W1,t )−εw L1,t


  Here ϕ−1 is the Frisch elasticity of labour supply.
  The capital adjustment cost takes form of an cost S(.) to produce an extra unit of capital
when It = It−1 in Equation 2.3. Following Christiano et al (2005), Altig et al (2011) and
Smets and Wouters (2007), S (1) = S (1) = 0 and S (1) > 0 in steady state. Relative to
an adjustment cost penalising changes in the capital stock (Kt − Kt−1 )2 , this formulation is
better able to replicate the hump-shaped response of investment to a monetary policy shock
in Christiano et al (2005). In log-linear terms, investment (ˆ
                                                             it ), depends on its own lagged
                                                                ˆt (Equation 2.5).
and (expected) future value, as well as shadow price of capital q



                           ˆ       1 ˆ        β               1
(2.5)                      it =       it−1 +     Etˆ
                                                   it+1 +           ˆt
                                                                    q
                                  1+β        1+β          (1 + β )S

                              ˆt is determined by its expected future price, the expected
  The shadow price of capital q
marginal product of capital, and the opportunity cost of investing in a risk-free bond.
                  WHEN IS THE GOVERNMENT TRANSFER MULTIPLIER LARGE?                         9




(2.6)          q                 ˆt+1 + [1 − β (1 − δ )]Et M Pˆ
               ˆt = β (1 − δ )Et q                                    ˆ t − Et π
                                                              Kt+1 − (R        ˆt+1 )


  The Ricardian household’s problem in the simple model is similar, except that there is no
capital or investment, and labour markets are competitive with ﬂexible wages. Hence in the
simple model L1,t (i) = L1,t and w1,t (i) = w1,t ∀i.




2.2. The Hand-to-Mouth (HtM) household’s problem. The HtM household member’s
problem is much simpler than that of the Ricardian household: each individual household
member i ∈ [0, 1] only has to choose desired labour hours (L2,t (i)) as he/she can not smooth
consumption over time. Real consumption (c2,t ) is equal to labour income plus lump-sum
transfers ( T rt ) from the government, and will be equal across household members due to
our assumption of perfect within-household insurance of Calvo wage shocks. In the simple
model, L2,t (i) = L2,t and w2,t (i) = w2,t ∀i as labour markets are competitive.


                                                        ∞
(2.7)                          max{c2,t ,L2,t (i)} E0         β2 t U (c2,t L2,t (i))
                                                        t=0


                                          Lϕ +1
                                           2,t (i)
  where U (c2,t L2,t (i)) = ln(c2,t ) −            such that:
                                           ϕ+1

(2.8)                                 w2,t (i)L2,t (i) + T rt = c2,t




(2.9)                              L2,t (i) = (W2,t (i)/W2,t )−εw L2,t


2.3. Sticky prices, Retailers, Intermediate and Final Output. Intermediate output
is Cobb-Douglas in capital and aggregate labour, and is produced by a unit continuum of
                   WHEN IS THE GOVERNMENT TRANSFER MULTIPLIER LARGE?                                    10

competitive intermediate goods producers. Aggregate labour is Cobb-Douglas in the labour
inputs of the two households.13 There is no capital (µ = 0) in the simple model.



                                         1−µ                           (1−α)
(2.10)                       Yt = K µ
                                    t−1 Lt       where Lt = Lα
                                                             1,t L2,t



  As in Bernanke et al (1999) and Iacoviello (2005), ﬁnal output is produced by a unit
continuum of retailers, indexed by l, who buy intermediate output Yt at price Ptint in a
competitive market, costlessly diﬀerentiate it, and sell a variety of ﬁnal output Yl,t at price
                                                     f     ´ 1 σ− 1
                                                                        σ
                                                                      σ −1
Pl,t . Aggregate ﬁnal output is given by the index Yt = 0 Yl,t dl
                                                                σ
                                                                           and aggregate prices
                    ´ 1 1−σ 1/(1−σ)
are given by Pt = ( 0 Pl,t dl)        . Each retailer faces a downward sloping demand curve
for his variety, and he must choose the optimal nominal price, taking into consideration the
Calvo probability θp that he may not be able to change his price. The pricing problem of
retailers leads to a standard New Keynesian Phillips curve (Equation 2.11), which is shown
                                          ˆt = lnPt − lnPt−1 is the inﬂation rate (steady state
in log deviation from steady state, where π
                       ˆ t = lnXt − lnX is the deviation in the retailer’s average markup
inﬂation is zero), and X
                                      σ
from steady state (where X =        σ −1
                                           and κ = (1 − θp )(1 − βθp )/θp ). The parameter κ is the
slope of the Phillips curve — the higher κ, the more responsive inﬂation (and less responsive
output) is to a given shift in demand. With ﬂexible prices κ → ∞, so shifts in demand
aﬀect prices and not output. With more sticky prices (higher θp ) a larger share of ﬁrms are
unable to change their prices to move markups towards their desired level, resulting in a
muted response of inﬂation and a larger response of output to increases in demand (such as
government purchases or transfers).




13In a related model, Galí et al (2007) assume that labour across household types as being perfectly sub-
stitutable (rather than Cobb-Douglas as in Equation 2.10). They also argue that imperfectly competitive
labour markets are needed to ﬁt the response of consumption to a government purchases shock with a reason-
able share of HtM HHs. It turns out that their formulation generates exactly the same aggregate allocations
and multipliers as the Cobb-Douglas speciﬁcation used here in Equation 2.10 (including a generalization
to sticky wages). In Online Appendix 2.1 we show the equivalence analytically between our simple model
with a Cobb-Douglas speciﬁcation, and a similar model with perfect substitutes and a union as in Galí et al
(2007). We also verify the equivalence numerically for the full model with sticky wages.
                 WHEN IS THE GOVERNMENT TRANSFER MULTIPLIER LARGE?                            11




(2.11)                                π                ˆt
                                               ˆt+1 − κX
                                      ˆt = βEt π


   The price of intermediate output in terms of ﬁnal output is the inverse of the retailer’s
                 P int   1
average markup t =         . As such, the marginal product of labour or capital in terms of
                  Pt    Xt
intermediate goods must be divided by the markup to generate the real marginal product.
As in Galí (2008), deviations of Ytf from Yt are second-order in the neighbourhood of the
                                                           ˆtf . Aggregate real wages are
                                                      ˆt = Y
steady state, and so for our ﬁrst-order approximation Y
given by:

                                      1 Y                             1 Yt
(2.12)              w1,t = α(1 − µ)           , w2,t = (1 − α)(1 − µ)
                                      Xt L1,t                         Xt L2,t

2.4. Sticky wages. The government transfer multiplier depends crucially on the labour
supply response of diﬀerent types of households. Christiano et al (2005) argue that sticky
wages are important for ﬁtting the response of a monetary policy shock to the data. Because
wage stickiness necessitates adding extra state variables (lagged real wages), we assume
ﬂexible wages in the simpliﬁed model (but include sticky wages in the full model in Section
4).
  We model wage stickiness as in Erceg et al (2000) and Galí (2008). The labour supply
of household type {Ricardian, HtM }, L1,t and L2,t respectively, are now CES composites
                                                       ´1                         ´1
of diﬀerentiated labour inputs (indexed by i): L1,t = [ 0 L1,t (i)di] and L2,t = [ 0 L2,t (i)di]
where the demand for each variety i is given by Equation 2.4 and 2.9. Since households
possess market power in their labour supply decisions, they are able to set their wage at a
steady state markup above their marginal rate of substitution µw = εw /(εw − 1).
  Each member i of the Ricardian and HtM households is allowed to reset his/her nominal
wage with constant probability 1 − θw in each period. As such, the wage decision of the
Ricardian HH at time t = 0 is to choose W1,0 (i), to maximize Equation 2.1 subject to
Equation 2.4 and other constraints, where the discount rate β1 = βθw is lower to reﬂect the
fact that the further into the future, the less the chance that the ﬁxed nominal wage W1,0 (i)
                      WHEN IS THE GOVERNMENT TRANSFER MULTIPLIER LARGE?                                        12

will apply. The HtM HH’s problem is analogous. The optimal nominal wage of HHs of type
i (who get to reset at time t = 0) can be expressed as a weighted average of the expected
future wage level for other households and the log deviation of the wage mark-up from its
                   ˆw
steady state level µ              ˆ k,t − c
                          ˆk,t − ϕL
                    k,t = w               ˆk,t .
  Aggregating over types that cannot reset wages, we get the New Keynesian wage Philips
                                                                      ˆw
curve (Equation 2.13), where nominal wage inﬂation for each household π k,t = lnWk,t −

lnWk,t−1 , k = 1, 2 will be a function of expected wage inﬂation tomorrow and the deviations
                                                                              ˆw
of each household’s marginal rate of substitution from its steady state level µ k,t (variables

with hats generally denote deviations from steady-state).



(2.13)                                         ˆw
                                               π            ˆw
                                                 k,t = β Et π          ˆw
                                                              k,t+1 − λµi,t


                  (1−θw )(1−θw β )
  where λ =          θw (1+ϕ )
                                   ,   and w
                                           ˆk,t = w
                                                  ˆk,t−1 + π
                                                           ˆwk,t − π
                                                                   ˆ t , k = 1, 2 is the real wage.

2.5. Monetary and Fiscal Policy. During normal times, the central bank follows a Taylor
                                                              ˆ t = lnRt − lnRSS is the log
Rule (in linearised form) with interest rate smoothing, where R
deviation of the gross nominal interest rate from its steady state level. We allow for the
possibility that the central bank is constrained by the ZLB and keeps the nominal rate ﬁxed
for a certain number of periods before resuming the Taylor rule (Equation 2.14). The degree
of interest rate smoothing is governed by the parameter φR .



(2.14)                                          ˆ t−1 + (1 − φR )(φπ π
                                       ˆ t = φR R
                                       R                                     ˆt )
                                                                     ˆt + φY Y


  Government expenditures consist of unproductive government purchases Gt , and targeted
transfers to HtM households T rt . Government expenditure is ﬁnanced by a lump sum tax
on the Ricardian households T axt . Note here that throughout the paper, T        ˆ t are
                                                                          ˆrt and G

the deviation of transfers and government purchases from steady state as a share of GDP,
i.e. Tˆrt ≡   T rt −T rSS
                          ,   Tˆ
                               axt ≡    T axt −T axSS       ˆt ≡
                                                        and G      Gt −GSS
                                                                           .   This simpliﬁes the expressions for
                  YSS                        YSS                     YSS

multipliers and allows for the possibility that purchases are zero in steady state. The notation
                   WHEN IS THE GOVERNMENT TRANSFER MULTIPLIER LARGE?                                    13

only applies to transfers and purchases: other variables with “hats” are log deviations from
their respective steady-states.
  The government runs a balanced budget each period (Equation 2.15). Whether the gov-
ernment runs a balanced budget does not matter for the path of the economy as taxes are
only levied on the unconstrained households, who are Ricardian — it is only the timing of
the transfers and purchases that aﬀect allocations.14



(2.15)                                     T axt = T rt + Gt


  The paths of T        ˆ t are exogenous and are assumed to follow an AR(1) process.
                ˆrt and G




(2.16)                 Tˆrt+1 = ρTˆrt + eT r,t+1                 ˆ t + eG,t+1
                                                        ˆ t+1 = ρG
                                                    and G


  where {eT r,t+1 , eG,t+1 } are zero-mean i.i.d shocks. The model is closed by the standard
aggregate resource constraint:



(2.17)                                 Yt = c1,t + c2,t + It + Gt


 3. When is the transfer multiplier larger than the purchase multiplier?
                        Analytical results from a simplified model

  In this section we derive analytical expressions in a simpliﬁed model for the targeted
transfer and purchases multipliers in “normal” times when the central bank follows a Taylor
rule (Section 3.2) or when nominal interest rates are at the Zero Lower Bound (ZLB, Section
3.3). Given the analytical approach, we focus on the relative size of the targeted transfer and
purchases multipliers which we can characterize exactly, rather than the numerical size of
the transfer multiplier which requires a richer model (Section 4). The transfer multiplier is

14This is not the case if taxes are levied only on the HtM HHs or if taxes are distortionary. Equation 2.15
excludes steady state transfers across households to ensure consumption shares equal labour shares.
                    WHEN IS THE GOVERNMENT TRANSFER MULTIPLIER LARGE?                                       14

larger than the purchase multiplier when the economy’s aggregate demand curve is inverted
(Section 3.4), which occurs occasionally when monetary policy follows a Taylor rule, but
always when the ZLB binds. Because transfers lead to lower supply than purchases (but
have the same eﬀect on demand), they generate more inﬂation and so the transfer multiplier
is more sensitive to the monetary policy response to inﬂation than the purchase multiplier
(Section 3.5).



3.1. The importance of wealth eﬀects on labour supply. The eﬀect of targeted trans-
fers on aggregate demand is identical to that of purchases — they are both spent — and the
only diﬀerence depends on labour supply. When the HtM HH receives a transfer, it becomes
better oﬀ and so “spends” some of the transfer on higher leisure/reduced work which lowers
labour supply — the wealth/income eﬀect on labour supply. In contrast, a government pur-
chase has no eﬀect on HtM HH labour supply (absent GE eﬀects).15 All diﬀerences between
transfer and purchase multipliers in this paper stem from the eﬀects of this diﬀerence in gen-
eral equilibrium. Without wealth eﬀects – for example, with Greenwood–Hercowitz–Huﬀman
(GHH) preferences – transfers have the same eﬀect on aggregate supply as purchases, and
hence the targeted transfer multiplier is identical to the purchases multiplier.16
  The wealth eﬀect enters the model through the household’s labour-leisure ﬁrst order con-
dition. With standard (separable) preferences as in Section 2, a transfer to the HtM HH
increases consumption (as c2 = w2 L2 + T r2 ), which increases the denominator of Equation
3.1, and therefore reduces labour supply L2 . In contrast, with GHH preferences, consump-
tion does not appear in the labour-leisure FOC (RHS of Equation 3.1), and so there is no
eﬀect of the transfers on labour supply of HtM HHs at constant wages.


15For  either targeted transfers or purchases, lump sum taxes increase on the Ricardian HH, which makes it
want to work more (also via the wealth eﬀect). This means that in total, aggregate labour supply increases
for a purchase, and is roughly unchanged for a transfer.
16If preferences are GHH, the targeted transfer and purchases multipliers are identical and in the simple model
                                                    −1
               1 αϕκ         [φπ − ρ]
are given by                             − (1 − α)     . With either perfect inﬂation targeting (φπ → ∞) or
               ϕ ϕ + 1 (1 − ρ)(1 − ρβ )
ﬂexible prices (κ → ∞), the GHH multiplier will go to zero.
                   WHEN IS THE GOVERNMENT TRANSFER MULTIPLIER LARGE?                                       15




                                                                                                     1/ϕ
(3.1)   Standard pref. :       L2 = [w2 /c2 ]1/ϕ = [w2 /(w2 L2 + T r2 )]1/ϕ      GHH :       L2 = w2


  The empirical literature (surveyed in Online Appendix 9) generally ﬁnds signiﬁcant estim-
ates of the wealth/income eﬀect – albeit ones that vary across studies and are modest in size
– and so are broadly supportive of the standard preferences used here. In our model, the
size of wealth eﬀects depends only on the size of the Frisch elasticity (ϕ−1 ).17 Conditional on
having standard preferences, the Frisch elasticity doesn’t aﬀect the relative sizes of purchase
and transfer multipliers in the simple model due to oﬀsetting general equilibrium eﬀects.




3.2. The transfer multiplier when Monetary Policy follows a Taylor rule. In order
to get analytical results, we need to simplify the model by assuming ﬂexible wages, no capital
or steady state government spending, and a simpliﬁed Taylor rule where nominal interest
rates only respond to contemporaneous inﬂation.18 The list of log-linearised equations (A1-
A9) is shown in Box 1 where a hat (^) denotes percentage deviation from steady state
(except for transfers and purchases, where it represents the change in ﬁscal policy as a share
of GDP).




17Speciﬁcally, the size of the income eﬀect with our preferences is −(ϕ + 1)−1 < 0, which is increasing in
absolute magnitude with the Frisch (ϕ−1 ). See Keene (2011). The wealth/income eﬀect is also known in the
labour literature as the marginal propensity to earn (MPE) out of unearned income. With GHH preferences
the MPE is zero.
18
  The ﬁrst group of assumptions make sure the multiplier is constant over time — that is, output is a
constant multiple of G ˆ t or Tˆrt — by removing endogenous state variables such as capital (by setting the
capital share µ → 0), lagged wages (by making nominal wages ﬂexible λ → ∞) or the lagged interest rate
(by setting interest rate smoothing φR = 0). The second group of assumptions simplify the expressions by
assuming (i) the central bank does not respond to output (φY = 0) and (ii) ensuring that the steady state
consumption share of each household is equal to their share of wage income. We achieve the latter by setting
steady state government purchases to zero (Gss = 0), and assume a wage subsidy equal to sss = Xss − 1
(where Xss is the steady state gross markup), funded by a lump sum tax of (Xss − 1)YSS on Ricardian HHs
such that consumption and wage income of each HH is a share α or 1 − α of total GDP. A similar approach
used by Bilbiie (2008) is to assume a ﬁxed cost of operating each ﬁrm that exactly oﬀsets proﬁts in steady
state.
                 WHEN IS THE GOVERNMENT TRANSFER MULTIPLIER LARGE?                          16

   Box 1: Simpliﬁed New Keynesian model
   Model Equations (A1-A9)
                                  ˆ 1t + (1 − α)L
                            ˆt = αL
   [A1 Production Function] Y                   ˆ 2t
                            ˆt = αc
   [A2 Resource Constraint] Y     ˆ1,t + (1 − α)ˆ      ˆt
                                                c2,t + G
   [A3 HtM Budget Constraint] (1 − α)ˆ
                                     c2,t = Tˆrt + (1 − α)(w      ˆ 2,t )
                                                           ˆ2,t + L
                                          ˆ t − Et π
                                 ˆ1,t = − R
   [A4 Ricardian Euler Equation] c                           ˆ1,t+1
                                                   ˆt+1 + Et c
                    ˆt = φπ π
   [A5 Taylor Rule] R       ˆt
   [A6 Phillips Curve] π                ˆt
                                ˆt+1 − κX
                       ˆt = βEt π
                                           ˆ rt + e
                                  ˆrt+1 = ρT
   [A7 Fiscal policy (exogenous)] T                                    ˆt + e
                                                              ˆ t+1 = ρG
                                                  ˆT r,t+1 or G             ˆG,t+1
   [A8 Labour-Leisure FOC] w
                           ˆkt = c      ˆ kt , ∀k = 1, 2
                                 ˆkt + ϕL
   [A9 MPL=wage] w           ˆ k,t − X
                        ˆt − L
                 ˆk,t = Y            ˆ t , ∀k = 1, 2


Proposition 1. Flexible price multiplier. In the limit of the simple model when prices
are ﬂexible (κ → ∞), the transfer multiplier is zero and the government purchase multiplier
is 1/(ϕ + 1) (where ϕ−1 is the Frisch elasticity of substitution).


Proof. Combine Equations A8, A9, A1, A2 to form Equation 3.2. When prices are ﬂexible
                                                                                   ˆt = 0
(κ → ∞), retailers keep their markups constant at the proﬁt-maximising optimum, so X
          ˆt =
and hence Y       1 ˆ
                    G.
                 ϕ+1 t




                                   ˆt =    1 ˆ      1 ˆ
(3.2)                              Y          Gt −     Xt
                                          ϕ+1      ϕ+1

  The ﬂexible price multiplier is driven entirely by wealth eﬀects on labour supply. Both
targeted transfers and purchases are funded by a lump-sum tax on the Ricardian household
which cause it to increase labour supply (a negative wealth eﬀect) when its consumption falls
to pay the tax. For purchases this is the end of the story: higher labour supply boosts output
leading to a positive multiplier of (1 + ϕ)−1 (the neoclassical wealth eﬀect). For transfers,
this negative wealth eﬀect for the Ricardian household is exactly oﬀset by the positive wealth
                   WHEN IS THE GOVERNMENT TRANSFER MULTIPLIER LARGE?                                     17

eﬀect on the HtM HH who receives the transfer, leaving output unchanged. An implication
                                                                                 ˆ t .19
of Equation 3.2 is that transfers aﬀect output only through variation in markups X
   Solving the analytical model with sticky prices
       Box 2: Dynamic two-equation system:
       Modiﬁed New Keynesian IS Curve (with a fraction 1 − α of HtM HHs):



                                     ˆ t − Et π
                                 (φπ π                            ˆ t + α −1 E t T
                                                          ˆ t+1 − G
                                              ˆt+1 ) + Et G                       ˆrt+1 − Tˆrt
       (3.3)            ˆt+1 −
                ˆt = Et Y
                Y
                                                     1 − α−1 (1 − α)(ϕ + 1)

       Standard New Keynesian Phillips Curve



       (3.4)                         π                              ˆt
                                                       ˆ t − (ϕ + 1)Y
                                              ˆt+1 − κ G
                                     ˆt = βEt π
   We solve the analytical model — and show how it works — in ﬁve steps. In the ﬁrst step
we rearrange the Equations A1-A9 into a modiﬁed New Keynesian IS Curve (Equation 3.3)
and a standard New Keynesian Phillips curve (Equation 3.4, which does not depend on the
HtM share) as shown in Box 2. In the case that there are no HtM HHs (α = 1) (transfers
are not deﬁned in this case), the modiﬁed NK IS curve collapses to its standard version:
        ˆt+1 − (φπ π
ˆt = Et Y
Y                  ˆ t − Et π                  ˆ t+1 ). The Philips curve is the same as it would
                                      ˆ t − Et G
                            ˆt+1 ) + (G
be in a standard NK model without HtM HHs.
   In the second step, we restrict the parameter space to where Assumption A1 holds (φπ > 1
and 1 − α < (2+ ϕ)−1 ), which we show in Lemma 1 is a suﬃcient condition for determinacy.20
All our results with a Taylor rule — even when the transfer multiplier is larger than the
purchase multiplier — are in this region of the parameter space. This is distinct from
19Ifwe assumed that the share of labour income of each household was not same as their share of aggregate
consumption, then the wealth eﬀects of the two households would not exactly cancel in response to a targeted
transfer. This means that the aggregate supply curve would shift in response to a targeted transfer and the
ﬂex-price transfer multiplier would be positive (negative) if the HtM HH’s consumption labour share is
larger (smaller) than his labour share. Nonetheless, transfers will still increase supply by less than same-
sized government purchase, so much of the intuition is unchanged. See Online Appendix 4.
20In a related model, Galí et al (2004) ﬁnd that only the Taylor principle is required for determinacy so
long as the HtM share is below a certain cut-oﬀ (around 0.57 in their Figure 2), which is consistent with
the ﬁnding here. Bilbiie (2008) also ﬁnds that when the HtM share is reasonably low the Taylor Principle is
suﬃcient for determinacy (his Proposition 7).
                    WHEN IS THE GOVERNMENT TRANSFER MULTIPLIER LARGE?                                        18

Bilbiie’s (2008) IADL region (where φπ < 1 and 1 − α > (2 + ϕ)−1 ), which can be seen in the
diﬀerent white determinacy regions in Online Appendix Figure 4 (Panel A) — see Online
Appendix 5.1 for a discussion.
  Assumption A1: The Taylor Principle holds (φπ > 1) and the HtM share is not too high
(1 − α < (2 + ϕ)−1 ).


Lemma 1. Assumption A1 is a suﬃcient condition for a determinant equilibrium in the
simple model (Equation 3.3-3.4).


Proof. Rearrange Equation 3.3-3.4) in state-space form, and use Woodford (2003) Proposi-
tion C1 (p670).

  In the third step, we use Lemma 2 to solve for expectations of future variables in terms of
current variables, which removes all dynamics from the model.21 Because all variables follow
an AR(1) process with the same persistence ρ, the static solution of the model at t+1 is just
a shrunk-down version of the static solution of model at t.


Lemma 2. Following an unanticipated transfers or purchases shock with persistence ρ, all
model variables follow an AR(1) process with persistence ρ along the adjustment path. That
                                ˆt+1 = ρZ
                     ˆt then Et Z
is, for any variable Z                  ˆt


Proof. Follows from the linearity of the model and lack of endogenous state variables. Can
be shown by guess and verify.

  Aggregate supply and demand
  The fourth step is to show the equilibrium can be characterized by an aggregate supply
                                                         ˆt and current inﬂation π
and aggregate demand relationship linking current output Y                       ˆt . This
is similar to the “Old Keynesian” aggregate demand and aggregate supply relationships in
undergraduate textbooks, but with rational expectations micro-foundations.22
21When  prices are ﬂexible, the model is essentially static because real interest rate adjusts to make the Euler
equation hold.
22Conditional on P
                   t−1 , solving for the inﬂation rate is the same as solving for the price level in “Old Keyne-
sian” models.
                   WHEN IS THE GOVERNMENT TRANSFER MULTIPLIER LARGE?                                  19

     The supply curve (Deﬁnition 1) is unchanged from the standard NK model.23
     The slope of the aggregate demand curve (Deﬁnition 2) is key in determining the relative
size of transfers and purchases multipliers, so we provide a further decomposition of the
opposing forces driving its slope: the Taylor Principle (TP) eﬀect (Deﬁnition 3) and the
Disposable Income (DI) Eﬀect (Deﬁnition 4). The two factors correspond (respectively) to
the determinants of the two endogenous components of aggregate demand (Equation A2):
                                                          ˆ1,t , and consumption by the
consumption by the Ricardian household as a share of GDP αc
HtM HH as a share of GDP (1 − α)ˆ
                                c2,t . Normally the AD curve is downward sloping as higher
inﬂation leads to higher real interest rates and lower consumption demand of the Ricardian
HH. An increase in inﬂation is associated with higher aggregate demand (an inverted AD
curve) when (i) the boost to the consumption of the HtM HHs (via lower markups, higher
wages and hence incomes) outweighs any reduction in consumption demand of the Ricardian
HH through higher real interest rates or (ii) the ZLB binds so that higher inﬂation reduces
real interest rates and so increases Ricardian HH consumption.
     In the ﬁnal step, we identify the multiplier by intersecting the aggregate demand and
supply curves (substituting out for inﬂation). Transfers and purchases both increase demand
by the same amount (Remark 2), but only government purchases expand supply (Remark 1).
This means that the targeted transfer multiplier will be larger than the purchases multiplier
iﬀ the aggregate demand equation inverts (slopes upwards). Proposition 2 presents the
transfer and purchase multipliers and Proposition 3 lists some implications.
     Away from the ZLB, the transfer multiplier will be larger than the purchase multiplier
when: (i) the share of HtM households is larger, ↑ (1 − α), as this increases the share of
aggregate consumption that is sensitive to wages and markups and reduces the share sensitive
to the interest rate, and (ii) ﬁscal policy is not not too persistent, ↓ ρ, as this makes retailers
more reluctant to increase prices (in case they cannot change prices back in the future) and
instead reduce markups/increase wages, which increases HtM HH disposable income. For
example, with our default parameters (Table 1) and ρ = 0, the transfer multiplier is larger
23
  Labour supply decisions of households (which aﬀect ﬁrms’ marginal costs) aﬀect the supply curve but not
the demand curve (note the inverse of Frisch elasticity substitution ϕ in Equation 3.5).
                   WHEN IS THE GOVERNMENT TRANSFER MULTIPLIER LARGE?                                  20

so long as the HtM share (1 − α) is greater than around 10% (but less than 1/3 to satisfy
Assumption A1). With the default HtM share (1 − α = 0.3) the transfer multiplier is larger
so long as ρ < 0.6 — see the white region of Online Appendix Figure 4 (Panel B).


Deﬁnition 1. Aggregate Supply Curve. The aggregate supply curve is given by Equation
                                            ˆ AS at a given level of inﬂation π
3.5, and reﬂects the desired output of ﬁrms Y                                 ˆtAS
                                                                                   . The curve
                                              t

is the generalization of the Phillips curve (Equation A6), solving out for expectations (using
                     ˆ t (using Equation 3.2).
Lemma 2) and markups X

                                      AS     κ(ϕ + 1) ˆ AS     −κ ˆ
(3.5)                               ˆt
                                    π    =             Yt +           Gt
                                             (1 − ρβ )      (1 − ρβ )

Remark 1. Purchases increase aggregate supply, but transfers do not (i.e. only purchases
appear in Equation 3.5).


Deﬁnition 2. Aggregate Demand Curve. The aggregate demand curve is given by
                                                 ˆ AD demanded for private and government
Equation 3.6, and represents the level of output Y t
                                            AD 24
                                          ˆt
consumption for a given level of inﬂation π   .



                                                       AD
                                                  ˆt
                                                 αY             T      ˆt
                                                                 ˆrt + G
                                         AD
(3.6)                                  ˆt
                                       π      =−            +
                                                   Γ                 Γ

  where Γ = [α(φπ − ρ)/(1 − ρ)] − [(1 − α)(1 − ρβ )/κ]
                     T P Ef f ect                 DI Ef f ect


Remark 2. Purchases and targeted transfers have the same eﬀect on aggregate demand.


Deﬁnition 3. Taylor Principle (TP) Eﬀect. The fall in aggregate demand from the
Ricardian household from an increase in inﬂation is given by α(φπ − ρ)/(1 − ρ).25 As its name
24The  AD curve is derived by combining the aggregate resource constraint (Equation A2) and Equations
3.7 and 3.8. The aggregate demand curve is the generalisation of the standard New Keynesian IS curve in
terms of current inﬂation, solving out for expectations using Lemma 2, and solving for consumption demand
of the HtM household.
25Consumption of the Ricardian household is driven by the Euler equation (Equation A4), and so the Taylor
Principle eﬀect comes from substituting the Taylor rule (Equation A5) into the Euler Equation, and using
Lemma 2 to solve for the expectations of future consumption and inﬂation (Equation 3.7).
                    WHEN IS THE GOVERNMENT TRANSFER MULTIPLIER LARGE?                                 21

suggests, α(φπ − ρ)/(1 − ρ) > 0 whenever the Taylor principle holds (i.e. φπ > 1), which
ensures that an increase in inﬂation raises real interest rates and lowers the consumption of
the Ricardian household. When the ZLB binds, the Taylor Principle Eﬀect reverses its sign
because a rise in inﬂation lowers real interest rates, which increases consumption demand
from Ricardian HHs (Section 3.3 — eﬀectively φπ = 0).




(3.7)                              ˆ1,t = − [α(φπ − ρ)/(1 − ρ)] π
                                  αc                            ˆt
                                                     T P Ef f ect


Deﬁnition 4. Disposable Income (DI) Eﬀect. The boost to aggregate demand by the
HtM household from an increase in inﬂation is given by (1 − α)(1 − βρ)/κ, other things
(transfers and aggregate output) equal. Consumption of the HtM household is driven by
its disposable income each period, and along the adjustment path higher inﬂation increases
wages (by reducing markups), thereby boosting labour income of the HtM HH.26




(3.8)                 (1 − α)ˆ
                             c2,t = T             ˆt + [(1 − α)(1 − ρβ )/κ] π
                                     ˆrt + (1 − α)Y                         ˆt
                                                                    DI Ef f ect


Proposition 2. Sticky price multiplier. In the simple model when prices are sticky,
monetary policy follows a Taylor rule and Assumption A1 holds, the targeted transfer and
purchases multipliers are given by Equation 3.9.



                                                −1
(3.9)                  ˆt = α + Γ κ(ϕ + 1)
                       Y                              T      ˆt +
                                                       ˆrt + G            κ      ˆt
                                                                                ΓG
                                  (1 − ρβ )                           (1 − ρβ )

  where:
                                    −1
                       κ(ϕ + 1)
        • MT r   = α+Γ                   > 0 is the transfer multiplier,
                       (1 − ρβ )
26The  disposable income eﬀect is derived from the HtM HH’s budget constraint (Equation A3), substituting
the ﬁrm’s FOC (Equation A9), and using the Phillips curve (Equation A6) plus Lemma 2 to substitute out
variation in markups Xˆ t to yield Equation 3.8.
                   WHEN IS THE GOVERNMENT TRANSFER MULTIPLIER LARGE?                        22

                                  −1
                    κ(ϕ + 1)              κ
     • MG = α + Γ                  1+         Γ > 0 is the purchases multiplier,
                    (1 − ρβ )          1 − βρ
     • Γ = [α(φπ − ρ)/(1 − ρ)] − [(1 − α)(1 − ρβ )/κ]
                   T P Ef f ect                  DI Ef f ect




Proof. Use the aggregate demand (Equation 3.6) and aggregate supply (Equation 3.5) rela-
tions to eliminate π                  ˆt .
                   ˆt , and solve for Y


Proposition 3. Transfer and Purchase Multipliers and Inverted Aggregate De-
mand Curve. In the simple model when assumption A1 holds, the targeted transfer multi-
plier is larger than the purchase multiplier whenever:
  a) the Disposable Income eﬀect dominates the Taylor Principle eﬀect, i.e.


                        Γ = [α(φπ − ρ)/(1 − ρ)] − [(1 − α)(1 − ρβ )/κ] < 0
                                  T P Ef f ect                 DI Ef f ect


or equivalently:
                                                     ˆ,π
  b) the demand curve is inverted (slopes upward in (Y ˆ )-space).


Proof. Follows from Proposition 2 and Deﬁnition 2.



3.3. The transfer multiplier when the ZLB binds. It is well documented that gov-
ernment purchases are much more potent when monetary policy is at the ZLB (Eggertsson
2010b, Christiano et al 2011, Woodford 2011). We show analytically that the targeted trans-
fer multiplier is larger than the (already large) purchases multiplier at the ZLB (Proposition
4). In Section 4, we get similar numerical results in medium-scale DSGE model.
  We show the transfer multiplier is larger than the purchases multiplier at the ZLB using a
tractable two-state setup similar to that in Eggertsson (2010b) and Woodford (2011), where
the ZLB and contemporaneous ﬁscal expansion persist with probability ξ each period. In this
set-up, the reason the ZLB is binding does not matter (Christiano et al 2011): the multiplier
is determined by the fact that nominal interest rates do not respond to ﬁscal policy. For
                  WHEN IS THE GOVERNMENT TRANSFER MULTIPLIER LARGE?                                 23

simplicity, we abstract from the reason the ZLB binds, and model “the ZLB binding” as a
constant nominal interest rate policy of the central bank while this regime lasts.27
  The key reason that targeted transfers are more stimulatory than purchases at the ZLB
is that they generate more inﬂation: transfers and purchases provide the same boost to
demand, but transfers do not boost supply. When monetary policy follows a Taylor rule,
the extra increase in inﬂation will increase wages, and hence the disposable income of the
HtM HH, which will boost demand (the DI eﬀect). But it will also raise real interest rates,
which will reduce demand of the Ricardian HH (the TP Eﬀect). At the ZLB there is no
tension between the TP eﬀect and the DI eﬀect: higher inﬂation lowers the real interest
rate, and hence increases consumption by the Ricardian household. Hence, the aggregate
demand curve is always inverted at the ZLB, and the transfers multiplier is always larger
than the purchases multiplier.
  Assumption A2: (i) The ZLB regime is not too persistent (Markov probability ξ < 0.35
with our default parameters), (ii) the non-ZLB regime is an absorbing state and (iii) the
Taylor principle (φπ > 1) holds in the non-ZLB regime.

Lemma 3. Consider a ﬁscal shock of size T       ˆ t and a constant nominal interest rate
                                         ˆrt or G

at time t (the “Zero Lower Bound regime”). With probability ξ , the ﬁscal shock and constant
nominal rate policy continues at t + 1. With probability 1 − ξ , T        ˆ t+1 = 0 and the
                                                                  ˆrt+1 = G

central bank resumes a Taylor rule (the non-ZLB regime). Assume assumption A2 holds.
Then while the ZLB binds, the equilibrium is characterized by the same equations as before
( 3.2-3.9), but with φπ = 0 and ρ = ξ .

Proof. Can be shown by guess and verify.

Proposition 4. Assume A2. When the ZLB binds (as described in Lemma 3),
  a) the transfer multiplier will be greater than the purchases multiplier
  b) the economy’s aggregate demand curve will be inverted
27A  caveat is that the ﬁscal expansion does not aﬀect the number of periods that the ZLB is binding.
Mathematically, the size of the shock that causes the ZLB to bind in our two state example would appear
as a constant in Equation 3.10, and so does not aﬀect the multiplier.
                    WHEN IS THE GOVERNMENT TRANSFER MULTIPLIER LARGE?                                           24

  c) the transfer and purchases multipliers are given by Equation 3.10.



                                                     −1
(3.10)              ˆt = α + ΓZLB κ(ϕ + 1)
                    Y                                     T      ˆt +
                                                           ˆrt + G          κ          ˆt
                                                                                  ΓZLB G
                                  (1 − ξβ )                             (1 − ξβ )

  where:
                                               −1
          ZLB              κ(ϕ + 1)
      •  MT r = α + ΓZLB                  is the transfer multiplier
                           (1 − ξβ )
                                       −1
          ZLB              κ(ϕ + 1)                κ
      • MG = α + ΓZLB                       1+         ΓZLB is the purchases multiplier.
                           (1 − ξβ )            1 − βξ
      • ΓZLB = [α(−ξ )/(1 − ξ )] − [(1 − α)(1 − ξβ )/κ]
                        T P Ef f ect             DI Ef f ect

Proof. Follows from Lemma 3.

Determinacy at the ZLB. The determinacy of the ZLB equilibrium depends on the
persistence of the ZLB and non-ZLB regimes and other model parameters. In the Online
Appendix 5.2, we follow Davig and Leeper (2007) and model the ZLB as a two-regime
Markov process, which allows for transitions between the ZLB and non-ZLB regimes in both
directions. We show numerically that with other default parameters (Table 1), so long as
the non-ZLB state is absorbing and the expected persistence of ZLB regime is expected to
be relatively short, then the Taylor principle (φπ > 1) in the non-ZLB regime is a suﬃcient
condition for determinacy, as in Assumption A2.28

3.4. Aggregate Supply and Aggregate Demand Diagram. The eﬀect of a transfer or
purchases shock can be seen in shifts in the aggregate demand and aggregate supply curves in
Figure 3.1.29 Because all transfers are targeted at the HtM HH who will consume them (we
relax this assumption below in Section 5.1), transfers and purchases shift the demand curve
28Analytically, we can also assume [1 − (1 − α)(2 + ϕ)] (1 − ξ )(1 − βξ ) − αξκ(1 + ϕ) > 0, which ensures a
positive multiplier, which has the same form (with α = 1) as in Eggertsson (2012).
29                                                                       ˆπ
  In Figure 3.1 Ox , (x = 1, 2) represents the steady state equilibrium (Y, ˆ ) with the original (solid) Aggregate
Supply (AS) and Aggregate Demand (AD) curves. Ax represents the new equilibrium with a 0.2% GDP
transfer shock contemporaneously, which shifts the AD curve to the right, but doesn’t aﬀect AS. Bx reﬂects
the new equilibrium with a 0.2% of GDP government purchases shock in the ﬁrst period, which shifts both
AD and AS curves to the right. At any period t in the future the ﬁgure looks identical except that all points
are scaled by ρt .
                    WHEN IS THE GOVERNMENT TRANSFER MULTIPLIER LARGE?                                                                                      25

out by the same amount (Equation 3.6) but only government purchases shift the aggregate
supply curve (via the neoclassical wealth eﬀect).30 As in Proposition 1, government purchases
increase the desired labour supply of the Ricardian household (because they are worse oﬀ
due to higher taxes), but transfers have no eﬀect on aggregate supply, because the extra
labour supply of Ricardian households (who are worse oﬀ) exactly oﬀsets the reduced labour
supply of the HtM HH (who are better oﬀ). When the aggregate demand curve is downward
sloping (for example with a high persistence shock, with ρ = 0.9 and a Taylor Rule in the
left-hand panel of Figure 3.1), the increase in aggregate supply from a government purchases
shock increases the purchases multiplier above the transfer multiplier.
                                         Agg supply & Demand; High Persistence                             Agg supply & Demand; Low Persistence
                                        (Baseline; Supply=red, Demand=blue )                              (Baseline; Supply=red, Demand=blue )
                                 0.2                                                               0.2

                                                                                                                                      A2
                                0.15                                                              0.15
                                                                    Tr                                                                            Tr
                                 0.1                                                               0.1                             B2
                                                         A1               G
                                                                                                                                                 G
                                0.05                                                              0.05
                                                              B1
                   Inflation




                                                                                     Inflation




                                                                                                                        O2
                                  0                    O1                                           0


                               −0.05                                                             −0.05


                                −0.1                                                              −0.1


                               −0.15                                                             −0.15


                                −0.2                                                              −0.2
                                   −1     −0.5          0                0.5     1                   −1     −0.5          0                0.5         1
                                                  % Change Output                                                   % Change Output




         Figure 3.1. Aggregate demand and supply when the purchases multiplier is
         larger (LHS: high persistence of ﬁscal policy (ρ = 0.9) and when the transfer
         multiplier is larger (RHS: low persistence of ﬁscal policy (ρ = 0.5)). See
         footnote 29 for details.

     However, when the Disposable Income eﬀect dominates the Taylor Principle eﬀect, the
aggregate demand curve inverts and the transfer multiplier will be larger than the purchase
multiplier (Proposition 3b).31 This always happens when monetary policy is constrained by
30
  In Online Appendix 2.1, we show that the simple model A1-A9 in Box 1 is equivalen t to assuming perfect
substitutes across labour types with a union as in Galí et al (2007). In Online Appendix 2.2 we assume
instead that the labour of the two households are imperfect substitutes (with elasticity of substitution ϑ),
without a union. This reduces the transfer multiplier, and substantially complicates the analysis, though
doesn’t change the results much so long as the elasticity of substitution between labour inputs is not too
high. Imperfect substitutes means that the aggregate demand curve shifts by less for a transfer than for a
government purchase, because some of the income from the transfer is spent on leisure instead of consumption
(this doesn’t happen in the Cobb-Douglas model because lower labour supply for a household is oﬀset by
higher wages, keeping labour income constant). As a result, the AD curve has to be even more inverted for
the transfer multiplier to be greater than the purchase multiplier.
31The slope of the supply curve is always positive. It increases with (1 + ϕ) and decreases with κ — this
means that the supply curve is ﬂatter (more Keynesian) with a higher Frisch elasticity or more sticky prices.
                   WHEN IS THE GOVERNMENT TRANSFER MULTIPLIER LARGE?                                      26

the Zero Lower Bound, but can also happen when the ﬁscal shock is not very persistent
(if monetary policy follows a Taylor rule). From the RHS of Figure 3.1 one can see that
when the demand curve inverts, higher inﬂation boosts aggregate demand by increasing the
disposable income of the HtM HH by more than it reduces the consumption of the Ricardian
HH via higher real interest rates. This means that the increase in supply from a government
purchases shock actually reduces the multiplier relative to a comparable targeted transfer.32

3.5. The sensitivity of the transfer multiplier to the central bank’s response to
inﬂation and alternative monetary policy rules. The larger size of the transfer multi-
plier at ZLB is because the transfer multiplier is generally more sensitive than the purchase
multiplier to the monetary policy response to inﬂation (Proposition 5). Under a Taylor rule,
φπ appears in the numerator and denominator of the expression for the purchases multiplier,
but only in the denominator of the expression for the transfer multiplier. As discussed above,
transfers tend to produce more inﬂation than purchases, and so an increase in φπ will lead to
a larger increase in real rates for transfers than purchases (as φπ > 1), leading to a greater
fall in the multiplier.33

Proposition 5. Assume A1. A more aggressive monetary policy response to inﬂation leads
to a larger proportional fall in the transfer multiplier than the purchasers multiplier, i.e.
∂lnMT r /∂φπ < ∂lnMG /∂φπ where ∂lnMT r /∂φπ < 0 and ∂lnMG /∂φπ < 0.

Proof. Diﬀerentiating the expressions for the multipliers in Proposition 2 with respect to φπ
yields:

                                 ∂lnMT r         κ(ϕ + 1) α
(3.11)                                   = −MT r                 <0
                                   ∂φπ           (1 − ρβ ) 1 − ρ
32
  This result is related to Eggertsson and Krugman (2012) and Eggertsson (2010a, 2012), who argue that
the “paradox of toil” means that increase in aggregate supply can reduce actual output. However in those
papers this only occurs at the ZLB, whereas here is can also occur with a Taylor rule (due to the presence
of HtM HHs). In the latter case, a reduction in price ﬂexibility (↓ κ) increases transfer multiplier relative
to the purchase multiplier here, whereas increased ﬂexibility makes restrictive labour market practices more
stimulatory in Eggertsson (2012).
33If the central bank responds to output in the Taylor rule, Equation 3.9 becomes Y                   ˆt =
                            −1                   ˆ
       αφY        κ(1 + ϕ)       ˆt + Tˆrt + Γ κGt , which does not aﬀect the relative size of the trans-
  α+          +Γ                G
      (1 − ρ)       1 − ρβ                    1 − ρβ
fer and purchase multipliers (though it reduces their absolute size).
                    WHEN IS THE GOVERNMENT TRANSFER MULTIPLIER LARGE?                         27

                          ∂lnMG   ∂lnMT r       1      ∂lnMT r
(3.12)                          =         −
                           ∂φπ      ∂φπ     MG (ϕ + 1)   ∂φπ

where MT r and MG are the transfer and purchase multipliers (from Proposition 2) respect-
ively. As ∂lnMT r /∂φπ < 0 and − [MG (ϕ + 1)]−1 < 0 the second term in Equation 3.12 is
positive and so, then ∂lnMG /∂φπ > ∂lnMT r /∂φπ .

3.5.1. Two alternative monetary policy rules during normal times. This subsection investig-
ates the size of multipliers with two alternative monetary policy rules, which are the least and
most accommodating of inﬂation (respectively) in normal times. In the framework above,
the eﬀect of monetary policy on demand is governed by the strength of the Taylor Principle
eﬀect (the fall in consumption demand from unconstrained HHs when inﬂation rises). In
normal times, the Taylor Principle eﬀect is at its strongest when any rise in inﬂation cuts
oﬀ all consumption demand from unconstrained HHs. It is at its weakest when inﬂation has
no eﬀect on the consumption of the Ricardian household (i.e consumption of the Ricardian
HH is constant). These rules are captured by perfect inﬂation targeting, and a constant real
interest rate policy, respectively.

  Perfect inﬂation targeting (a strict form of price-level targeting)
  A number of papers have examined the eﬀect of transfers in heterogeneous agent models,
but have assumed a strict form of price-level targeting to keep the model tractable. For
example, Oh and Reis (2012) assume monetary policy is such that the price level is constant,
and Athreya et al (2016) assume that the price level returns to its original pre-shock level
after one period.
  Introducing a strict form of price-level targeting into our analytical model is straightfor-
ward. If the monetary authority enforces a constant price level, then inﬂation is zero in all
        ˆt = 0 ∀t. From the Phillips curve (Equation A6), this implies that markups will
periods π
             ˆt = 0), and so one gets the ﬂex-price multipliers from Proposition 1. An
be constant (X
alternative way to see this is to assume that the central bank implements a constant price
level by following the Taylor rule (Equation A5), but by responding inﬁnitely strongly to
inﬂation deviations. That is, φπ → ∞, implying Γ → ∞ for the multipliers in Proposition
                   WHEN IS THE GOVERNMENT TRANSFER MULTIPLIER LARGE?                                    28

2. As Γ is only in the denominator of MT r , MT r → 0 as φπ → ∞, whereas MG → (ϕ + 1)−1
as φπ → ∞. Given these results, it is not surprising that papers which assume a strict form
of price-level targeting also ﬁnd a transfer multiplier close to zero (though this does not
guarantee larger multipliers with alternative rules).

  Constant real interest rate targeting
  At the more accommodative end of the monetary policy spectrum (in normal times) is a
constant real interest rate rule (Woodford 2011). If real interest rates are constant, then so is
consumption of unconstrained HHs — the Taylor Principle eﬀect will be zero. This is similar
to setting φπ → 1+ , though to implement constant real interest rates we also need make the
                                                      ˆt = φF L Et π
Taylor rule forward looking: replace Equation A5 with R            ˆt+1 and take φF L
                                                                                      →
                                                            π                     π

1+ .34 Solving using the same solution procedure as above, the transfer multiplier approaches
[α − (1 + ϕ)(1 − α)]−1 and the purchase multiplier approaches α × [α − (1 + ϕ)(1 − α)]−1 .
As such, the transfer multiplier is always larger than the purchase multiplier with a constant
real interest rate rule so long as the share of HtM HHs is positive (α < 1).35

           4. The Transfer Multiplier in a Medium-scale DSGE Model

  By including realistic features such as sticky wages, capital, and a more ﬂexible paramet-
risation, the full model allows us to show (i) that the transfer multiplier is often large in
a quantitative sense (i.e. greater than one) — especially when the ZLB binds — and (ii)
that the analytical results of Section 3 hold qualitatively in a richer model. See Table 1 for
parameters, and Section 2 for a statement of the full model.
  In this section we analyse once-oﬀ ﬁscal shocks (persistence ρ = 0), and persistent ﬁscal
shocks (ρ = 0.9). The once-oﬀ shock is designed to capture once-oﬀ transfer payments, like
the 2001 and 2008 Bush stimulus payments. The more persistent shock closely aligns with
the transfer component of the 2009 ARRA (see Online Appendix 8).
34In our model, if φF L
                    π = 1 the model is indeterminate, though we can get arbitrarily close from above with
a determinant solution (we also veriﬁed this numerically). It is also important not to assume φF π
                                                                                                   L
                                                                                                     is too
large (Galí et al 2004 Fig. 5, Bilbiie 2008 Prop. 1). With a contemporaneous Taylor rule (and a low share
of HtM HHs), large values of φπ      1 (for price level targeting) are determinant (by Lemma 1).
35As α → 1, transfers and purchases multipliers approach unity. Woodford (2011) also found a purchase
multiplier of unity with a constant real interest rate rule in a model without HtM HHs.
                    WHEN IS THE GOVERNMENT TRANSFER MULTIPLIER LARGE?                                        29

  In the full model, output will not be a constant multiple of the ﬁscal stimulus (as there
are additional state variables), and so we report the present value multiplier (Uhlig 2010).
This is the discounted sum of increases to output, relative to the discounted sum of ﬁscal
expenditure, where the discounting is at the HH’s discount rate β :


                                                     ∞     iˆ           ∞    iˆ
                                                     i=0 β Yt+i         i=0 β Yt+i
(4.1)                      P V M ultipler ≡         ∞
                                                                   or   ∞
                                                          iˆ                 iˆ
                                                    i=0 β T rt+i        i=0 β Gt+i

  Determinacy The full model is much less susceptible to indeterminacy than the simple
model, possibly because sticky wages limit the extent that demand shocks increase inﬂation.
If the central bank follows a Taylor rule (with the Taylor principle in eﬀect φπ > 1), there
are no values of the HtM HH share (away from corners) where the model is indeterminate.36
When the ZLB binds for a ﬁxed non-stochastic number of periods (we have checked up to 7
years), we get similar results.



4.1. Sticky Wages. The most important diﬀerence between the simple and full models is
the presence of sticky wages in the full model, which weakens wealth eﬀects on labour supply
and hence reduces the diﬀerence between transfer and purchase multipliers.37 When wages
are sticky, an increase in HtM consumption due to a transfer is partially absorbed by a fall
                     ˆw
in the labour markup µ               ˆ 2,t − c
                             ˆ2,t − ϕL
                       2,t = w               ˆ2,t , rather than a fall in the HtM HH’s labour
supply. This means a smaller fall in aggregate supply for a transfer, and hence a smaller
increase in inﬂation, which moves the transfer multiplier towards the purchase multiplier. To
see this, Figure 4.1 shows the eﬀect of varying the Calvo probability of unchanged nominal
wages (θw ) on the multipliers in the full model. With θw = 0, nominal wages are ﬂexible
and multipliers are similar to those in the simple model (and the purchase multiplier is very



36In the full model we check determinacy numerically by making sure that the Blanchard-Kahn and rank
conditions are satisﬁed in Dynare.
37Recall that when wages are sticky, last period’s real wage is a state variable and hence output will no longer
be a constant multiple of the exogenous ﬁscal shock, ruling out an analytical solution for the multiplier.
                   WHEN IS THE GOVERNMENT TRANSFER MULTIPLIER LARGE?                                                                    30

                    Table 1. Full Model Parametrisation and Steady State

                  Parameter                                         Value                                  Parameter          Value

               Discount Rate (β )                                   0.995*                       Investment adj. cost (S )      1.5

        Frisch Labour Elasticity (ϕ−1 )                           1* or 0.2               Capital Depreciation Rate (δk )      0.03

        Labour share HtM HH (1 − α)                                       0.3*               Calvo Prob. Constant Wage         0.75
                                                                                                        (θw )

        Calvo Prob. Constant Price (θp )                              0.75*                      Sticky Wage Elasticity (ε)   20.5 or
                                                                                                                                4.5

           Taylor Rule Inﬂation (φπ )                                 1.27*                              Capital Share (µ)     0.25

         SS Markup (X = σ/(σ − 1))                                    1.05*                 Taylor Rule Smoothing (φR )        0.73

        SS Govt Purchases Share (GSS )                                    0.2                    Taylor Rule Output (φY )      0.13

         * Indicates parameter is also in simple model (others are zero in the simple model).


diﬀerent from the transfer multiplier). But with θw = 1, nominal wages are perfectly sticky
and the purchases and transfer multipliers are identical.38

                                             3
                                                  ρ=.9, Transfer Mult.
                                                  ρ=.9, Purchases Mult.
                                            2.5   ρ=0, Transfer Mult.
                                                  ρ=0, Purchases Mult.


                                             2



                                            1.5
                           PV Multiplier




                                             1



                                            0.5



                                             0



                                           −0.5



                                            −1
                                              0           0.2               0.4            0.6            0.8      1
                                                                           Nominal wage stickiness (θ )
                                                                                                     w




        Figure 4.1. Wage stickiness and the PV multiplier (full model). The vertical
        line indicates default parametrisation


4.2. Parameters and related empirical evidence. Parameters are listed in Table 1 and
are taken from the literature, but are also chosen to be consistent with empirical evidence
38The  extent to which nominal wages or the wage markup changes also depends on the persistence of the
shock. For once-oﬀ shocks, HHs are reluctant to change nominal wages (and they will have to be readjusted
in the future), leading to larger movements in wage markups.
                   WHEN IS THE GOVERNMENT TRANSFER MULTIPLIER LARGE?                                   31

on the response of consumption for diﬀerent groups to a transfer shock. Online Appendix
Figure 3 shows the MPC estimated by Johnson et al (2006) in response to the 2001 Bush
Tax rebates and compares them to the MPC of an analogous group from the full model.39
In both the model and data, the lowest third of consumers by liquid assets tend to spend all
their income, whereas the top two thirds of consumers, deﬁned by their holdings of liquid
assets, do not. The model’s estimates are well within one standard error of the empirical
estimates (not reported). The MPC proﬁle is the most sensitive to the share of HtM in the
model, 1 − α = 0.3. Kaplan et al (2014) present a range of microeconomic evidence that a
third of households are hand-to-mouth in the US, UK and Germany. A calibration of 0.3
is in the middle of the range of macroeconomic estimates of the share of constrained HHs,
such as 0.36 from Iacoviello (2005), 0.5 from Campbell and Mankiw (1989) and Galí et al
(2007) and 0.26 from Cogan et al (2010).
  A voluminous literature ﬁnds macro-empirical estimates of the Frisch elasticity (usually
> 1) are larger than the micro-empirical estimates (usually < 1) — due to frictions, indivisib-
ilities and other factors (see Online Appendix 9 for a survey). Our default Frisch elasticity of
ϕ−1 = 1 is the largest Frisch elasticity that is consistent with the microeconomic evidence.40
Our results are also robust to an alternative calibration of ϕ−1 = 0.2 (see Online Appendix
Table 1), which is in line with microeconomic estimates and also with modest wealth eﬀects
on labour supply (recall that the absolute size of wealth eﬀects increases with the Frisch
elasticity).
  Other parameters are fairly common in the literature. We assume that wages change
on average once a year, in line with evidence from Barattieri et al (2014). Investment
adjustment costs are taken from Altig et al (2014), and the capital share (µ) chosen to
match a steady state I/Y of around 20%, the average 2001-15 (WDI: NE.GDI.FTOT.ZS).

39In the full model, this is the response to an untargeted once-oﬀ transfer. Speciﬁcally, HtM HHs are
compared to those with less than US$1000 in liquid assets, and Ricardian households are compared to those
with more than US$8000 in liquid assets, and those with US$1000-US$7000 in liquid assets. The data are
from the bottom of Table 5 in Johnson et al (2006), and refer to MPC for non-durables.
40Chetty et al (2011) argue that: “Even accounting for indivisible labour, micro studies do not support
representative-agent macro models that generate Frisch elasticities above one” (p4). A Frisch of 1 is also
common in the macroeconomic literature (eg Christiano et al (2005) and Nakamura and Steinsson (2014)).
                 WHEN IS THE GOVERNMENT TRANSFER MULTIPLIER LARGE?                             32

Taylor rule coeﬃcients, price stickiness and depreciation rates are estimated by Iacoviello
(2005). In the full model, steady state government purchases are set at 20 per cent of GDP
(GSS = 0.2) as is common in the literature, funded by a lump sum tax on each household
in proportion to labour income (though any new ﬁscal stimulus is still funded by taxes on
Ricardian HHs). Government transfers as part of ﬁscal stimulus (T rt ) are zero in steady
state, though the HtM HH does receive steady state transfers equal to a share (1 − α)
of total ﬁrm proﬁts and capital income (after depreciation), such that the two households
consume a fractions α and 1 − α of total consumption. We solve the full model numerically
using Dynare.

4.3. Quantitative Results when the central bank follows a Taylor rule. In this
section we calculate the targeted transfer and purchase multipliers in normal times when the
central bank follows a Taylor rule. The white region of Figure 4.2 Panel B shows that the
transfer multiplier in the full model (when policy follows a Taylor rule) is larger than one
when ﬁscal policy is not very persistent or the share of HtM HH is not too small, which is
consistent with the results in the simple model. The transfer multiplier is rarely larger than
the purchase multiplier — except for once-oﬀ stimulus with very high shares of HtM HHs
(Figure 4.2 Panel A). In part, this reﬂects the fact that the purchase multiplier itself is large
for temporary stimulus and moderate shares of HtM HHs.


  The ﬁrst row of Table 2 (Columns A and B) presents the targeted transfer and purchase
multipliers (respectively) when the central bank follows a Taylor Rule. When ﬁscal policy
is once-oﬀ — like the Bush 2001 tax rebates — both transfer and purchase multipliers are
slightly below 1. With persistence ρ = 0.9 (similar to the ARRA) the transfer multiplier
is around 0.25 and the purchase multiplier around 0.4. Impulse response functions with a
Taylor rule or 2 years ZLB are presented in Online Appendix 10.



4.4. Zero Lower Bound (ZLB) in the full model. The Federal Reserve maintained
nominal interest rates at 0-0.25 per cent from December 2008 to December 2015, a period of
                     WHEN IS THE GOVERNMENT TRANSFER MULTIPLIER LARGE?                                     33




        Figure 4.2. Regions of parameter space where the transfer multiplier is large
        (white) when monetary policy follows a Taylor rule (Panel A (LHS): transfer
        multiplier > purchases multiplier, Panel B (RHS): transfer multiplier> 1).

                         Table 2. Full Model — Present Value Multipliers

                          A. Targeted Transfers    B. Purchases             Untargeted Transfers
Default Frisch ϕ−1 = 1                                              C. Default Calib. D. 50% HtM Share
   Fiscal persistence:    ρ=0        ρ = 0.9      ρ=0     ρ = 0.9   ρ=0      ρ = 0.9   ρ=0       ρ = 0.9
       Taylor Rule         0.89       0.25        0.91     0.38      0.27     0.07      0.58       0.15
       2 years ZLB         1.32       1.04        1.30     0.91      0.40     0.31      0.87       0.71
       5 years ZLB         1.33       1.67        1.32     1.32      0.40     0.50      0.90       1.07
       7 years ZLB         1.34       1.77        1.32     1.42      0.40     0.53      0.90       1.12


around 7 years. It is well documented in the literature that government purchases are much
more stimulatory of economic activity when monetary policy is at the ZLB; for example,
Christiano et al (2011) ﬁnd a purchase multiplier above two in the case that the ZLB binds.
Given that the conditions under which the ZLB binds have been modelled elsewhere, we
follow Christiano et al (2011) and Cogan et al (2010) and assume the central bank commits
to keeping the nominal interest rate constant for a certain number of periods known to agents
(and then returns to a Taylor rule).41
  As shown in Proposition 4, the targeted transfer multiplier tends to be larger than the
purchase multiplier at the ZLB. Figure 4.3 (Panel A) shows (in white) the regions of the

41In a linear model with perfect foresight, it is the path of nominal rates that determines the multiplier,
rather than the reason nominal rates take that path (Christiano et al 2011).
                   WHEN IS THE GOVERNMENT TRANSFER MULTIPLIER LARGE?                                       34

(ρ, α)-space where the transfer multiplier is greater than the purchase multiplier if the ZLB
binds for two years. One can see that ZLB dramatically increases the area where the targeted
transfer multiplier is larger than the purchase multiplier — which is now almost the whole
parameter space. Moreover, the transfer multiplier is greater than one almost everywhere
— except for very persistent transfers with a small share of HtM (Figure 4.3 Panel B).42
  Table 2 shows that with constant nominal interest rates for two years (as considered by
Cogan et al 2010), all transfer multipliers are greater than one, and purchase multipliers
are usually close to or above one.43 With ﬁve years of constant rates, the multipliers are
now quite large for ρ = 0.9 (a similar persistence as the ARRA), speciﬁcally 1.7 for targeted
transfers and 1.3 for purchases. Multipliers are around 0.1 higher with 7 years at the ZLB.
Particularly striking are the increases in multipliers at the ZLB for persistent transfer-based
stimulus: the targeted transfer multiplier for ρ = 0.9 increases by 1.4 going from a Taylor rule
to ﬁve years of the ZLB, whereas the purchase multiplier only increases by 0.9 — verifying
Proposition 5 in the full model (transfer multipliers more sensitive to monetary policy than
purchase multipliers).44


       5. Extensions: Untargeted Transfers and Financing Fiscal Policy

5.1. Imperfect targeting of transfers. In the real world, it is unlikely that a government
could perfectly target transfers to HtM households, and so the targeted transfer multipliers
reported in Section 4 are an upper bound. Adjusting for imperfect targeting of transfers in
the model is straightforward: if only a fraction χHtM
                                                  Tr  of transfers are targeted at the HtM
HH (i.e a fraction 1 − χHtM
                        Tr  “leak” out to Ricardian HHs; in the baseline model χHtM
                                                                                Tr  = 1),
then the standard transfer multiplier above will be simply scaled down by a factor of χHtM
                                                                                       Tr .

42As  shown by Woodford (2011), the multiplier is very sensitive to ﬁscal policy that occurs after the ZLB
stops binding. Hence, longer periods at the ZLB have a larger eﬀect on the multipliers for very persistent
ﬁscal policy.
43While short term rates have been constant for much longer than two years ex-post, it is not clear that
markets fully anticipated this at the time (Swanson and Williams 2014).
44A reduction in the Frisch elasticity to ϕ−1 = 0.2 (Online Appendix Table 1) reduces transfer and purchase
multipliers in normal times, but increases them at the ZLB. This is because a lower Frisch elasticity means
a large increase in real wages (and hence inﬂation) is required to meet a given increase in demand, which
raises real interest rates under a Taylor Rule, but reduces them at the ZLB. A change in the Frisch elasticity
can also change wage stickiness, though we change sticky wage CES elasticity (ε) which is largely oﬀsetting.
                      WHEN IS THE GOVERNMENT TRANSFER MULTIPLIER LARGE?                                                                             35

                        Full model (2yr ZLB): dY/dTr>dY/dG (White region)                   Full model (2yr ZLB): dY/dTr>1 (White region)
                 1                                                                   1

                0.9                                                                 0.9

                0.8                                                                 0.8

                0.7                                                                 0.7

                0.6                                                                 0.6

              α 0.5                                                               α 0.5
                0.4                                                                 0.4

                0.3                                                                 0.3

                0.2                                                                 0.2

                0.1                                                                 0.1

                 0                                                                   0
                  0    0.2            0.4             0.6            0.8    1         0   0.2           0.4             0.6             0.8   1
                                               ρ                                                                 ρ



          Figure 4.3. Regions where the targeted transfer multiplier is larger with 2yrs
          ZLB. Panel A (LHS): transfer multiplier > purchases multiplier. Panel B
          (RHS): transfer multiplier >1.


To see this, note that the rest of the transfer (a fraction 1 − χHtM
                                                                 T r ) ﬂows from the Ricardian

household to itself and hence has no eﬀect on the economy.
  This can be incorporated in the analytical model by replacing Equation A3 with (1 −
  c2,t = χHtM  ˆ                     ˆ 2,t ) (scaling down the transfer by a factor χHtM ). The
α)ˆ       T r T r t + (1 − α)(w
                              ˆ2,t + L                                               Tr

expression for the multiplier becomes Equation 5.1, where Γ is deﬁned as in Equation 3.9
and 0 ≤ χHtM
         Tr  ≤ 1 (and χHtM
                       T ax = 0 for now). A stronger DI eﬀect/weaker TP eﬀect

Γ < −(1 − χHtM
           T r )(1 − βρ)/κ ≤ 0 is required for the transfer multiplier to be greater than

the purchases multiplier.


                                                            −1
(5.1)        ˆt = α + Γ κ(ϕ + 1)
             Y                                                         (χHtM
                                                                         Tr  − χHtM    ˆ           HtM
                                                                                T ax )T r t + 1 − χT ax +
                                                                                                                                         κ     ˆt
                                                                                                                                             Γ G
                        (1 − ρβ )                                                                                                     1 − βρ

  An alternative assumption — which could be considered a lower bound — is that transfers
are completely untargeted where 1 − χHtM
                                     Tr  = 1 − α = 0.7 (with our default calibration). In
the full model, Table 2 Column C shows that the untargeted transfer multiplier is around
0.25 for once-oﬀ transfers and 0.1 for persistent transfers if monetary policy follows a Taylor
rule, and is usually around 0.5 for persistent transfers when the ZLB binds for an extended
period.
  The size of the untargeted transfer multiplier is much more sensitive to the fraction of
HtM HHs than the targeted transfer multiplier (as it increases both the size of the targeted
                    WHEN IS THE GOVERNMENT TRANSFER MULTIPLIER LARGE?                                       36

transfer multiplier and the scaling factor). We also might expect that share of HtM HHs to
be higher during a recession when ﬁscal stimulus actually takes place. Table 2 Column D
shows that with a 50% HtM share (as in Campbell and Mankiw 1989, Mankiw 2000, Galí et
al (2007)) the untargeted transfer multiplier is above one with persistent ﬁscal policy and 5
or more years of ZLB, and fairly close to one for less persistent ﬁscal policy. Online Appendix
Figure 1 shows that when the ZLB binds for 2 years, the untargeted transfer multiplier is
greater than one so long as the HtM share is greater than around 0.5 (α < 0.5) and ﬁscal
policy is not too persistent.


5.2. The funding of purchases and transfers: when the HtM HH pays taxes. In
the baseline analysis, only Ricardian HHs pay (lump-sum) taxes.45 The targeted transfer or
government purchase multiplier when a fraction χHtM
                                                T ax of lump sum taxes fall on the HtM

HH (the baseline is where χHtM
                           T ax = 0) can be represented by a combination of the standard

purchase/targeted transfer as presented in Sections 3/4 and a negative imperfectly targeted
transfer (as in Section 5.1 with targeting χ). As the model is linear and ﬁscal variables
are exogenous, the multiplier is simply the standard purchase/targeted transfer multiplier
less the imperfect targeted transfer multiplier. That is, output is given by Equation 5.1
with 0 ≤ χHtM            HtM
          T ax ≤ 1 (and χT r = 1 for now).46 Assuming that transfers and purchases are
ﬁnanced in the same way, the diﬀerence between (and ranking of) transfer and purchase
multipliers is unaﬀected by the fraction χHtM
                                          T ax of taxes that fall on the HtM HH. In the full



45Multipliers can also be substantially lower when ﬁscal stimulus is ﬁnanced by distortionary taxation
(Drautzburg and Uhlig (2015), Uhlig (2010) Leeper et al (2010a)). In Online Appendix 7 we add dis-
tortionary payroll taxes to the full model, which aﬀect the absolute size of transfer and purchase multipliers,
but do not aﬀect their relative size. With a Taylor rule, multipliers fall enough to become negative with
persistent stimulus. However, as in Eggertsson (2010b), we also ﬁnd that distortionary taxation is much
more benign at the ZLB, as extra inﬂation generated by a reduction in supply reduces real interest rates.
As such, when the ZLB binds for 5 years, PV multipliers on persistent targeted transfers are still above one.
See Online Appendix 7 for details.
46These results are derived when lump sum taxes levied on the HtM are contemporaneous (the timing of
taxes on the Ricardian HH does not matter due to Ricardian equivalence). If ﬁscal policy is instead debt
funded by issuing perpetuities, then regardless of the allocation of the perpetual lump-sum taxes (to service
the perpetuities) across the two households, multipliers are the same as the baseline when taxes fall on
Ricardian HHs. The reason is that the transfer multiplier goes to zero as the persistence of the transfer goes
to zero. See Online Appendix 3.
                    WHEN IS THE GOVERNMENT TRANSFER MULTIPLIER LARGE?                                       37

model, Panel A of Figures 4.2 and 4.3 are unchanged— but the absolute size of multipliers
will be lower.47
  If taxation is completely untargeted — that is, the HtM HHs pay 30% of total tax bill
in the full model — then multipliers are generally less than one, though the multiplier on
persistent transfers when ZLB binds for 5 years or more is greater than one. These multipliers
are calculated in Online Appendix Table 2, as the multipliers in Table 2 (Columns A and
B), less the untargeted transfer multipliers in Table 2 Column C.
  As the share of taxes that fall on HtM HHs increases to one (χHtM
                                                                T ax → 1, see Online

Appendix Figure 2), the targeted transfer multiplier goes to zero and purchase multipliers
will be equal to the diﬀerence between the baseline purchase and targeted transfer multiplier.
As the transfer multiplier is positive, this will generally reduce the size of the HtM-ﬁnanced
purchase multiplier (as Monacelli and Perotti 2011), which becomes negative at the ZLB
when the transfer multiplier is larger than the purchases multiplier.

                                             6. Conclusion

  Government transfers to individuals were a larger share of the 2009 US stimulus package
than government purchases. At the same time, with depressed growth prospects in the United
States and other economies, there has been a debate about the eﬃcacy of ﬁscal policy. We
have demonstrated that, in a New Keynesian model modiﬁed to have two types of agents that
diﬀer in their access to ﬁnancial markets, the transfer multiplier is more sensitive than the
purchase multiplier to the degree of accommodation of inﬂation of the central bank. When
the ZLB is binding, the targeted transfer multiplier is larger than the purchases multiplier,
and usually larger than one.
  Using a simpliﬁed model that we can solve analytically, we show that while purchases
and transfers both increase aggregate demand, only purchases increase aggregate supply
(as wealth eﬀects cancel across households for transfers). This means that transfer-based
stimulus is more inﬂationary than purchase-based stimulus. In normal times, when the
47When   transfers are untargeted (0 ≤ χHtM     ≤ 1) and the HtM pay some fraction of taxes (0 ≤ χHtM
                                          Tr                                                         T ax ≤ 1),
then the transfer multiplier is only positive if the HtM HHs receive a greater fraction of transfers than they
pay in taxes (χHtM
                Tr   > χHtM
                         T ax ).
                 WHEN IS THE GOVERNMENT TRANSFER MULTIPLIER LARGE?                               38

central bank follows a Taylor rule, the aggregate demand curve is usually downward sloping,
so that higher rates of inﬂation lead to an increase in real interest rates and a lower multiplier.
However, when the ZLB is binding, the economy’s aggregate demand curve inverts, so that
higher levels of inﬂation lower real interest rates and increase the multiplier. These results
are quantitatively robust in a medium-scale DSGE model with capital and sticky wages.
  The potential for a large targeted transfer multiplier (under certain circumstances) raises
the policy question: should transfers be a larger part of future stimulus packages? A com-
plete answer involves a full welfare calculation, which is sensitive to how individuals value
government spending and is beyond the scope of this paper. An argument in favour of
targeted transfers (versus purchases) in this context is that the people receiving the trans-
fers choose what to spend them on, and so transfers might be more highly valued relative
to purchases. Moreover, if transfers are targeted at constrained households who are also
poorer, they may have higher marginal utility, leading to an increase in social welfare from
a utilitarian perspective. Transfers might also be able to provide some insurance against
steep reductions in consumption for those who become unemployed. Practicalities are also
important. Expedient implementation of a temporary stimulus package — which has the
highest multiplier under a Taylor rule — is much easier for a transfer than a government
purchase. Public investment, which is a popular alternative form of ﬁscal stimulus, can have
long implementation lags such that much of the investment occurs after the worst of a reces-
sion is over (Leeper et al 2010b). On the other hand, transfers cannot be perfectly targeted
at constrained households and so the multipliers on real-world transfer packages are lower
that the perfect-targeting benchmark.
  An online appendix is available at:
https://sites.google.com/site/stevenpennings/GP2017appendix.pdf
                  WHEN IS THE GOVERNMENT TRANSFER MULTIPLIER LARGE?                                 39

                                           References
 [1] Altig, D, L Christiano, M Eichenbaum, and J Lindé (2011) “Firm-speciﬁc capital, nominal
     rigidities and the business cycle” Review of Economic Dynamics 14(2), pp225-247
 [2] Athreya K., A Owens, and F Schwartzman (2016), “Does Redistribution Increase Output? The
     Centrality of Labor Supply”, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Working Paper 14-04R (revised 28
     December 2016)
 [3] Barattieri, A, S, Basu and P, Gottschalk (2014) "Some Evidence on the Importance of Sticky
     Wages." American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 6(1): 70-101.

 [4] Bernanke B, Gertler M and S Gilchrist (1999), “The Financial Accelerator in a Quantitative
     Business Cycle Framework,” Handbook of Macroeconomics 1, pp 1341-1393.
 [5] Bilbiie F (2008), “Limited Asset Markets Participation, Monetary Policy and (Inverted) Aggregate
     Demand Logic,” Journal of Economic Theory, 140(1), pp 162-196.
 [6] Bilbiie F, Monacelli, T and R Perotti (2013), “Public Debt and Redistribution with Borrowing
     Constraints,” The Economic Journal, 123 (February ), pp F64-F98.
 [7] Campbell J and G Mankiw (1989), “Consumption, Income and Interest Rates: Reinterpreting the
     Time Series Evidence,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 4, pp 185-246.
 [8] Chetty, R, A Guren, D Manoli and A Weber (2011), “Does Indivisible Labor Explain the
     Diﬀerence Between Micro and Macro Elasticities? A Meta-Analysis of Extensive Margin Elasticities”,
     NBER Working Paper No. 16729, (January 2011)
 [9] Coenen, G, C Erceg, C Freedman, D Furceri, M Kumhof, R Lalonde, D Laxton, J Lindé,
     A Mourougane, D Muir, S Mursula, C Resende, J Roberts, W Roeger, S Snudden, M
     Trabandt, and J in’t Veld. (2012) “Eﬀects of Fiscal Stimulus in Structural Models.” American
     Economic Journal: Macroeconomics, 4(1) pp 22-68.
[10] Cogan J and J Taylor (2010), “What the Government Purchases Multiplier Actually Multiplied in
     the 2009 Stimulus Package,” NBER Working Paper 16505.
[11] Cogan J, Cwik T, Taylor J and V Wieland (2009), “New Keynesian versus Old Keynesian
     Government Spending Multipliers,” Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 34(3), pp 281-295.
[12] Christiano L, Eichenbaum M and C Evans (2005), “Nominal Rigidities and the Dynamic Eﬀects
     of a Shock to Monetary Policy” Journal of Political Economy, 113(1), pp 1-45.
[13] Christiano L Eichenbaum M, and S Rebelo (2011), “When Is the Government Spending Multiplier
     Large,” Journal of Political Economy, 119(1), pp 78-121.
[14] Davig T and E Leeper (2007), “Generalizing the Taylor Principle”, American Economic Review,
     97(3), pp 607-635.
[15] Davig T and E Leeper (2011), “Monetary-Fiscal Policy Interactions and Fiscal Stimulus”, European
     Economic Review, 55(2), pp 211-227.
[16] Drautzburg T and H Uhlig (2015), “Fiscal Stimulus and Distortionary Taxation”, Review of Eco-
     nomic Dynamics 18, 894–920
[17] Eggertsson G (2010a), “The Paradox of Toil” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Working Paper.
[18] Eggertsson G (2010b), “What Fiscal Policy is Eﬀective at Zero Interest Rates?” NBER Macroeco-
     nomics Annual 25, pp 59-112.
[19] Eggertsson, G (2012) "Was the New Deal Contractionary?" American Economic Review, 102(1), pp
     524-55.
                  WHEN IS THE GOVERNMENT TRANSFER MULTIPLIER LARGE?                                  40

[20] Eggertsson G and P Krugman (2012), “Debt, Deleveraging, and the Liquidity Trap: A Fischer-
     Minsky-Koo Approach”, The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 127(3): 1469-1513
[21] Erceg C, Henderson D and A Levin (2000), “Optimal Monetary Policy with Staggered Wage and
     Price Contracts,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 46(2), pp 281-313.
[22] Galí J (2008), Monetary Policy, Inﬂation, and the Business Cycle: An Introduction to the New
     Keynesian Framework, Princeton University Press, Princeton, USA
[23] Galí J, Lopez-Salido D and J Valles (2007), “Understanding the Eﬀects of Government Spending
     on Consumption,” Journal of the European Economic Association, 5(1), pp 227-270.
[24] Iacoviello M (2005), “House Prices, Borrowing Constraints, and Monetary Policy in the Business
     Cycle,” American Economic Review, 95(3), pp 739-764.
[25] Johnson D, Parker J and N Souleles (2006), “Household Expenditure and the Income Tax Rebates
     of 2001,” American Economic Review, 96(5), pp 1589-1610.
[26] Kaplan G, G Violante and J Weidner (2014) “The Wealthy Hand-to-Mouth”, Brookings Papers
     on Economic Activity, (Spring 2014), pp 77-138
[27] Keane, M (2011) "Labor Supply and Taxes: A Survey." Journal of Economic Literature, 49(4):
     961-1075.
[28] Leeper, E, Plante M and N Traum (2010a), “Dynamics of Fiscal Financing in the United States”
     Journal of Econometrics, 156, 304-321.
[29] Leeper E, T Walker, and S Yang (2010b), “Government investment and ﬁscal stimulus” Journal
     of Monetary Economics 57, 1000–1012
[30] Leeper E, N Traum, and T Walker (2017), “Clearing up the Fiscal Multiplier Morass”, American
     Economic Review, 107(8), pp 2409-54
[31] Mankiw, N (2000), “The Savers-Spenders Theory of Fiscal Policy” American Economics Review PP,
     90(2), pp 120-125
[32] Mehrotra N (2017), “Fiscal Policy Stabilization: Purchases or Transfers?”, International Journal of
     Central Banking (forthcoming)
[33] Monacelli T and R Perotti (2011), “Redistribution and the Multiplier,” IMF Economic Review,
     59(4), pp 630-651, November.
[34] Nakamura, E and J Steinsson (2014) "Fiscal Stimulus in a Monetary Union: Evidence from US
     Regions." American Economic Review, 104(3): 753-92.
[35] Oh H, and R Reis (2012), “Targeted Transfers and the Fiscal Response to the Great Recession,”
     Journal of Monetary Economics, 59(S).
[36] Smets F and R Wouters (2007), “Shocks and Frictions in US Business Cycles: A Bayesian DSGE
     Approach,” American Economic Review, 97(3), pp 586-606.
[37] Swanson E and J Williams (2014), “Measuring the Eﬀect of the Zero Lower Bound on Medium-
     and Longer-Term Interest Rates”, American Economic Review 104(10):3154-3185
[38] Uhlig H (1999), “A Toolkit for Analyzing Dynamic Stochastic Models Easily,” In Computational
     Methods for the Study of Dynamic Economies, R. Marimon and A. Scott, eds. Oxford University Press.
[39] Uhlig H (2010), “Some Fiscal Calculus,” American Economic Review, 100(2), pp 30-34.
[40] Werning I (2012), “Managing a Liquidity Trap: Monetary and Fiscal Policy”, MIT mimeo.
[41] Woodford M (2003), Interest and Prices, Princeton University Press
[42] Woodford M (2011), "Simple Analytics of the Government Expenditure Multiplier," American Eco-
     nomic Journal: Macroeconomics, 3(1), pp 1–35.
