                                                   WPS8007


Policy Research Working Paper                     8007




  Economic Upgrading through Global Value
            Chain Participation
        Which Policies Increase the Value Added Gains?

                                Victor Kummritz
                                 Daria Taglioni
                                Deborah Winkler




Trade and Competitiveness Global Practice Group
March 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 8007


  Abstract
 The emergence of global value chains has opened up new                             First, the study finds that global value chain integration
 ways to achieve development and industrialization. How-                            increases domestic value added, especially on the selling side,
 ever, new evidence shows that not all countries have gained                        which holds across all income levels. Second, the results
 from participating in global value chains, and that coun-                          highlight the importance of policy for economic upgrading
 try-specific characteristics matter for economic upgrading                         through global value chain integration. Although the study
 in global value chains. This paper uses two panel data sets                        cannot claim causal evidence, all the assessed policy areas
 of developing and industrialized countries at the sectoral                         are consistently shown to mediate the effects of global value
 level to relate global value chain participation as a buyer                        chains and magnify the gains for domestic value added. Third,
 and seller to domestic value added. These are combined                             a detailed analysis shows that several policy areas mediate
 with a wide range of policy measures at the country level                          the gains from global value chains more through integration
 that can play a role in economic upgrading through global                          as a seller. Finally, the study observes that many of the results
 value chains, by targeting global value chain integration                          are driven by high- and upper-middle-income countries.
 or the quality and conditions of input and output factors.



  This paper is a product of the Trade and Competitiveness Global Practice Group. It is part of a larger effort by the World
  Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions around the world.
  Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The authors may be contacted
  at dtaglioni@worldbank.org and dwinkler2@worldbank.org.




         The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
         issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
         names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
         of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
         its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                       Produced by the Research Support Team
      Economic Upgrading through Global Value Chain Participation:

                    Which Policies Increase the Value Added Gains?



                         Victor Kummritz,1 Daria Taglioni,2 and Deborah Winkler3




    Key words: global value chain participation, economic upgrading, value added, role of policy, standards
    JEL: F1, F2




1 Consultant, Trade & Competitiveness Global Practice, World Bank Group. E-mail: victor.kummritz@graduateinstitute.ch.
2 Lead Economist and Global Solutions Lead for Global Value Chains, Trade & Competitiveness Global Practice, World Bank
Group. E-mail: dtaglioni@worldbank.org.
3 Senior Consultant, Trade & Competitiveness Global Practice, World Bank Group. E-mail: dwinkler2@worldbank.org.

This paper is part of the development of a taxonomy for GVC integration and upgrading, which consists of “best practice”
experiences for a representative sample of countries from each world region. The authors would like to thank Miles McKenna
for his inputs on the standards literature, as well as Paulo Bastos, Dominique Bruhn, and Alexandros Ragoussis for their valuable
comments on an earlier draft of the paper. The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and should not be
attributed to the World Bank, its Executive Directors or the countries they represent.
1. Introduction
   The emergence of global value chains (GVCs) has opened up new ways for development and
industrialization. Developing countries can now join existing supply chains instead of building complete
chains domestically. This increased degree of specialization frees them from the need to develop a wide
range of competitive tasks and emphasizes their respective finely defined comparative advantages. At the
same time, GVCs can be a tool for industrialized countries to re-invigorate their slow growth in the
absence of major innovations. Indeed, cross-country evidence and case studies show that GVC
participation can on average be growth-enhancing and lead to economic and social upgrading (see, for
example, UNCTAD 2013; WEF 2013). However, new evidence also shows that not all countries have gained
from participating in GVCs and that the institutional and political environment of countries matters to
their success in GVCs (Kummritz 2016; Taglioni and Winkler 2016).
   This paper examines which national policies are crucial for successful economic upgrading in GVCs,
combining two panel data sets of developing and industrialized countries at the sectoral level with a wide
range of policy measures at the country level. Taglioni and Winkler (2016) differentiate between three
types of economic upgrading based on a country’s current tasks of comparative advantage, skills, and
capabilities (Humphrey 2004; Humphrey and Schmitz 2002): (i) product upgrading, which involves moving
into more sophisticated products in the existing value chain; (ii) functional upgrading, which involves
increasing the value-added share (in output of the final product) in existing GVC processes by integrating
or moving into more sophisticated tasks; and (iii) inter-sectoral upgrading, which involves moving into
new supply chains with higher value-added shares. Therefore, in this paper, we adopt value added as our
measure of economic upgrading.
   These three objectives can be achieved by upgrading the production factors of labor and capital, and
also by increasing total factor productivity (TFP). First, skills upgrading refers to improving the skills and
know-how of the workforce. Developing skills is a key element of competitiveness, it affects the ability to
participate in GVCs and to achieve economic and social upgrading within GVCs. Second, capital upgrading
refers to improving the absorptive capacity and technology of firms, which requires general and industry-
specific investments to upgrade technical capacity and achieve quality standards and innovation
capabilities. Third, process upgrading refers to increasing TFP in existing GVC tasks that cannot be directly
attributed to the production factors of labor or capital, for example, by better organizing the production
or by introducing new technologies to capture efficiency gains (Taglioni and Winkler 2016).
    Countries have different policy options at hand to facilitate skills, capital, and process upgrading that
foster value-added gains in GVCs. We discuss and analyze a wide spectrum of areas that can play a role
for GVC upgrading, either by targeting GVC entry and stronger GVC integration that increases the potential
for economic upgrading in a country, or by directly targeting the quality and conditions of input and output
factors. These include infrastructure, connectivity, investment and trade policy, business climate and
institutions, financial development, labor market policy, education and skills, product standards and
innovation, as well as labor, social, and environmental standards. We outline several paths for economic
upgrading through GVC participation and highlight the complimentary role that policy plays in this
development. Overall, this paper shows that countries that want to develop GVC strategies must take into
account their policy environment. Bad policies can be an impediment to GVC-induced value-added gains
while good policies can be a substantial facilitator.




                                                      2
   Using two panel data sets at the sectoral level, our empirical strategy relates GVC participation as a
buyer (backward GVC links) and seller (forward GVC links) to domestic value added. The measures are
based on the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development’s (OECD) Inter-Country Input-
Output (ICIO) data set as well as the World Input Output database (WIOD). Both databases cover a wide
range of industrialized and developing countries, manufacturing and services sectors, and years. Related
streams of literature have focused on the productivity gains from international trade and investment at
the sector or firm level, including the role of exporting (Bernard and Jensen 1995 and following studies),
importing inputs (see, for example, early contributions by Görg and Hanley 2003 or Mann 2003), and FDI
(see, for horizontal spillovers, Haddad and Harrison 1993; for vertical spillovers, Javorcik 2004a). To the
best of our knowledge, Kummritz (2016) is the only other study that looked into the effects of GVC
integration on economic upgrading based on international input-output measures.
   The type of GVC integration is a main determinant for which policies matter. Javorcik’s (2004a) seminal
study on spillovers from foreign direct investment (FDI) introduced measures of backward and forward
FDI links based on input-output data. The concept of backward and forward links has been used widely in
the literature of FDI and, increasingly, in international trade. Overall, the literature suggests that backward
and forward FDI links have a differential effect on economic upgrading (see, for example, Javorcik 2004a;
Havranek and Irsova 2011), and similar results can be expected for different types of GVC integration
(Kummritz 2016). Integrating as a buyer into GVCs requires a focus on building the infrastructure and
strengthening connectivity to global firms in order to import world-class inputs. While GVC participation
as a seller also hinges on a similar policy framework, the focus now shifts more towards increasing
productivity in order to be more competitive in the global marketplace. Following Kummritz (2016), we
focus on measures of backward and forward GVC links.
    In a second step, we investigate whether certain policies at the national level increase the relationship
between domestic value added and GVC participation, in order to guide future GVC-related policy making.
There are at least two streams of literature that have emphasized the role of national policies for welfare
gains: One set of studies looked at the role of country characteristics for economic growth and for escaping
the middle-income trap (for recent contributions, see, for example, Eichengreen, Park, and Shin 2013;
Pritchet and Summers 2014; Bulman, Eden, and Nguyen 2014; for a literature review, see Raiser 2014).
Another strand of literature examined the role of policies for the productivity spillovers from FDI. For an
extensive literature review, see, for example, Farole and Winkler (2014). In this paper, we include a wide
range of measures at the national level in the form of interaction terms.
   We also test whether the findings depend on a country’s development stage by splitting the samples
into three income categories. The effects of GVC integration on economic upgrading can vary depending
on a country’s development stage, the type of GVC integration, and its underlying transmission channels.
The transmission channels include backward and forward GVC links; technology spillovers to local firms in
the same or related downstream or upstream sectors; skills upgrading transferred through the training of
and demand for skilled labor; investments in infrastructure that would otherwise not be profitable
(minimum scale achievements); and pro-competitive market restructuring effects that are not limited to
GVC participants, but also extend to nonparticipants (Taglioni and Winkler 2016). It might be possible that
countries with lower income levels benefit more strongly from backward links and technology spillovers,
while higher income countries show higher gains from forward links and skills upgrading.
   First, we find that GVC integration significantly increases the domestic value added of our samples,
especially on the selling side. The results hold across all income levels. Second, the results highlight the
importance of policy for economic upgrading through GVC integration. While we cannot claim causal
evidence, all assessed policy areas are consistently shown to mediate the effects of GVCs and magnify the
gains for domestic value added. This holds for policies that affect the quality and conditions of input and



                                                      3
output factors, policies targeting investment and trade flows, and policies targeting the business climate
and institutions including financial and labor markets. As a result, strategies for GVC integration must
focus not just on border measures, but also on beyond-the-border measures if they are to extract the
maximum benefits for the integrating country.
    Third, detailed analysis shows that several policy areas mediate the gains from GVCs more through
integration as a seller. This holds in particular for connectivity, education and skills, as well as for
standards. We consider this a sensible result since the mechanisms behind the positive effects of GVC
integration as a buyer and seller are likely to be different. For instance, backward links might generate
gains through increasing the quality of inputs while forward links have a direct demand increasing effect
for domestic value added. Naturally, domestic policies can influence the demand for domestic goods more
than the quality of foreign inputs. Our results are in line with such an explanation.
   Finally, we observe that many of our results are driven by high- and upper middle-income countries—
notable exceptions are standards and the business climate and institutions; nevertheless, we consider our
conclusions as highly relevant for developing economies; many high- and upper middle-income countries
have higher levels of GVC integration and it is then evident that they are responsible for a significant part
of our results. However, as low- and lower-middle income countries integrate more and more into GVCs,
we expect that such domestic policies will play an increasing role.
   The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews the literature on the impact of
GVC participation on economic upgrading and discusses the relevance of policy in this context. Section 3
describes the empirical specification and introduces the data. Section 4 presents the econometric results
based on the total sample of countries. Section 5 concludes and outlines areas for future research.


2. Literature Review

2.1. The Impact of GVC Participation on Economic Upgrading

   Trade Openness and Efficiency Gains across Sectors
   The macro-economic channels through which openness to trade enhances aggregate productivity and
growth are well known. Trade openness leads to a more efficient allocation of resources across sectors
within countries and thereby raises growth. Exports in Ricardo’s famed two-country, two-sector, and one-
factor model allow for specialization in a country’s comparative advantage, which, in his model, is
determined by technological differences across countries. By contrast, comparative advantage in the two-
country, two-sector, two-factor model by Hecker-Ohlin-Samuelson (Heckscher 1919; Ohlin 1933;
Samuelson 1948), is not determined by technological differences but by different factor endowments. The
proportion of factors used in the production of different goods determines international trade.
   The new trade theory à la Helpman and Krugman (1985), and generalized by Grossman and Helpman
(1991), shifted the focus from static gains from trade to dynamic ones in which the increased investment,
knowledge, and technology, associated with increased productivity growth can transform trade patterns
and accelerate overall economic growth. Under the new theory, specialization is a result of scale and
concomitant efficiencies.
   Finally, New Economic Geography (NEG) models focus on the uneven distribution of economic activity
and income across spaces that are determined by the interplay between transactions costs (such as trade
costs) and various types of increasing returns to scale (Venables 2005). In the NEG two-region model by
Krugman and Venables (1995), firms produce intermediate and final goods using labor and intermediate



                                                     4
inputs. Falling trade costs increase the relative benefits of clustering economic activity in a region, as the
possibility of international trade enables firms to reach foreign customers via exports. When trade costs
fall further, factor price differences become more important and firms start importing inputs from the
lower-cost region. In sum, four forces determine the location of economic activity: factor supply and
product market competition (dispersion factors), and demand and cost links (agglomeration forces).
    The following sections review the literature on the relationship between GVC integration and
economic upgrading. The concept of economic upgrading is largely about gaining competitiveness in
higher value-added products, tasks, and sectors. While the trade models listed above emphasize the
positive effects of trade openness for a country’s aggregate productivity and growth, our literature review
focuses specifically on productivity and value-added effects at the sector and firm levels. GVC integration
is also a broad concept, which can include a variety of measures, including selling and buying in GVCs and
foreign direct investment (FDI). The following is a brief literature overview of the main empirical and
theoretical contributions that relate measures of GVC participation to productivity and value added, and
an assessment of possible transmission channels.

   Exporting and Economic Upgrading within Sectors
   The export-productivity nexus has been discussed both at the macro and micro levels for a long time.
While traditionally, the macro-economic channels through which export expansion enhances aggregate
productivity and growth have been the focus of trade models, Melitz (2003) added firms to trade theory
and showed that exporting can increase aggregate productivity by reallocating resources from less
productive to more productive firms.
    This development from macro to micro level started with the seminal paper by Bernard and Jensen
(1995) that exporters outperform nonexporters in the same sector and country, in terms of productivity,
skills, wages, technology, and capital intensity (see, for detailed literature review, Wagner 2007).
Consequently, researchers started to ask whether exporters perform better because of self-selection into
the exporting market and because of learning by exporting (LBE). Self-selection refers to ex ante
differences across firms, while LBE refers to ex post gains of exporters versus nonexporters. Self-selection
relates to the fact that exporting involves additional costs of exporting, including transportation,
marketing, and distribution costs, employees with specific skills, and production costs for necessary
adjustments that only more productive firms are able to absorb. LBE refers to knowledge flows that
exporting firms absorb from international buyers and competitors that renders them more productive
(Wagner 2007).
   The wide array of existing studies tends to find that more productive firms self-select into exporting,
while the positive impact of exporting on productivity is less clear-cut. The increased fragmentation of
international trade in GVCs makes LBE more likely as selling to international buyers might increase firm-
level productivity ex post via forward and backward links, technology spillovers, skills upgrading, and
minimum scale effects.

   Importing Inputs and Economic Upgrading within Sectors
   Most of the studies on the effects of imported inputs on productivity focused on developed countries,
as part of the offshoring literature that started in the mid-1990s, when developed countries began to
assess whether importing (or offshoring) of material inputs (typically from lower-income countries)
entailed positive welfare effects in the countries of origin. For instance, the seminal study by Grossman
and Rossi-Hansberg (2008) showed that offshoring can entail productivity gains similar to technological
progress for the offshoring nation because it lowers the average cost of inputs. Baldwin and Robert-
Nicoud (2014) extended this framework and showed that offshoring can additionally shift terms of trade


                                                      5
in favor of the developed economy. On the developing economy’s side, Li and Liu (2015) and Zi (2014)
developed models in which LBE drives gains for the host countries. This relates to an older strand of
literature that examined the effects of the North American Free Trade Area. Most prominently, Feenstra
and Hanson (1996) showed that offshoring and host countries benefit from production fragmentation
since the average skill intensity rises in both countries when the initial technology gap between the two
is sufficiently large.
   There are various ways of measuring offshoring, but in most cases, it is the share of imported inputs
as percentage of total inputs, value added, or output. Since these measures are typically based on input-
output tables, these types of studies are often performed at the industry-level. However, the focus was
more on the labor market effects. Shifting the focus on productivity growth, Egger and others (2001) found
that materials offshored to Eastern European countries had a significantly positive impact in 20 Austrian
manufacturing industries.
    In the 2000s, this stream of literature gained momentum when the focus shifted on services offshoring
and its impact on TFP or labor productivity. Several studies at the sectoral level found evidence that
services offshoring significantly increases productivity, while the effect of materials offshoring is smaller
or insignificant: including Amiti and Wei (2006, 2009) for U.S. manufacturing between 1992 and 2000,
Crino (2008) for nine EU countries between 1990 and 2004, Winkler (2010) for German manufacturing
industries covering the period 1995–2006, and Michel and Rycx (2011) for Belgian manufacturing
industries between 1995 and 2004. The last study also examined the impact of inter-industry spillover
effects, but only found little evidence of it. Other studies, by contrast, only found significant productivity
gains from materials offshoring, including Daveri and Jona-Lasinio (2008) for Italy between 1995 and 2003
and Ito and Tanaka (2010) for Japanese manufacturing over the period 1988–2004. Focusing on low-skilled
workers, Egger and Egger (2006) found a U-shaped labor productivity effect from materials offshoring in
the manufacturing sectors of 12 EU countries between 1993 and 1997.
    A few studies use firm-level data. Görg and Hanley (2003) analyzed the impact of services offshoring
on labor productivity for Ireland using plant-level data. The effect was positive in the electronics industry
between 1990 and 1995. In a more recent plant-level study, Görg and others (2008) evaluated the
productivity effects of materials and services offshoring for Irish manufacturing for the period 1990–1998,
differentiating between exporting and non-exporting firms. They only found a significantly positive impact
of services offshoring on TFP for exporting firms.
   A recent strand of literature looked at the impact of trade liberalization on productivity through
improved access to foreign inputs in developing countries. Amiti and Konings (2007) found, for Indonesia,
that reducing tariffs on intermediate inputs leads to a productivity gain at least twice as high as gains from
reducing output tariffs. Topalova and Khandelwal (2011) confirmed this result using firm-level data from
India. In addition, Crino (2012) showed for 27 transition countries that importing inputs induces skills
upgrading by facilitating the production of new goods, improvement of product quality, and, to a lesser
extent, research and development (R&D) and technology adoption.

   FDI and Economic Upgrading within Sectors
   Econometric studies of FDI spillovers usually investigate why the level or growth rate of productivity
of domestic firms is higher in sectors where foreign firms are more prevalent. In the last decade, many
researchers have econometrically examined the existence and direction of FDI-generated horizontal and
vertical spillovers. Starting with the pioneering study by Caves (1974), early research on the topic
examined the effects of horizontal spillovers using industry-level cross-sectional data, and generally found
evidence for positive spillovers (see, for an overview of earlier studies, Görg and Strobl 2001). In later
work, using panel data at the firm level, Haddad and Harrison (1993) found evidence for negative


                                                      6
spillovers in Morocco, which was attributed to possible adverse effects of increased competition offsetting
positive spillovers from FDI.
    Numerous studies on horizontal FDI spillovers have followed since, showing ambiguous effects of FDI
on domestic productivity (see, for extensive literature reviews, Görg and Greenaway 2004; Lipsey and
Sjöholm 2005; Smeets 2008, among others). In a review of 40 studies on horizontal productivity spillovers,
Görg and Greenaway (2004), found that 20 studies reported statistically significant evidence of positive
spillovers, while only 6 studies reported negative spillovers. However, they raised concerns over the
robustness of the cross-sectional studies—almost all showed positive effects. By contrast to the 28 panel
studies, only 6 studies reported positive spillovers, while 4 studies reported negative spillovers, and the
large majority (18 studies) showed ambiguous results. Indeed, Paus and Gallagher (2008) concluded in
their literature overview that regressions based on cross-sectional data tend to find positive spillovers,
while those based on panel data are more likely to find negative spillovers.
    In a seminal study using panel data for Lithuania, Javorcik (2004a) shifted the focus to vertical spillovers
and introduced a measure of backward and forward spillovers based on input-output data, which has
been widely used since. Besides finding positive horizontal spillovers, Javorcik (2004a) confirmed positive
backward spillovers, but rejected the existence of forward spillovers. Since then, there has been a “virtual
explosion of studies on vertical spillovers” (Havranek and Irsova 2011, p.1), including Blalock and Gertler’s
(2008) widely cited study on Indonesian manufacturing firms that confirms the positive backward
spillovers. In a comprehensive meta-analysis, Havranek and Irsova (2011) took into account 3,626
estimates from 55 studies on vertical spillovers, and found evidence of positive and economically
important backward spillovers from multinationals to local suppliers in upstream sectors and smaller
positive effects to local customers in downstream sectors. However, the authors rejected the existence
of horizontal FDI spillovers. The findings suggest that a 10-percentage-point increase in foreign presence
increases productivity of local firms in upstream sectors by around 9 percent.

2.2. Transmission Channels

   Expanding and strengthening a country’s GVC participation may lead to higher output, productivity,
value added, and jobs through a variety of channels (Taglioni and Winkler 2016).
    (1) The transmission channels include backward links, that is, GVC-linked purchases of international
        inputs, spurring production and productivity in various downstream sectors via an increased
        availability and quality of inputs and knowledge diffusion effect; and forward links, that is, sales
        of GVC-linked local intermediates to international buyers, spurring production and productivity in
        various upstream sectors via the demand for more or better inputs and assistance extended to
        local suppliers.
    (2) Second, GVC participation can translate into pro-competitive market restructuring effects that are
        not limited to GVC participants, but also extend to nonparticipants, as GVC participation increases
        competition for limited resources in the country, overall average productivity increases in the
        medium run. Moreover, knowledge and technology spillovers arise from direct imitation or
        reverse engineering by local firms (demonstration effect).
    (3) Third, technology spillovers lead to improved productivity of local firms in the same or related
        downstream, or upstream sectors as a result of GVC production via the diffusion, availability and
        quality, and demonstration effects described above.
    (4) Fourth, GVC participation may stimulate investments in infrastructure that would otherwise not
        be profitable and may spur local production and productivity in other sectors through minimum



                                                       7
        scale achievements for at least two reasons: they amplify pro-competition effects and also
        strengthen the ability of a country to sustain GVC participation over time.
    (5) GVCs also benefit labor markets through the training of and demand for skilled labor as well as
        labor turnover where knowledge embodied in the workforce of participating firms moves to other
        local firms.
    This paper focuses on the value-added effects of forward and backward GVC integration and
emphasizes the role of policy in mediating these effects. Host-country and institutional factors can
influence characteristics of domestic and foreign firms in GVCs, as well as the transmission channels for
knowledge diffusion to local firms. Similarly, standards can shape firms’ characteristics, influence the
transmission channels and thus have a mediating effect on economic upgrading through GVC integration.
   Measuring a country’s implementation and compliance with product, labor, social, and environmental
standards can be done directly and indirectly. Direct measures include, for example, compliance with
certain International Organization for Standardization (ISO) standards or certain international
conventions. Indirect measures, on the other hand, focus on policies and characteristics that can be
expected in countries that have implemented certain standards, including their innovation potential, and
labor market, social, and environmental policies.
   Causality between direct and indirect measures on standards can go two ways. On the one hand, the
implementation of standards, such as higher product standards, improves a country’s innovation
potential, among others. On the other hand, countries put in place policies (such as minimum wages),
which, in turn, help them comply with certain standards (such as labor standards). In any case, we expect
a positive correlation between the direct and indirect measures of standards.
    In the following section, we discuss ten types of policies that target: (i) investment and trade flows, (ii)
the business climate including financial and labor markets, (iii) as well as the quality of output and input
factors. While (i) and (ii) target more GVC entry and stronger GVC integration, (iii) focuses more directly
on upgrading. We focus on a country’s infrastructure, connectivity, investment and trade policy, business
climate and institutions, financial and labor markets, education and skills, product standards and
innovation, labor standards, social standards, and environmental standards. Although the focus of the
literature review is on spillovers from FDI, many host-country characteristics can also be expected to lead
to spillovers from GVC participation through other forms (for example, selling, buying, and nonequity
modes of investment).

2.3. The Mediating Role of Policies That Target Investment and Trade Flows

   Infrastructure and Connectivity
   While we are unaware of studies that explicitly take into account a country’s quality of infrastructure
and connectivity when assessing FDI spillovers or broader GVC effects on economic upgrading, it can be
expected to influence the predictability, reliability, and timeliness in GVCs (WEF 2013). Many countries
cannot join certain stages of GVCs because of their inability to meet requirements for timely production
and delivery. A day of delay in exporting has a tariff equivalent of 1 percent or more for time-sensitive
products (Hummels and others 2007). Slow and unpredictable land transport keeps most of Sub-Saharan
Africa out of the electronics value chain (Christ and Ferrantino 2011). Sellers are often willing to pay more
for airfreight. Delays in GVCs also create uncertainty, inhibiting countries from participating in GVCs for
goods such as electronics or fruits and vegetables (Arvis, Raballand, and Marteau 2010).




                                                       8
    Regarding cost reduction, GVCs have changed the perspective on traditional barriers to trade, such as
tariffs. Some recent studies suggest that reducing supply-chain barriers to trade—border administration,
transport and communications infrastructure, and related services—would have greater impact on the
growth of GDP and trade than the complete elimination of tariffs. Cutting supply-chain barriers to trade
could increase GDP by nearly 5 percent and trade by 5 percent, against less than 1 percent and 10 percent,
respectively, for complete tariff removal (WEF 2013). Developing countries would be the main
benefactors of trade facilitation. Transport costs, according to developing-country suppliers, remain the
main obstacle to entering, establishing, or moving up in GVCs (OECD-WTO 2013).
    Policy matters for logistics performance, whether for infrastructure investment and operation or for
regulatory matters, including trade facilitation at the border. Improving the quality of infrastructure and
promoting international connectivity touches on several dimensions: tightening forward and backward
links within GVCs by securing the flow and lowering the costs of inputs and outputs, increasing speed, and
reducing uncertainty. Therefore, higher quality infrastructure and better connectivity at the border can
have a positive impact on GVC integration.

   Investment and Trade Policy
   Investment policy and promotion mediate spillovers by helping attract foreign investment in general
(the focus of most export promotion efforts), and by encouraging policies to promote spillovers (much
less common). Investment promotion contributes to bringing in firms that should have higher spillover
potential, given their quality and technology position (Harding and Javorcik 2012). For example, positive
FDI spillovers in Chinese manufacturing are higher from foreign firms enjoying investment subsidies and
exemptions from value-added taxes relative to spillovers from foreign firms that do not reap those
benefits (Du, Harrison, and Jefferson 2011). Drivers of investment, particularly the protection of foreign
assets, have a large influence on a country’s location attractiveness for foreign investo rs. Those drivers
affect a country’s participation in GVCs, regardless of their governance structure.
    Special Economic Zones (SEZs) are a special case for investor attraction, which may affect GVC
spillovers. Local Chinese manufacturing firms in SEZs have smaller productivity spillovers from FDI than
do nonSEZ domestic firms (Abraham, Konings, and Slootmaekers 2010). That may occur because most
SEZs focus on export processing combined with a high percentage of imported inputs, which limits the
potential for FDI because demand for local suppliers is constrained. Moreover, the spatial and legal
structures that govern SEZs often inhibit their integration with the local economy.
   A country’s trade policy shapes the amount and type of foreign investment. Spillovers are larger in
countries that are more open to trade. A country’s trade policy regime is related to its capacity to attract
foreign firms because foreign investors are less constrained by the size and efficiency of the local market
(Crespo and Fontoura 2007). Moreover, foreign investors in an open trade setting are more integrated
globally and thus tend to adopt the newest technologies. One can also argue, however, that foreign
investors in an outward-oriented trade policy regime tend to focus more on international distribution and
marketing and less on new technologies (Meyer and Sinani 2009).
   Trade policy also affects domestic firms. In an open trade regime, domestic firms are more exposed to
international competitive pressures, which will prepare them to absorb spillovers (Havranek and Irsova
2011). Moreover, a country’s trade policy also affects the likelihood of domestic firms becoming exporters
and LBE. Although the effect of exporting on the domestic firms’ absorptive capacities is ambiguous,
exporting clearly moderates the direction and extent of FDI spillovers. FDI spillovers are larger in countries
that are more open to trade (Havranek and Irsova 2011, Farole and Winkler 2014). For China, horizontal
and vertical spillover effects from FDI are negative when final goods and input tariffs are higher (Du,
Harrison, and Jefferson 2011).


                                                      9
2.4. The Mediating Role of Policies That Target Business Climate

   Business Climate and Institutions
   A country’s business climate—particularly the protection of foreign assets—has a large influence on a
country’s location attractiveness for foreign investors. Those drivers affect a country’s participation in
GVCs, regardless of their governance structure. The strength of intellectual property rights in a host
country, for example, may help attract high-quality foreign investment initially and, therefore, create the
potential for FDI spillovers (Gorodnichenko, Svejnar, and Terrell 2007; Javorcik 2004b). But some people
argue that although strong intellectual property rights may help attract such investment and allow
knowledge and technology to be transferred to the affiliate, they may also hinder the transmission of
those advances beyond the local market (Havranek and Irsova 2011).
    Competitive pressures from GVC participation might be lower if the local firm already faces a higher
level of competition at the sectoral level. Local firms in competitive sectors might have a lower incentive
to improve, resulting in lower benefits from GVC spillovers. Sinani and Meyer (2004) confirmed that more
sectoral competition, both of foreign firms and of domestic firms, has a positive impact on the growth of
sales on local firms in Estonia, but does not control for the interaction of competition with FDI. On the
other hand, local firms could be better equipped to benefit from positive demonstration effects. Barrios
and Strobl (2002) found that less sectoral competition, captured by a higher Hirschman-Herfindahl index,
increases the productivity gains from FDI for Spain, pointing towards a lower incentive to improve.
    Weak institutions—including corruption, red tape, intellectual property rights, and contract
enforcement—are linked to protection for local firms, network-driven business practices, and inefficient
markets, which, possibly, constrains foreign investors from fully exploiting their competitive advantages.
That drawback may influence the type of FDI and nonequity mode of investment that is initially attracted,
as well as domestic firms’ absorptive capacities. Empirical evidence is mixed. Firm-level data for 17
emerging countries, during 2002–05, reveal no evidence that the degree of corruption or red tape affects
the extent of FDI spillovers (Gorodnichenko, Svejnar, and Terrell 2007). Evidence also shows that a
country’s transparency has a U-shaped effect on FDI spillovers: countries with a medium level of
transparency benefit least from FDI, whereas countries with low and high levels show stronger FDI
spillovers (Meyer and Sinani 2009).

   Financial and Labor Markets
    Financial markets in developing countries may also be a factor in absorption of GVC spillovers (Alfaro
and others 2010). Multinationals can have an ambiguous impact on access to finance for local firms: they
may ease such access by bringing in scarce capital to developing countries; but if multinationals borrow
locally, they may increase local firms’ financing constraints (Harrison, Love, and McMillan 2004). That, in
turn, can influence local firms’ absorptive capacity, and well-developed markets may facilitate domestic
firms’ absorptive capacity links (Aggarwal, Milner, and Riaño 2011).
   Low wages may be a way for countries to enter GVCs. According to firm surveys, costs (production,
labor, transport, investment) and tax incentives are major drivers of lead firms’ decisions to invest or to
source production in developing countries. Indeed, wage differentials have been primary drivers of the
globalization of production. But costs encompass a wide range of drivers and the goal should be higher
labor productivity and higher wages, allowing the country to remain cost competitive despite rising living
standards (Taglioni and Winkler 2016).
   Labor market regulations may influence the effect of GVC integration on domestic firms through
various channels. Higher absolute and relative labor market flexibility than in the foreign investor’s home



                                                    10
country seems to have a positive effect on the chances of securing initial foreign investment (Javorcik and
Spatareanu 2005). Labor market regulations, and, in particular, wage constraints, can affect skills in a firm,
hence their absorptive capacity (Hale and Long 2011). Overly rigid labor markets can reduce the likelihood
of labor turnover and GVC spillovers. Conversely, overly flexible labor markets may generate frequent
labor turnover, which reduces the time for domestic workers to acquire skills and knowledge from foreign
firms.

2.5. The Mediating Role of Policies That Target the Quality and Conditions of Output and Input Factors

   Education and Skills
    Economic upgrading is often about “creating the knowledge behind the product,” but a country might
not be able to upgrade because of barriers in other stages of production, such as services, or skills
shortages. For example, moving out of production into R&D, engineering, or marketing services requires
flexibility in trading those services, including the temporary movement of service providers. It may also
require establishing and enforcing intellectual property rights. Economic upgrading also requires new
skills and knowledge, either by increasing the skill content of a country’s activities (and thus workforce)
or by developing competencies in niche market segments (Humphrey and Schmitz 2002).
    Education and skills influence the share of human capital in firms and are particularly important for
expanding GVC participation (Farole and Winkler 2014). Meyer and Sinani (2009) show evidence that the
share of workers with tertiary education significantly affects FDI spillovers. This relationship takes a U-
shaped form, that is, only below or above certain threshold levels of human capital does the extent of
spillovers increase (Meyer and Sinani 2009). Tytell and Yudaeva (2007) found for Romania that
productivity spillovers from FDI in manufacturing are significantly lower in regions with a low share of
education.

   Product Standards and Innovation
   Signaling the quality of a product has become increasingly difficult for suppliers in developing countries
(Mangelsdorf and others 2012). Product standards and certification schemes have proliferated as a means
to verify quality, safety, and compatibility to buyers. However, product standards can have a dual impact
on costs, and therefore trade. Complying with such standards may impose additional fixed (or even
variable) costs on exporters, as they adapt production to meet one, or in some cases many, idiosyncratic
market or buyer standards. Certification and auditing can generate additional costs (Portugal and others
2009). The possibility of increased costs for production and compliance has led to concerns in developing
countries over technical barriers to trade, market access, and competitiveness (Henson and Jaffe 2008).
   In addition, standards compliance of local suppliers could lead to lower technology spillovers through
GVC participation, as their catch-up potential is smaller. This could happen in the form of reduced
assistance from international buyers, reduced reliance on inputs sourced internationally with a high
knowledge or technology content, or reduced competition, demonstration, training, and labor turnover
effects. However, it is important to stress that the overall benefits for a country are not smaller per se,
but can be attributed to both standards adoption and GVC integration.
   Firms that adopt product standards can also benefit. Standards provide for technical compatibility and
interoperability, allowing one country’s inputs to be used in multiple markets, generating economies of
scale and economies of learning in production (Tippman and Racine 2013). This should lead to growing
demand via more or stronger links to international buyers and an increased location attractiveness for




                                                     11
foreign investors. By conveying best practices, product standards can improve the overall safety of
products on the market and lead to technological upgrading and innovation.
   In a study of the differentiated impact of standards harmonization in the electronics sector, for
instance, Portugal and others (2009) found a positive and robust relationship between international
harmonization and firms’ trade performance. Meyer and Sinani (2009), for instance, showed evidence
that innovation (an indirect measure of product standards), measured as the R&D intensity in the private
sector and the number of patents per billion U.S. dollars granted to host country residents, significantly
affects FDI spillovers. This relationship takes a U-shaped form, that is, only below or above certain
threshold levels does the extent of spillovers increase. Yet, studies have revealed mixed results and
endogeneity issues across and within sectors, providing ample evidence for a vibrant debate.
   As production becomes increasingly fragmented globally, exporters face shorter time periods in which
to exploit their comparative advantage. Whether through the adoption and certification of product
standards or through knowledge and technology spillovers, early adopters are likely to benefit most
(Rogers 1983; Francesconi and Ruben 2014). A study of the impact of U.K. supermarket standards on
horticultural imports from Africa showed that success in the fresh vegetables GVC depended on meeting
and exceeding regulatory requirements, and that even the most innovative of suppliers enjoyed only
short-lived first-mover advantages (Dolan and Humphrey, 2000).

   Labor Standards
   Higher labor standards in a country influence GVC spillovers via forward links. On the one hand,
domestic suppliers’ compliance with labor standards could increase the demand for goods and services
from foreign investors or international buyers whose reputation among their final clients depends on
standards compliance of their suppliers; on the other hand, higher labor standards (such as minimum
wages) could increase labor costs and thus the costs of inputs sold to international buyers, while not
necessarily increasing the quality of those inputs, which could negatively affect a country’s attractiveness.
Oka (2012), for example, examined the link between labor standards and supplier competitiveness and
found that better labor standard compliance increases the supplier’s likelihood of retaining buyers that
are reputation-conscious, but does not drive buyers’ sourcing decisions. Other criteria such as price,
quality, and delivery time matter more strongly.
    In order to compensate for increased labor costs, local firms have two basic options: (1) they may try
to save costs elsewhere, for example by sourcing inputs at lower costs internationally that they previously
performed in-house. While this increases backward linkages, the type of inputs are not necessarily more
technology- or knowledge-intensive, thus, positive GVC spillovers are lower. And (2) higher labor
standards may force local firms to become more productive in order to compensate for the increased
labor costs. Mayneris and others (2014), for instance, confirmed that minimum wages increase the
productivity of high-performing firms (due to increased efforts) that may lead to the least-performing
firms’ exit, thus increasing overall productivity.
   If certain labor standards are not the result of international conventions, the impact on GVC spillovers
may be different. Researchers have for decades found that globalization is closely associated with a rise
of female intensity in formal employment—especially in developing countries—mainly due to a high
gender wage gap (Seguino 1997, 2000) and a more flexible female workforce that was easily employed as
casual, contract or part-time labor with little or no benefits (Standing 1989). A study by Tejani and Milberg
(2010), however, found a negative relationship between the growth of female intensity and that of value
added per worker. The authors argue that women have, on average, attained a lower level of skills than
men and thus lose out in terms of employment when economic upgrading occurs.



                                                     12
   Social Standards
   While product and labor standards have become codified, as governmental regulations in many
markets and across most GVCs, suppliers had to adapt to the increasing importance of voluntary
standards. In many instances, voluntary standards have become de facto mandatory obligations and a
commercial imperative (Swann 2010). Their emergence reflects social concerns “unleashed by
globalization” over inadequate government regulation of the social and environmental impacts of
international trade (Mayer and Gereffi 2010). The governance of GVCs is increasingly determined by what
the buyer requires, and not merely what a supplier can offer.
   Higher social standards could increase the demand for goods and services from reputation-conscious
foreign investors or international buyers, but also increase labor costs (for example, due to higher
contributions to unemployment, pension, or health insurance), while not necessarily improving the
quality of those inputs. This could have a positive or negative effect on a country’s attractiveness. Higher
labor costs, in turn, can trigger local firms to save costs, for example, via increased offshoring, or to raise
their productivity levels. The extent of generated spillovers via GVC integration is therefore not clear.
   However, a growing number of studies now show that profits, productivity, and firm survival are all
positively associated with improvements in working conditions (World Bank Group 2015). Several papers
have taken various approaches to try to identify the relationship between firm performance and working
conditions. A discrete-time survival analysis model of 595 Cambodian garment factories by Jetha and
Linsen (2015) found that increased compliance with social protection standards is associated with reduced
odds of factory closure. A survey of management and laborers in the Lao People’s Democratic Republic’s
garment sector finds that failure to increase worker well-being has led to dissatisfaction, high labor
turnover, low productivity, and impaired firms’ opportunities to strengthen participation in garment GVCs
(World Bank 2012).

   Environmental Standards
    Finally, higher environmental standards may lead to growing demand for inputs from foreign investors
or international buyers whose reputation among their final clients depends on standards compliance of
their suppliers. But, while higher environmental standards compliance can raise unit costs forcing local
firms to save costs elsewhere or, alternatively, to raise their productivity levels, it also improves the quality
of products (for example, due to reduced pesticide usage or organic production). In this regard, the
expected mediating effect of environmental standards on GVC spillovers is more similar to that of product
standards.
    To test this hypothesis, Prakash and Potoski (2006) employed a panel of 108 countries over seven years
to investigate whether international trade encourages firms to adopt ISO 14001—the most widely
adopted voluntary environmental standard. For importing countries whose own firms had high levels of
adoption of ISO 14001, exporting firms from other markets showed a significantly increased rate of
adoption of ISO 14001, even after controlling for firms' compliance and pollution histories, as well as
addressing potential endogeneity issues. These findings point to the increasing importance of lead firms
influencing organizational practices in GVCs.
   Most studies in this area focused on environmental standards and their impacts in agribusiness GVCs.
In 2009, the International Institute for Sustainable Development explored impacts of sustainability
standards on the distribution of economic benefits along GVCs (Sexsmith and Potts 2009). The authors
found standards compliance and certification often lead to producer-level price premiums for agricultural
products, but less frequently for certified fisheries and forest markets. Much like product standards, the
costs of certification and indirect compliance costs act as a barrier to small and resource-poor groups.



                                                       13
However, other producers benefit from increased market access and longer-term contracts. Certification
can also lead to improved agroecological practices (Kleeman and Abdulai 2012) and increased revenues,
though studies have shown wide variance, and an emphasis on measuring local context. In one
randomized control trial of households producing certified organic coffee beans in Uganda, for instance,
scheme participation is associated with an increase in net coffee revenue of around 75 percent on
average, equivalent to 12.5 percent of mean (total) household revenue (Bolwig and Gibbon 2009).


3. Data and Empirical Specification

3.1. Empirical Specification

   To capture the effect of GVC participation on the domestic economy and test if countries have been
successful in economic upgrading, we estimate a standard fixed effects model for sector s of country k at
time t of the following form:
         ,, =  +  ,, + ′,, + , + , + , + ,, .             (1)
   We use the level of domestic value added (dva) generated in sector s as our measure of economic
upgrading. Since we are interested in the effects of GVC participation, we use two standard GVC indicators
as proxies for ,, . The first indicator is the amount of foreign value added embodied in exports ( FVAX),
while the second indicator is the amount of domestic value added re-exported by third countries (DVAR).
FVAX quantifies a country’s backward links into GVCs (or GVC integration as a buyer), while DVAR
quantifies a country’s forward links into GVCs (or GVC integration as a seller). We use lagged values to
minimize reverse causality concerns and allow for a delayed response of value added.
    Our choice of domestic value added as measure of economic upgrading allows us to use the full sample
of countries and industries covered by our databases and thus make it an optimal indicator to assess the
effect of GVC related policies in developing economies. In addition, domestic value added combines the
gains for firms (gross profits) and workers alike (total compensation). Finally, it combines factor
productivity improvements and factor employment changes into one variable.
   Alternative measures that might capture other relevant aspects of economic upgrading, such as labor
productivity and TFP, focus on specific subtypes of upgrading, such as skills or process upgrading (see
section 1). Moreover, they would require us to limit the sample size considerably since they are only
available for high-income countries or at a much higher sectoral aggregation. Domestic value added, by
contrast, reflects economic upgrading via better skills, capital, and processes, and therefore represents a
comprehensive upgrading metric.
   However, we have to add, there is a structural relationship between dva and our forward links GVC
measure that might bias the results. By using the lagged relationship this bias should be reduced, though,
and, most importantly, it should not affect the qualitative results obtained with the policy interaction
terms as shown below in equation (2).
   Our set of controls (C) includes the amount of foreign value added for domestic processing (FVADP).4
Here, we are guided by a standard production function of the form:
                                                        ,, =  ∗  ∗ 



4Capital stock and employment data are available for the WIOD sample, which we use for robustness exercises to improve the
reliability of the results. The regressions based on the OECD sample rely on the three two-dimensional fixed effects.



                                                                         14
   Combining labor with capital stock, which is dependent on a country’s technology shifters (A),
generates domestic value added. The technology shifter is assumed to be a function of international trade
and innovation, which is consistent with the trade literature.
   FVADP is a measure of final goods trade to separate a potential positive GVC effect from a simple
positive effect of trade openness. For this, we calculate the amount of foreign value added processed or
consumed domestically. This covers both imports of final goods and intermediate goods assembled and
consumed domestically. As especially the latter part might overlap with GVC trade, we might have a
downward bias in our estimates. However, not controlling for openness would prevent us from separating
the effects of GVC trade and final goods trade.
    Finally, we employ a set of sector-country (, ), country-year (, ), and sector-year (, ) fixed effects
to account for potentially correlated omitted variables and take the natural logarithm of all level variables.
Note that while our technology shifter does not explicitly take into account innovation (for example, R&D
intensity, though, unavailable at the sectoral level for our country sample), we can assume that including
three two-dimensional fixed effects picks up most of the differences in innovation.
   As we are primarily interested in the contribution of country-specific policy variables to economic
upgrading through GVCs, we include an interaction term between a set of national characteristics and our
GVC indicators to equation (1):
   ,, =  +  ,, +   +  ,, ∗  + ′ ,, + , + , + , + ,, .   (2)
    As measures for the national characteristics,  , we employ variables capturing a country’s
infrastructure, connectivity, investment and trade policy, business climate and institutions, financial and
labor markets, skills and education, innovation and product standards, as well as labor, social, and
environmental standards. Due to sometimes incomplete data and to minimize reverse causality, we use
the average over the sample period.
   We repeat this exercise by splitting the sample into three categories based on the World Bank’s income
classification. The categories are low- and lower-middle-, upper-middle-, and high-income countries. As
robustness, we also split the countries into three evenly sized groups based on GDP per capita to avoid
sample size issues. For a country application of the empirical model, see appendix 1.
   It is important to emphasize that our empirical setting does not generate causal estimates on the role
of domestic policies for economic upgrading through GVC integration, but rather provides evidence to
guide future more directed work. A main advantage of this study is its comprehensive nature covering an
extensive part of policy space to detect which policies should be analyzed more closely and which policies
might be of second order. However, we do not claim to expose a causal relationship.

3.2. Data

   GVC Indicators
    To calculate our GVC indicators we rely on the OECD ICIO database, which covers 61 countries, 34
industries, and the years 1995, 2000, 2005, and 2008–11. The advantage of the database compared to
other ICIOs is the extended country coverage, especially regarding low- and middle-income countries. This
is especially important since it allows us to test implicitly if the role of certain policies depends on a
country’s stage of development. Since the average per capita income level in the OECD ICIO database is
significantly below the level of, for instance, the World Input Output Database (WIOD)—a new ICIO
database—differences in significance of certain variables can inform us if a policy is more relevant for
either developing or industrialized countries. As robustness, we will use WIOD since it also records


                                                                            15
employment and capital stock data. They can serve as additional controls to gauge the true effect of GVC
integration.
   For the estimation, we merge the industry coverage of the OECD ICIO database with the WIOD
database to allow for comparability and robustness checks, which leaves us with 29 industries. In addition,
we exclude nontradable industries, so that the sample consists of 20 industries, of which 2 are primary
industries, 13 manufacturing industries, and 5 service industries. For a description on how the variables
are constructed, see appendix 5.

      Policy Variables
   To get a comprehensive picture of the role that policy plays in economic upgrading through GVC
participation, we analyze seven different categories. These areas can be divided into policies targeting
investment and trade flows (categories 1 to 3), the business climate including financial and labor markets
(categories 4 to 6), and the quality of input factors (category 7).
    Infrastructure has four main dimensions: roads, ports, rail lines, and airports. We proxy for the two
latter using the World Development Indicators’ (WDI) rail line coverage (kilometers of rail lines per
person)5 and airfreight volume (value of air cargo as percentage of GDP); the former two are measures
from the World Economic Forum’s (WEF) assessment of road and port infrastructure for the Global
Competitiveness Report. The report is based on business executives' perceptions of their country's port
or road facilities. Data are from the WEF's Executive Opinion Survey and only available from 2006 on, but
no indicators with larger country and time coverage are available. WEF scores range from 1 to 7, with 7
being the optimal value. Finally, for a subset of OECD countries in the WIOD sample, we look at investment
in infrastructure (infrainvest) as percentage of GDP available from OECD Stat.
   Connectivity looks at procedures and controls governing the movement of goods and services across
and within national borders, as well as a country’s ICT infrastructure. It is accounted for by three
categories of the World Bank’s Logistics Performance Index (LPI) (LPI overall, LPI customs, and LPI
logistics), which ranges from 1 to 5 = best. In addition, we include Internet users per 100 inhabitants and
the expected time for exporting (time to export) and importing (time to import) in days by the WDI as
measures of connectivity. The latter two are only available from 2003.
   Investment policy is measured on the investment side by an index of investment freedom by the
Heritage foundation and by FDI inflows as percentage of GDP (FDI inflows) from the WDI. The variable
investment freedom serves as a proxy for investment promotion. The Heritage score ranges from 0 to 100
= highest freedom, and investment freedom measures the ability of individuals and firms to move their
resources in and out of specific activities both internally and across the country’s borders. This variable is
mainly based on official government publications of each country on capital flows and foreign investment.
Trade policy is proxied by a country’s share of exports of goods and services as percentage of GDP
(openness) from the WDI. We also include two measures regarding services trade, namely, its share as
percentage of GDP (services trade) from the WDI, and the Services Trade Restrictiveness Index (STRI OECD)
from the OECD.6 The STRI takes the value from 0 = completely open to 1 = completely closed.
    Business climate and institutions are assessed using six indicators. Property rights (The Heritage
Foundation) covers the functioning of courts. It measures the degree to which a country’s laws protect
private property rights and the degree to which its government enforces those laws. It also assesses the
likelihood that private property will be expropriated and analyzes the independence of the judiciary, the


5   Rail line coverage and the education variable listed below by Barro and Lee (2010) are interpolated to achieve full coverage.
6   For the OECD sample, we use the World Bank’s STRI since it has a larger country coverage.



                                                                 16
existence of corruption within the judiciary, and the ability of individuals and businesses to enforce
contracts. Political stability (World Governance Indicators), which ranges from -2.5 to 2.5 = best, and
corruption (Heritage data based on Transparency International’s Corruption Perceptions Index) take
governance into account, while the doing business frontier gap (WDI, from 2004 on) and domestic
competition and foreign competition estimates (WEF, from 2006 on) refer to the business climate. The
former is based on the regulatory environment for the starting and operation of a local firm and takes
values from 0 to 100 = best. The latter are composite indices concerned with market concentration, anti-
monopolistic policies, investment incentives, and tax policy (domestic) as well as tariffs, nontariff
measures, and investment promotion (foreign).7
    Financial and labor market policy is captured on the financial side by the value of credit given to the
private sector as percentage of GDP (private credit) from the WDI. This quantitative variable is
complemented by an estimate of financial freedom (Heritage), which measures banking efficiency as well
as independence from government control and interference in the financial sector. It relies on various
underlying data sources, including from the International Monetary Fund, OECD, and official government
publications of each country, among others. Labor market policy is examined using Heritage’s labor
freedom index that captures labor market institutions. It includes various aspects of the legal and
regulatory framework of a country’s labor market, such as minimum wages; laws inhibiting layoffs;
severance requirements; and measurable regulatory burdens on hiring, hours, and so forth. The measure
is mainly based on data from the World Bank’s Doing Business study. We also use an index of unit labor
costs (ULC) by the OECD that proxies for a country’s cost competitiveness (base year = 2005). It measures
the average cost of labor per unit of output and is calculated as the ratio of total labor costs to real output.
   Education and skills are represented on the education side by the expected years of schooling (Barro
and Lee 2013), which gives a quantitative measure of the education system. As qualitative measure, we
use an index of educational quality provided by the WEF on the basis of their Executive Opinion Survey.
Regarding skills, we look at the share of workers with a secondary degree, or higher, in the total workforce
(WDI) and the WEF’s index for on-the-job training, which is equally a qualitative survey-based indicator.
   Innovation and product standards are represented on the quality side by the stock of ISO certifications
related to quality management (ISO 9001, 13485, 16949, and 22000) per capita. Innovation is measured
by R&D intensity (WDI), and the WEF’s survey-based Innovation and Technology adoption indices—the
former looks at private and public innovation capacities and spending while the latter measures country-
and firm-level availability of new technologies.
   Labor standards cover basic rights including the WDI’s share of children between 7 to 14 years old in
employment, child labor, share of vulnerable employment, and the share of female workers in the total
workforce, female intensity. In addition, we cover the number of ILO’s basic conventions (that is,
fundamental and governance conventions) signed, complemented with different measures of wage
inequality. We use the ILO’s wage dispersion between the 9th and 5th wage decile, and the OECD’s
minimum wage relative to the median wage.
   Social standards deal with a country’s basic welfare system. We use ILO data on the share of health
expenditure in total government spending, the share of workers contributing to a pension scheme, and
the share of unemployed receiving regular unemployment benefits. Additionally, we assess the role of
total conventions of the ILO signed.




7   WEF’s foreign competition measure could equally be grouped under trade and investment policy.



                                                              17
   Environmental standards are our final category. Here we look at the stock of ISO 14000 certifications
per capita and the number of UNEP conventions signed, complemented with the Food and Agriculture
Organization’s data on pesticide use per 1000, WDI data on the share of renewables in electricity
production and water withdrawals relative to internal resources, and WHO data on air pollution measured
as particulate matter with diameter of 2.5 μm or less in urban areas.


4. Results

4.1. Overall Results

   Focusing first on GVC integration, table 1 shows the results for the full sample of 61 OECD countries
covering the years 1995, 2000, 2005, and 2008–11 (columns 1 and 2) and those for the full sample of 40
WIOD countries covering the period 1995–2011 (columns 3 and 4).8 The production factors labor and
capital significantly increase domestic value added. The same applies to both our trade-related variables
foreign value added for domestic processing (FVADP) and—most importantly—our two GVC measures of
backward (FVAX) and forward links (DVAR). In other words, GVC integration helps increase a country’s
domestic value added and thus fosters economic upgrading

Table 1. Overall impact of GVC participation on economic upgrading
                     (1)               (2)               (3)               (4)
    VARIABLES        DVA               DVA               DVA               DVA
                     OECD                                WIOD
    FVAX             0.0685***                           0.0428***
                     (0.0091)                            (0.0129)
    FVADP            0.252***          0.232***          0.124***          0.142***
                     (0.0268)          (0.0257)          (0.0170)          (0.0207)
    DVAR                               0.217***                            0.157***
                                       (0.0160)                            (0.0377)
    Employment       -                 -                 0.322***          0.273***
                     -                 -                 (0.0598)          (0.0497)
    Capital Stock    -                 -                 0.295***          0.257***
                     -                 -                 (0.0454)          (0.0464)
    Constant         5.869***          5.179***          2.663***          2.564
                     (0.180)           (0.183)           (0.451)           (0.417)
    Observations     7,276             7,284             10,455            10,514
    R-squared        0.852             0.870             0.885             0.894
Sources: OECD ICIO database and WIOD. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. FVAX and DVAR lagged. All level variables in natural logarithms. WIOD sample
values in constant terms.

    Focusing on the OECD sample, a 10 percent increase of GVC integration as a buyer increases domestic
value added by 0.7 percent (column 1). Using the WIOD sample, we similarly observe that a 10 percent
increase of GVC integration as a buyer leads to domestic value added gains of 0.4 percent (column 3). This
is in line with our results in the next sections where robustness exercises using WIOD largely confirm the
estimates obtained with OECD data.
   GVC integration as a seller also substantially increases domestic value added (columns 2 and 4). Note
that the elasticity is higher than those of all other control variables, while it was smaller when using the



8   For the country and industry coverage of the data set, see appendixes 2 to 4.



                                                                 18
amount of foreign value added in exports, indicating that being a seller in GVCs contributes more strongly
to economic upgrading than being a buyer only.
    If we split the sample into the three income groups, low- and lower middle-income, upper middle-
income, and high-income, we find that our overall results are not dependent on the income level. 9 The
only difference we observe is that the coefficient for GVC integration as a buyer is not significant for upper
middle-income countries. However, when we split the sample into three evenly sized groups based on
GDP per capita, the coefficient is significant again pointing to a sample size issue rather than the absence
of an effect.

4.2. Policies That Target Investment and Trade Flows

    Infrastructure
    The following section focuses on policies that target investment and trade flows, in particular, their
timeliness (infrastructure and connectivity), quantity, and quality (investment and trade policy). Table 2
shows the estimates of our interaction terms between the GVC participation measures and the
infrastructure variables.
   We find that a better airfreight infrastructure positively mediates the benefits of GVC integration as a
buyer for value added (column 1). This might reflect the composition of the OECD ICIO country sample
that contains many countries located far from the three major GVC hubs: Germany, Japan, and the U.S.
These countries are likely to depend more strongly on air transport.
   A better road network seems to equally mediate the impact of GVC integration as a buyer on domestic
value added (table 2, column 4). This suggests that GVCs also require good connections to regional
suppliers that enable them to link effectively into GVCs.
   It is interesting to note that concerning forward GVC links, we find that the two infrastructure
components that played no role for the value added gains from backward links now become significant.
That is, both the port and rail networks (table 2, columns 2 and 3) increase economic upgrading through
GVC integration as a seller.
   For the results by income groups, we find that the estimates of GVC integration as a buyer are mainly
driven by low- and high-income countries, while the results of GVC integration as a seller are mainly driven
by upper middle- and high-income countries. The relatively larger significance of the results for high-
income countries could be partially explained by the fact that the sample is twice as big as the low- and
middle-income samples combined.
    To summarize, we find that the role of infrastructure for a country’s upgrading experience through
GVC participation depends on the location of its partners and the type of GVC integration. For instance, if
a country is highly integrated as a seller or a buyer in close geographical proximity to its partner countries,
it benefits from a strong rail and road network. GVC relationships with more remote countries, on the
other hand, require a sufficient port and airfreight infrastructure. To draw country-specific conclusions,
one needs to determine the country’s main GVC partners and their geographical distance, and also
differentiate between the two types of GVC integration (that is, as a buyer or as a seller).




9Due to space constraints, we do not include the results by income group in the paper but they are available from the authors
upon request.



                                                              19
Table 2. The role of infrastructure in economic upgrading through GVCs
                         (1)                (2)                 (3)                 (4)
 VARIABLES               DVA                DVA                 DVA                 DVA
 Backward links
 FVAX                    0.0622***          0.0456***           0.0140              0.0250
                         (0.00975)          (0.0142)            (0.0398)            (0.0294)
 FVADP                   0.253***           0.289***            0.252***            0.252***
                         (0.0269)           (0.0283)            (0.0267)            (0.0267)
 FVAX*Air freight        1.1e+06***
                         (335,790)
 FVAX*Rail                                  2.8e-05
                                            (3.11e-05)
 FVAX*Port                                                      0.0119
                                                                (0.00826)
 FVAX*Road                                                                          0.0101*
                                                                                    (0.0061)
 Constant                5.846***           5.881***            5.935***            6.006***
                         (0.183)            (0.215)             (0.182)             (0.190)
 Observations            7,156              6,346               7,276               7,276
 R-squared               0.855              0.877               0.852               0.852
 Forward links
 DVAR                    0.220***           0.190***            0.119**             0.191***
                         (0.0173)           (0.0203)            (0.0503)            (0.0465)
 FVADP                   0.233***           0.264***            0.231***            0.232***
                         (0.0259)           (0.0274)            (0.0257)            (0.0257)
 DVAR*Air freight        138,451
                         (498,564)
 DVAR*Rail                                  0.0001**
                                            (4.7e-05)
 DVAR*Port                                                      0.0222**
                                                                (0.0097)
 DVAR*Road                                                                          0.0062
                                                                                    (0.0091)
 Constant                5.065***           5.053***            5.186***            5.152***
                         (0.171)            (0.217)             (0.189)             (0.184)
 Observations            7,164              6,347               7,284               7,284
 R-squared               0.872              0.896               0.870               0.870
Source: OECD ICIO database. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. FVAX and DVAR lagged. All level variables in natural logarithms.

   Connectivity
   Table 3 focuses on the role of connectivity. Remarkably, all six variables are significant with the
expected positive sign when we looked at GVC integration as a seller. Better internet coverage and a
higher LPI with regard to customs procedures, logistics, and overall values as well as shorter export and
import times have the capacity to magnify economic upgrading through forward GVC links.
   Regarding GVC integration as a buyer, however, we observe that only higher LPI customs values show
a positive sign (table 3, column 3). This speaks in favor of connectivity being an important factor for
competitiveness of the export sector. Timely, reliable, and efficient customs and other administration
procedures benefit, in particular, domestic value added. Thus, this result highlights a further positive
impact of trade facilitation agreements.




                                                              20
Table 3. The role of connectivity in economic upgrading through GVCs
                              (1)            (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)            (6)
 VARIABLES                    DVA            DVA             DVA             DVA             DVA            DVA
 Backward links
 FVAX                         0.0453**       0.0189          -0.0260         -0.0167         0.0903***      0.0930***
                              (0.0182)       (0.0546)        (0.0491)        (0.0599)        (0.0233)       (0.0210)
 FVADP                        0.253***       0.273***        0.273***        0.273***        0.252***       0.252***
                              (0.0269)       (0.0238)        (0.0238)        (0.0238)        (0.0270)       (0.0271)
 FVAX*Internet                0.0008
                              (0.0005)
 FVAX*LPI logistics                          0.0141
                                             (0.0166)
 FVAX*LPI customs                                            0.0302*
                                                             (0.0158)
 FVAX*LPI overall                                                            0.0251
                                                                             (0.0180)
 FVAX*Time to export                                                                         -0.0013
                                                                                             (0.0014)
 FVAX*Time to import                                                                                        -0.0014
                                                                                                            (0.0012)
 Constant                     5.735***       5.735***        5.863***        5.745***        5.440***       6.150***
                              (0.175)        (0.168)         (0.167)         (0.167)         (0.160)        (0.190)
 Observations                 7,156          7,057           7,057           7,057           7,156          7,156
 R-squared                    0.854          0.859           0.860           0.860           0.854          0.854
 Forward links
 DVAR                         0.190***       0.0666          0.0638          0.0291          0.303***       0.273***
                              (0.0248)       (0.0694)        (0.0638)        (0.0770)        (0.0301)       (0.0259)
 FVADP                        0.232***       0.251***        0.250***        0.250***        0.232***       0.231***
                              (0.0259)       (0.0227)        (0.0227)        (0.0227)        (0.0258)       (0.0260)
 DVAR*Internet                0.0010*
                              (0.0006)
 DVAR*LPI logistics                          0.0513**
                                             (0.0211)
 DVAR*LPI customs                                            0.0550***
                                                             (0.0204)
 DVAR*LPI overall                                                            0.0621***
                                                                             (0.0232)
 DVAR*Time to export                                                                         -0.0053***
                                                                                             (0.0019)
 DVAR*Time to import                                                                                        -0.0033**
                                                                                                            (0.0014)
 Constant                     4.844***       4.671***        4.742***        4.965***        5.059***       5.029***
                              (0.165)        (0.166)         (0.157)         (0.159)         (0.174)        (0.181)
 Observations                 7,164          7,060           7,060           7,060           7,164          7,164
 R-squared                    0.872          0.879           0.879           0.879           0.872          0.872
Source: OECD ICIO database. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. FVAX and DVAR lagged. All level variables in natural logarithms.

   Looking at the income group specific results, we observe again that upper middle and high-income
countries drive these forward links results, but, overall, the results suggest that connectivity is particularly
important for economies that have strong forward links. If these countries want to benefit from GVC
participation, connectivity is an important policy field and must be included in GVC strategies.




                                                              21
   Investment and Trade Policy
   We now move from policies that are mainly focused on improving the timeliness of trade flows within
GVCs (via better infrastructure and connectivity) to policies that target the quantity and quality of trade
and investment flows in a country (via openness and promotion of trade and investment flows).
   Looking at the impact of backward GVC links on economic upgrading (table 4), we find that trade and
investment policies play an important mediating role. On the investment side, we find that both our
qualitative measure of investment freedom (column 1) and our outcome-based measure of FDI inflows
(column 3) positively moderate the effect of GVC integration on domestic value added. This supports the
findings from the literature review that productivity spillovers from FDI are higher when foreign firms
have been targeted by investment promotion efforts (Du, Harrison, and Jefferson 2011; Harding and
Javorcik 2012).
Table 4. The role of trade and investment policies in economic upgrading through GVCs
                                    (1)              (2)               (3)               (4)               (5)
 VARIABLES                          DVA              DVA               DVA               DVA               DVA
 Backward links
 FVAX                               -0.0124          0.0735***         0.0537***         0.0520***         0.0249*
                                    (0.0347)         (0.0263)          (0.0101)          (0.0110)          (0.0142)
 FVADP                              0.271***         0.301***          0.252***          0.252***          0.251***
                                    (0.0239)         (0.0333)          (0.0270)          (0.0270)          (0.0270)
 FVAX*Investment freedom            0.0012**
                                    (0.0006)
 FVAX*STRI WB                                        -0.0005
                                                     (0.0008)
 FVAX*FDI inflows                                                      0.0026***
                                                                       (0.0007)
 FVAX*Services trade                                                                     0.0006***
                                                                                         (0.0002)
 FVAX*Openness                                                                                             0.0004***
                                                                                                           (0.0001)
 Constant                           5.743***         5.742***          5.806***          5.904***          5.949***
                                    (0.165)          (0.240)           (0.190)           (0.185)           (0.192)
 Observations                       7,177            5,390             7,156             7,156             7,156
 R-squared                          0.858            0.874             0.855             0.855             0.855
 Forward links
 DVAR                               0.0943**         0.276***          0.212***          0.209***          0.186***
                                    (0.0468)         (0.0375)          (0.0180)          (0.0198)          (0.0212)
 FVADP                              0.249***         0.279***          0.233***          0.232***          0.231***
                                    (0.0227)         (0.0329)          (0.0259)          (0.0259)          (0.0259)
 DVAR*Investment freedom            0.0020***
                                    (0.0007)
 DVAR*STRI WB                                        -0.0022**
                                                     (0.0010)
 DVAR*FDI inflows                                                      0.0013
                                                                       (0.0010)
 DVAR*Services trade                                                                     0.0004
                                                                                         (0.0004)
 DVAR*Openness                                                                                             0.0003***
                                                                                                           (0.0001)
 Constant                           4.905***         5.068***          5.008***          5.206***          5.085***
                                    (0.162)          (0.264)           (0.184)           (0.190)           (0.180)
 Observations                       7,180            5,391             7,164             7,164             7,164
 R-squared                          0.876            0.891             0.872             0.872             0.872
Source: OECD ICIO database. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. FVAX and DVAR lagged. All level variables in natural logarithms.



                                                                22
   Similarly, we find that a more open and competitive services sector, as measured by the extent of
services trade (column 4), supports economic upgrading. This reveals that access to services inputs is
important for the welfare gains from GVC integration as a buyer. In addition, the interaction term with
overall trade openness shows a positive and significant coefficient (column 5), supporting the finding that
more open economies experience larger value added gains from GVC integration as a buyer. This is in line
with studies showing that trade openness is beneficial for FDI spillovers (Havranek and Irsova 2011, Du,
Harrison, and Jefferson 2011, Farole and Winkler 2014).
    Turning to forward links, we observe a similarly mediating impact of investment and trade policies. We
find significant coefficients for investment freedom, STRI, and trade openness (table 4, columns 1, 2, and
5). This indicates that many of our investment and trade policy measures play a large role for both
accessing foreign inputs (via backward links) and for selling abroad (via forward links).
   As for policies analyzed so far, the results are primarily due to high-income countries, which represent
the majority of the sample. Altogether, we find that trade and investment policy is central for GVC
integration to generate value added increases, especially when targeting the openness and promotion of
trade and investment flows. This policy area should be a key component of every country’s GVC -
integration analysis. The finding emphasizes that standard trade and investment policies remain highly
relevant even in a GVC world.
    Table 5 gives the estimates regarding the mediating role of the business climate and institutions. We
observe that all measures are positive and significant for both types of GVC integration with the exception
of political stability, which becomes insignificant for forward links (column 2). Given the relatively high
weight of developing economies in this sample, we argue that these countries could considerably increase
their value-added gains from GVC integration if they manage to improve their legal system (concerning
contract enforcement and property rights), their governance (as represented by political stability and
absence of corruption), as well as their business climate (measured by the doing business and the
competition indicators). These findings support studies that find that better institutions (Javorcik 2004b,
Gorodnichenko, Svejnar, and Terrell 2007) and more competition (Sinani and Meyer 2004)—are beneficial
for productivity spillovers from FDI.
   Interestingly, we also find that in the case of institutions, the effects are present more evenly across
the three income categories. In particular, they seem to play a larger role of mediating the positive GVC
effects in upper middle-income countries. This policy area should therefore receive particular attention
when discussing the impact of GVC integration for development.
   We conclude that business climate and quality of institutions can multiply the positive relationship
between GVC integration and value added. It is therefore imperative for countries, with currently weak
institutions and a less attractive business climate, to improve their conditions in order to reap the benefits
from GVC participation. Here, we also see a crucial difference between the role of policy for trade in final
goods and trade in value chains. The latter requires a stronger focus on previously considered policies
only relevant for domestic transactions. So, despite the fact that our findings have shown that border
policies—such as trade and investment facilitation—remain important, it is equally central to stress that
the relevance of beyond-the-border measures has increased considerably through the rise of GVCs.




                                                     23
Table 5. The role of business climate and institutions for economic upgrading
                                 (1)            (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)              (6)
   VARIABLES                     DVA            DVA             DVA             DVA             DVA              DVA
   Backward links
   FVAX                          0.0245         0.0623***       0.0183          -0.0330         -0.0798          -0.0854
                                 (0.0244)       (0.0097)        (0.0217)        (0.0551)        (0.0668)         (0.0604)
   FVADP                         0.271***       0.251***        0.271***        0.253***        0.252***         0.250***
                                 (0.0238)       (0.0268)        (0.0237)        (0.0268)        (0.0267)         (0.0269)
   FVAX*Property rights          0.0006*
                                 (0.0004)
   FVAX*Political stability                     0.0178*
                                                (0.0095)
   FVAX*Corruption                                              0.0009**
                                                                (0.0004)
   FVAX*Doing business                                                          0.0015*
                                                                                (0.0008)
   FVAX*Dom. competition                                                                        0.0330**
                                                                                                (0.0147)
   FVAX*For. competition                                                                                         0.0327**
                                                                                                                 (0.0127)
   Constant                      5.741***       5.589***        5.820***        5.780***        5.959***         5.558***
                                 (0.168)        (0.166)         (0.168)         (0.185)         (0.188)          (0.171)
   Observations                  7,177          7,276           7,177           7,156           7,276            7,276
   R-squared                     0.857          0.852           0.858           0.854           0.852            0.853
   Forward links
   DVAR                          0.154***       0.211***        0.176***        -0.0287         -0.132           -0.0733
                                 (0.0338)       (0.0157)        (0.0306)        (0.0664)        (0.0904)         (0.0754)
   FVADP                         0.249***       0.232***        0.249***        0.232***        0.232***         0.231***
                                 (0.0226)       (0.0258)        (0.0225)        (0.0258)        (0.0255)         (0.0257)
   DVAR*Property rights          0.0011**
                                 (0.0005)
   DVAR*Political stability                     0.0154
                                                (0.0137)
   DVAR*Corruption                                              0.0009**
                                                                (0.0004)
   DVAR*Doing business                                                          0.0037***
                                                                                (0.0009)
   DVAR*Dom. competition                                                                        0.0776***
                                                                                                (0.0195)
   DVAR*For. competition                                                                                         0.0603***
                                                                                                                 (0.0158)
   Constant                      4.958***       5.077***        4.701***        5.026***        4.962***         5.187***
                                 (0.159)        (0.185)         (0.152)         (0.175)         (0.181)          (0.184)
   Observations                  7,180          7,284           7,180           7,164           7,284            7,284
   R-squared                     0.876          0.870           0.876           0.873           0.871            0.871
Source: OECD ICIO database. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. FVAX and DVAR lagged. All level variables in natural logarithms.

    Table 6 shows that financial markets mediate economic upgrading through GVC integration as a seller
in the same way. Once again, both measures are positive and significant (columns 1 and 2), which indicates
that this policy area is relevant and independent of the type of GVC integration that a country pursues.
   Looking at the results for the role of labor market policy, a very similar picture emerges. The estimates
consistently show that, for GVC integration as a buyer, higher unit labor costs can limit economic
upgrading through GVCs (table 6, column 3), supporting studies that point to wage differentials as primary
drivers of the globalization of production. Labor freedom is equally positive and significant (table 6,


                                                              24
column 4), which indicates that a less regulated labor market can increase the effects on domestic value
added. This is broadly in line with the channels discussed in section 2.1. The positive effects from flexible
labor markets arise from increased labor market turnover, which facilitates spillovers from knowledge
embodied in foreign value added, supporting the general findings by Javorcik and Spatareanu (2005) and
Hale and Long (2011).

Table 6. The role of financial and labor market policies for economic upgrading through GVCs
                                         (1)                 (2)                (3)                 (4)
          VARIABLES                      DVA                 DVA                DVA                 DVA
          Backward links
          FVAX                           -0.0033             0.0470***          0.128***            -0.0016
                                         (0.0366)            (0.0161)           (0.0470)            (0.0387)
          FVADP                          0.271***            0.252***           0.220***            0.271***
                                         (0.0240)            (0.0270)           0.128***            -0.0016
          FVAX*Financial freedom         0.0011*
                                         (0.0006)
          FVAX*Private Credit                                0.0003*
                                                             (0.0002)
          FVAX*ULC                                                              -0.0008**
                                                                                (0.0003)
          FVAX*Labor freedom                                                                        0.0010*
                                                                                                    (0.0006)
          Constant                       5.748***            5.624***           5.840***            5.711***
                                         (0.164)             (0.169)            (0.379)             (0.161)
          Observations                   7,177               7,156              3,093               7,177
          R-squared                      0.858               0.854              0.650               0.858
          Forward links
          DVAR                           0.0832              0.189***           0.275***            0.0962**
                                         (0.0526)            (0.0265)           (0.0638)            (0.0464)
          FVADP                          0.249***            0.232***           0.210***            0.249***
                                         (0.0229)            (0.0259)           (0.0292)            (0.0225)
          DVAR*Financial freedom         0.0023**
                                         (0.0009)
          DVAR*Private Credit                                0.0004*
                                                             (0.0002)
          DVAR*ULC                                                              -0.0008**
                                                                                (0.0004)
          DVAR*Labor freedom                                                                        0.0020***
                                                                                                    (0.0007)
          Constant                       4.874***            4.986***           5.230***            5.087***
                                         (0.155)             (0.173)            (0.428)             (0.166)
          Observations                   7,180               7,164              3,093               7,180
          R-squared                      0.877               0.872              0.678               0.876
Source: OECD ICIO database. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. FVAX and DVAR lagged. All level variables in natural logarithms.

    Regarding forward links, we find positive and significant mediating effects of lower unit labor cost, and
more flexible labor markets from GVC integration as a seller in the OECD sample (table 6, columns 3 and
4). A potential explanation is that lower labor unit costs increase the competitiveness of sellers in GVCs,
while higher labor market flexibility allows sellers to react faster to the changing demands of their
customers in the value chain.
  Income group specific results, again, suggest that financial and labor market policies work as facilitators
mainly in high-income countries, but, in summary, the results suggest that financial and labor market



                                                              25
policies are also important factors to consider for countries trying to generate economic upgrading
through GVC participation. In line with our results on business climate and institutions, such beyond-the-
border policies are a vital part of successful GVC-integration strategy.

4.3. Policies That Target the Quality and Condition of Input and Output Factors

   Education and Skills
    Finally, we focus on policies that affect the quality and condition of input and output factors and
directly focusing on economic upgrading. We start by examining the role of education and skills—a policy
area that is important for absorptive capacity and competitiveness in international markets. For instance,
to benefit from technology embodied in foreign value added that enters a country through backward
links, the domestic workforce needs to be sufficiently trained and educated. Similarly, a skilled and
educated workforce can produce more efficiently and thus makes a country more competitive for GVC
integration as a seller.
   Table 7 shows that competitiveness channels seem to be more relevant for economic upgrading
through GVCs. Looking at backward links, we find that only educational quality seem to have a mediating
impact (column 3), while the remaining variables are positive but not statistically significant.
   The picture for GVC integration, as a seller, is quite different. Here, all variables show a facilitating
effect on domestic value added. This supportive role of education confirms the findings by various studies
on FDI spillovers (Tytell and Yudaeva 2007, Meyer and Sinani 2009, Farole and Winkler 2014), though the
results are significant, as usual, primarily for high-income countries.
   Nevertheless, we can conclude that this policy area is a relevant mediator for economic upgrading.
Even if the gains from improvements in this field might mainly accrue through one type of GVC integration,
countries need to take education and skills into consideration when reviewing their GVC strategies.

   Product Standards and Innovation
    Looking at quality and innovation, we observe a very similar pattern to education and skills. The results
in table 8 show that this policy area is particularly relevant for economic upgrading through GVC
integration as a seller. All four proxies are positive and significant, emphasizing the impact on
competitiveness, and supporting the findings of Portugal and others (2009) and Meyer and Sinani (2009).
An additional channel to explain the special relevance of forward links that arises with respect to our
measure of quality certifications could be signaling. Foreign customers may rely on internationally normed
standards to assess a product’s quality. This removes uncertainty and makes products more attractive
internationally, which reflects in the strong and consistent results for forward links.
    Technology adoption and a country’s overall innovative environment are also positively associated
with economic upgrading through backward links (table 8, columns 3 and 4). This emphasizes that the
importance of absorptive capacity for GVC-related spillovers should never be underestimated. Only if
countries are able to adequately use and exploit technology embedded in foreign value added, they may
fully reap the gains from GVC integration.
    Interestingly, here we observe that the upper middle-income category causes the mediating effect for
GVC integration as a buyer. This means innovation as a second major area—apart from the business
climate and institutions—matters for developing economies, even if it mainly applies to wealthier
developing economies.




                                                     26
Table 7. The role of education and skills for economic upgrading through GVCs
                                         (1)                 (2)                (3)                 (4)
          VARIABLES                      DVA                 DVA                DVA                 DVA
          Backward links
          FVAX                           0.0411              0.0235             -0.0313             -0.0118
                                         (0.0346)            (0.0298)           (0.0506)            (0.0542)
          FVADP                          0.252***            0.273***           0.2510***           0.2523***
                                         (0.0268)            (0.0265)           (0.0267)            (0.0268)
          FVAX*Schooling                 0.0033
                                         (0.0039)
          FVAX*Secondary degree                              0.0006
                                                             (0.0004)
          FVAX*Educ. Quality                                                    0.0223**
                                                                                (0.0110)
          FVAX*Training                                                                             0.0185
                                                                                                    (0.0121)
          Constant                       6.135***            5.603***           5.9181***           5.8125***
                                         (0.189)             (0.182)            (0.1819)            (0.1847)
          Observations                   7,276               6,819              7,276               7,276
          R-squared                      0.852               0.850              0.853               0.852
          Forward links
          DVAR                           0.0888**            0.106***           0.0436              0.0777
                                         (0.0437)            (0.0387)           (0.0630)            (0.0804)
          FVADP                          0.232***            0.247***           0.2313***           0.2329***
                                         (0.0258)            (0.0256)           (0.0257)            (0.0257)
          DVAR*Schooling                 0.0152***
                                         (0.0053)
          DVAR*Secondary degree                              0.0020***
                                                             (0.0006)
          DVAR*Educ. Quality                                                    0.0387***
                                                                                (0.0139)
          DVAR* Training                                                                            0.0319*
                                                                                                    (0.0180)
          Constant                       4.974***            4.828***           4.9067***           5.0618***
                                         (0.177)             (0.190)            (0.1821)            (0.1825)
          Observations                   7,284               6,822              7,284               7,284
          R-squared                      0.870               0.871              0.870               0.870
Source: OECD ICIO database. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. FVAX and DVAR lagged. All level variables in natural logarithms.

   Labor Standards
    For our last three policy measures, we focus exclusively on the condition of inputs and output factors.
This means we look at indicators that differentiate a country’s products based on specific standards in
production. As a result, we expect on the one hand that the absorptive capacity channel is likely to become
less prominent since our indicators do not necessarily look at the quality of input factors, as was done in
the previous section. On the other hand, we expect these policy areas to matter much more for forward
links through signaling effects.
    Table 9 on the role of labor standards confirms this hypothesis. Such standards do not seem to affect
economic upgrading through GVC integration as a buyer. This might in fact be an interesting result in itself.
It shows that, despite their often cost-increasing nature, there is no evidence on an upgrading-preventing
effect either. Therefore, a race to the bottom in terms of labor standards is not justified from a GVC
perspective.




                                                              27
Table 8. The role of quality and innovation for economic upgrading through GVCs
                                         (1)                 (2)                (3)                 (4)
          VARIABLES                      DVA                 DVA                DVA                 DVA
          Backward links
          FVAX                           0.0595***           0.0603***          -0.0684             0.0029
                                         (0.0123)            (0.0129)           (0.0759)            (0.0400)
          FVADP                          0.252***            0.253***           0.252***            0.252***
                                         (0.0269)            (0.0268)           (0.0268)            (0.0268)
          FVAX*Quality ISOs              4.5e-06
                                         (3.7e-06)
          FVAX*R&D intensity                                 0.0086
                                                             (0.0083)
          FVAX*Technology adoption                                              0.0265*
                                                                                (0.0145)
          FVAX*Innovation index                                                                     0.0176*
                                                                                                    (0.0101)
          Constant                       5.843***            5.775***           5.612***            5.847***
                                         (0.178)             (0.180)            (0.177)             (0.185)
          Observations                   7,276               7,276              7,276               7,276
          R-squared                      0.852               0.852              0.852               0.852
          Forward links
          DVAR                           0.183***            0.191***           -0.0062             0.113**
                                         (0.0177)            (0.0200)           (0.111)             (0.0571)
          FVADP                          0.232***            0.233***           0.233***            0.233***
                                         (0.0258)            (0.0257)           (0.0257)            (0.0257)
          DVAR*Quality ISOs              1.7e-05***
                                         (5.3e-06)
          DVAR*R&D intensity                                 0.0268**
                                                             (0.0117)
          DVAR*Technology adoption                                              0.0427**
                                                                                (0.0210)
          DVAR*Innovation index                                                                     0.0280*
                                                                                                    (0.0143)
          Constant                       4.904***            5.070***           4.923***            4.957***
                                         (0.170)             (0.182)            (0.176)             (0.179)
          Observations                   7,284               7,284              7,284               7,284
          R-squared                      0.870               0.870              0.870               0.870
Source: OECD ICIO database. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. FVAX and DVAR lagged. All level variables in natural logarithms.

   In fact, the evidence suggests a contrary strategy since it shows that labor standards thus promote
economic upgrading through GVC integration as a seller. All six indicators have the expected sign and four
are statistically significant (Basic ILO conventions, vulnerable employment, child labor, and wage
dispersion). Minimum wages in our sample show no mediating effect, thereby rejecting the positive
impact hypothesized by Mayneris and others (2014). Similarly, female intensity in our sample has no
moderating effect, opposing the negative relationship hypothesized by Tejani and Milberg (2010). Finally,
we conclude that raising labor standards is a sound and recommendable strategy for countries that are
engaged in GVCs. Furthermore, the income group specific results show that, not only high, but also upper
middle-income countries benefit from such standards, indicating that their facilitating potential is not
dependent on the stage of development.




                                                              28
Table 9. The role of labor standards for economic upgrading
                                 (1)            (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)              (6)
   VARIABLES                     DVA            DVA             DVA             DVA             DVA              DVA
   Backward links
   FVAX                          0.0877***      0.0734***       0.0627***       0.00286         0.0726           0.0513***
                                 (0.0303)       (0.0142)        (0.0138)        (0.0439)        (0.0835)         (0.0172)
   FVADP                         0.259***       0.272***        0.282***        0.254***        0.268***         0.280***
                                 (0.0276)       (0.0243)        (0.0285)        (0.0269)        (0.0342)         (0.0260)
   FVAX*Basic ILO conv.          -0.0023
                                 (0.0031)
   FVAX*Vulnerable Empl.                        -0.0003
                                                (0.0004)
   FVAX*Child labor                                             -0.0002
                                                                (0.0010)
   FVAX*Female workforce                                                        0.0016
                                                                                (0.0011)
   FVAX*Wage dispersion                                                                         -0.0095
                                                                                                (0.0400)
   FVAX*Minimum wage                                                                                             2.3e-05
                                                                                                                 (2.1e-05)
   Constant                      5.733***       5.532***        5.778***        5.844***        5.676***         5.641***
                                 (0.179)        (0.160)         (0.208)         (0.181)         (0.234)          (0.175)
   Observations                  7,037          6,578           5,147           7,156           2,995            5,502
   R-squared                     0.858          0.855           0.840           0.854           0.870            0.867
   Forward links
   DVAR                          0.102*         0.252***        0.232***        0.156*          0.473***         0.208***
                                 (0.0610)       (0.0231)        (0.0238)        (0.0824)        (0.128)          (0.0271)
   FVADP                         0.239***       0.250***        0.264***        0.233***        0.235***         0.259***
                                 (0.0261)       (0.0234)        (0.0275)        (0.0259)        (0.0298)         (0.0247)
   DVAR*Basic ILO conv.          0.0115*
                                 (0.0061)
   DVAR*Vulnerable Empl.                        -0.0010*
                                                (0.0005)
   DVAR*Child labor                                             -0.0027**
                                                                (0.0012)
   DVAR*Female workforce                                                        0.0016
                                                                                (0.0020)
   DVAR*Wage dispersion                                                                         -0.1200**
                                                                                                (0.0554)
   DVAR*Minimum wage                                                                                             3.2e-05
                                                                                                                 (2.8e-05)
   Constant                      4.899***       4.715***        5.071***        5.162***        4.886***         4.980***
                                 (0.180)        (0.155)         (0.212)         (0.184)         (0.222)          (0.180)
   Observations                  7,045          6,580           5,149           7,164           2,997            5,502
   R-squared                     0.875          0.875           0.861           0.872           0.886            0.886
Source: OECD ICIO database. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. FVAX and DVAR lagged. All level variables in natural logarithms.

   Social Standards
   The identical intuition holds for social standards; table 10 shows that the empirical evidence is in line
with the evidence for labor standards. A basic welfare system, measured through pension and
unemployment insurance proxies, facilitates the positive effects of GVC integration as a seller on domestic
value added (columns 2 and 3); and these effects are not driven by any particular income group. The
positive mediating effect on the selling side supports the findings by Jetha and Linsen (2015) and the
World Bank (2012).



                                                              29
   Similarly, the positive effects of GVC integration as a buyer are not associated with social standards.
Therefore, the conclusion remains the same here—economic and social upgrading through GVC
participation can move hand in hand. In fact, deteriorating social standards can be a stumbling block for
economic upgrading and should be prevented.

Table 10. The role of social standards for economic upgrading through GVCs
                                         (1)                 (2)                (3)                 (4)
          VARIABLES                      DVA                 DVA                DVA                 DVA
          Backward links
          FVAX                           0.0687***           0.0677***          0.0540***           0.0683***
                                         (0.0149)            (0.0130)           (0.0197)            (0.0262)
          FVADP                          0.259***            0.246***           0.275***            0.261***
                                         (0.0276)            (0.0261)           (0.0243)            (0.0278)
          FVAX*Technical ILO conv.       -8.6e-05
                                         (0.0003)
          FVAX*Unempl. insurance                             0.0001
                                                             (0.0003)
          FVAX*Pension insurance                                                0.0002
                                                                                (0.0003)
          FVAX*Health expenditure                                                                   -0.0003
                                                                                                    (0.0022)
          Constant                       5.558***            5.781***           5.485***            5.632***
                                         (0.171)             (0.168)            (0.167)             (0.178)
          Observations                   7,037               6,918              6,697               6,917
          R-squared                      0.858               0.858              0.858               0.858
          Forward links
          DVAR                           0.185***            0.186***           0.166***            0.236***
                                         (0.0246)            (0.0207)           (0.0262)            (0.0394)
          FVADP                          0.239***            0.223***           0.253***            0.240***
                                         (0.0264)            (0.0240)           (0.0233)            (0.0267)
          DVAR*Technical ILO conv.       -0.0026
                                         (0.0018)
          DVAR*Unempl. insurance                             0.0012**
                                                             (0.0005)
          DVAR*Pension insurance                                                0.0008**
                                                                                (0.0004)
          DVAR*Health expenditure                                                                   -0.0019
                                                                                                    (0.0031)
          Constant                       4.822***            4.990***           4.617***            5.012***
                                         (0.173)             (0.161)            (0.166)             (0.185)
          Observations                   7,045               6,926              6,700               6,925
          R-squared                      0.875               0.874              0.876               0.875
Source: OECD ICIO database. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. FVAX and DVAR lagged. All level variables in natural logarithms.

   Environmental Standards
    The final policy area we look at considers environmental standards. Here we find a slightly more
differentiated picture. Regarding country-level policies, table 11 indicates a mediating effect for both GVC
integration as a seller and a buyer. High air pollution and extensive water usage have negative and
significant coefficients for backward links (columns 5 and 6); and heavy pesticide use has a negative and
significant coefficient for forward links (column 4). While our firm-level indicator for the stock of ISO
certifications related to environmental protection has the positive and significant sign, only for GVC
integration as a seller. This is in line with what we found for the previous standards and fits the signaling
channel as dominant transmission mechanism between standards and GVC-induced upgrading.



                                                              30
    Finally, as with labor and social standards, the estimates are not due to a specific income group, but
do apply to all. An outlier for the overall results is the negative and significant coefficient for the share of
renewables in electricity generation (column 3). It does not fit the generally mediating role of standards
for economic upgrading through GVCs and, therefore, does not affect the overall very positive conclusion
we can draw with respect to standards.

Table 11. The role of environmental standards for economic upgrading
                                 (1)            (2)             (3)             (4)             (5)              (6)
   VARIABLES                     DVA            DVA             DVA             DVA             DVA              DVA
   Backward links
   FVAX                          0.0555***      0.118**         0.0678***       0.0638***       0.146***         0.0699***
                                 (0.0114)       (0.0504)        (0.0104)        (0.0124)        (0.0515)         (0.00985)
   FVADP                         0.258***       0.254***        0.254***        0.265***        0.252***         0.259***
                                 (0.0276)       (0.0269)        (0.0269)        (0.0237)        (0.0352)         (0.0275)
   FVAX*Environm. ISOs           4.6e-05
                                 (2.9e-05)
   FVAX*UNEP conventions                        -0.0060
                                                (0.0060)
   FVAX*Renewables                                              0.0005
                                                                (0.0017)
   FVAX*Pesticides                                                              -0.0008
                                                                                (0.0019)
   FVAX*Air pollution                                                                           -0.0055**
                                                                                                (0.0027)
   FVAX*Water use                                                                                                -7.2e-05***
                                                                                                                 (2.6e-05)
   Constant                      5.651***       5.937***        5.895***        5.875***        6.131***         5.870***
                                 (0.176)        (0.188)         (0.187)         (0.178)         (0.284)          (0.189)
   Observations                  7,037          7,156           7,156           6,461           3,356            7,037
   R-squared                     0.858          0.854           0.854           0.865           0.850            0.858
   Forward links
   DVAR                          0.187***       0.0914          0.238***        0.264***        0.280***         0.220***
                                 (0.0167)       (0.0823)        (0.0187)        (0.0205)        (0.0575)         (0.0174)
   FVADP                         0.237***       0.234***        0.231***        0.245***        0.226***         0.238***
                                 (0.0266)       (0.0256)        (0.0258)        (0.0228)        (0.0304)         (0.0266)
   DVAR*Environm. ISOs           0.0001***
                                 (4.2e-05)
   DVAR*UNEP conventions                        0.0157
                                                (0.0098)
   DVAR*Renewables                                              -0.0049**
                                                                (0.0022)
   DVAR*Pesticides                                                              -0.0065***
                                                                                (0.0020)
   DVAR*Air pollution                                                                           -0.0015
                                                                                                (0.0029)
   DVAR*Water use                                                                                                -9.5e-05
                                                                                                                 (8.7e-05)
   Constant                      5.314***       5.080***        5.255***        5.030***        5.170***         5.322***
                                 (0.198)        (0.182)         (0.189)         (0.161)         (0.273)          (0.199)
   Observations                  7,045          7,164           7,164           6,464           3,356            7,045
   R-squared                     0.876          0.872           0.872           0.883           0.873            0.875
Source: OECD ICIO database. *** p<0.01, ** p<0.05, * p<0.1.
Notes: Robust standard errors in parentheses. FVAX and DVAR lagged. All level variables in natural logarithms.




                                                              31
4.4. Summary

   Overall, our results highlight the importance of policy for economic upgrading through GVC
integration. While we cannot claim causal evidence, all assessed policy areas consistently show mediating
effects of GVCs and magnify the gains for domestic value added. This holds for policies that affect the
quality and conditions of input and output factors, policies targeting investment and trade flows, and
policies targeting the business climate and institutions, including financial and labor markets. As a result,
strategies for GVC integration need to focus, not only on border measures, but also increasingly on
beyond-the-border measures—if they are to extract the maximum benefits for the integrating country.
   A more detailed analysis shows that several policy areas mediate the gains from GVCs more through
integration as a seller. This holds in particular for connectivity, education, and skills, as well as for
standards. We consider this as a sensible result since the mechanisms behind the positive effects of GVC
integration as a buyer and seller are likely to be different. For instance, backward links might generate
gains by increasing the quality of inputs, while forward links have a direct demand increasing effect for
domestic value added. Naturally, domestic policies can influence the demand for domestic goods more
than the quality of foreign inputs. Our results are in line with such an explanation.
   Finally, we observe that high- and upper middle-income countries drive many of our results. (Notable
exceptions are standards and the business climate and institutions.) We consider the conclusions,
nevertheless, are highly relevant for developing economies. Many high- and upper middle-income
countries have higher levels of GVC integration and it is then evident that they are responsible for a
significant part of our results. However, as low- and lower-middle income countries integrate more and
more into GVCs, we expect that such domestic policies will play an increasing role.


5. Conclusion
   GVCs changed the way we think about trade and its role for development. Initial work on the topic
outlined several ways how GVCs can raise growth and value added through increased specialization,
knowledge spillovers, or terms of trade effects. However, initial comprehensive empirical tests of the
relationship have shown that gains from GVC participation are not self-evident, instead, the effects seem
to be dependent on a set of country- and industry-specific characteristics.
   Our econometric results confirm that GVC integration—both as a buyer and seller—increases domestic
value added, using a large database covering up to 61 countries, 34 industries, and the time period from
1995 to 2011. Interestingly, the results indicate that being a seller (forward links) in GVCs contributes
more strongly to economic upgrading than being a buyer (backward links) only.
   In a second step, we specifically examined the role of national policies, institutions, and standards for
the GVC integration-economic upgrading nexus. We find that the domestic policy environment is indeed
a major catalyst for the effects of GVC participation on domestic value added. It can act as either an
obstacle or a facilitator for economic upgrading in GVCs and should be a key element of a country’s GVC
strategy.
    A more detailed analysis shows that several policy areas mediate the gains from GVCs more through
integration as a seller, which holds in particular for connectivity, education, and skills, as well as for
standards. We consider this as a sensible result since the mechanisms behind the positive effects of GVC
integration as a buyer and seller are likely to be different. For instance, backward links might generate
gains through increasing the quality of inputs, while forward links have a direct-demand increasing effect
for domestic value added. Naturally, domestic policies can influence the demand for domestic goods more
than the quality of foreign inputs—our results are in line with such an explanation.


                                                     32
    Finally, we observe that many of our results are driven by high- and upper-middle-income countries.
Notable exceptions are standards and business climate and institutions. In any case, we consider that the
conclusions are highly relevant for developing economies nonetheless. Many high- and upper-middle-
income countries have higher levels of GVC integration and it is then evident that they are responsible for
a significant part of our results. However, as low- and lower-middle-income countries integrate more and
more into GVCs, we expect that such domestic policies will play an increasing role.
   This source of heterogeneity represents an important area for further research. A better
understanding of the role the type of GVC integration plays allows for the design of more accurate
country-specific GVC strategies. In addition, other sources of heterogeneity should be examined in more
detail. For instance, differences in effects that depend on the stage of development or a country’s
proximity could be highly relevant. Finally, it would be important to complement this work with a
narrower analysis that assesses the role and the transmission channels of each of these policies. While we
shed some light on these issues, more detailed research would be welcome.


    References
Abraham, F., J. Konings, and V. Slootmaekers. 2010. “FDI spillovers in the Chinese manufacturing sector
     Evidence of firm heterogeneity”, Economies of Transition, 18, 143-82.
Agarwal, N., C. Milner, and A. Riaño. 2011. “Credit Constraints and FDI Spillovers in China”, China and
     the World Economy Research Paper Series, No. 21/2011, University of Nottingham.
Alfaro, L., Chanda, A., Kalemli-Ozcan, S., Sayek, S. 2010. “Does foreign direct investment promote
     growth? Exploring the role of financial markets on linkages”. Journal of Development Economics 91
     (2), 242-56.
Amiti, M. and J. Konings. 2007. “Trade Liberalization, Intermediate Inputs, and Productivity: Evidence
     from Indonesia,” American Economic Review 97 (5), 1611-38.
Amiti, M. and S.-J. Wei. 2006. “Service Offshoring, Productivity and Employment: Evidence from the US,”
     CEPR Discussion Paper No. 5475, February 2006.
Amiti, M. and S.-J. Wei. 2009. “Service Offshoring and Productivity: Evidence from the US”, World
     Economy 32(2), 203-20.
Arvis, J.-F., G. Raballand, and J.-F. Marteau. 2010. The Cost of Being Land-locked: Logistics Costs and
     Supply Chain Reliability, Directions in Development Trade No. 55837, Washington, DC: The World
     Bank, 2010.
Baldwin, R., and F. Robert-Nicoud. 2014. “Trade-in-goods and trade-in-tasks: An integrating framework,”
     Journal of International Economics 92(1), 51-62.
Barrios, S. and E. Strobl. 2002. “Foreign direct investment and productivity spillovers: Evidence from the
     Spanish experience,” Review of World Economics 138(3), 459-81.
Barro, R., and J.-W. Lee. 2010. “A New Data Set of Educational Attainment in the World, 1950-2010,”
     Journal of Development Economics 104, 184-198.
Bernard, A. and J. Jensen. 1995. “Exporters, Jobs, and Wages in U.S. Manufacturing: 1976-1987”,
     Brookings Papers on Economic Activity: Microeconomics, 67-119.
Blalock, G. and P. Gertler. 2008. “Welfare gains from Foreign Direct Investment through technology
     transfer to local suppliers”, Journal of International Economics, 74(2): 402-21.
Bolwig, S. and P. Gibbon. 2009. “The Economics of Smallholder Organic Contract Farming in Tropical
     Africa,” World Development, 37(6), 1094-1104.
Borchert, I., B. Gootiiz, and A. Mattoo. 2012. “Guide to the Services Trade Restrictions Database,” World
     Bank Policy Research Working Paper 6108, Washington, DC: The World Bank.




                                                    33
Bulman, D., M. Eden, and H. Nguyen. 2014. “Transitioning from Low-income Growth to High-income
     Growth: Is there a Middle Income Trap?”, Policy Research Working Paper Series 7104, The World
     Bank.
Caves, R. E. 1974. “Multinational firms, competition, and productivity in host-country markets”,
     Economica, 41, 176-93.
Christ, Nannette, and Michael J. Ferrantino. 2011. “Land Transport for Exports: The Effects of Cost, Time,
     and Uncertainty in Sub-Saharan Africa.” World Development, 39(10), 1749-59.
Crespo, N. and M. Fontoura. 2007. “Determinant Factors of FDI Spillovers – What Do We Really Know?”,
     World Development 35, 410-25.
Crino, R. 2008. “Service Offshoring and Productivity in Western Europe,” Economics Bulletin 6, pp. 1-8.
Crino, R. 2012. “Imported inputs and skill upgrading,” Labour Economics, 6: pp. 957-69.
Daveri, F. and C. Jona-Lasino. 2008. “Off-shoring and Productivity Growth in the Italian Manufacturing
     Industries,” Working Paper No.2288, CESIfo, Munich.
Dolan, C. and J. Humphrey. 2000. “Governance and Trade in Fresh Vegetables: The Impact of UK
     Supermarkets on the African Horticulture Industry,” The Journal of Development Studies, 37:2, 147-
     176.
Du L., Harrison A., and G. Jefferson. 2011. “Do Institutions Matter For FDI Spillovers? The Implications Of
     China's Special Characteristics,” NBER Working Paper 16767, February 2011.
Egger, H. and P. Egger. 2006. “International Outsourcing and the Productivity of Low-skilled Labour in
     the EU,” Econonomic Inquiry, 44, 98-108.
Egger, P., M. Pfaffermayr and Y. Wolfmayr-Schnitzer. 2001. “The International Fragmentation of
     Austrian Manufacturing: The Effects of Outsourcing on Productivity and Wages,” North American
     Journal of Economics and Finance, 12, 257-72.
Eichengreen, B., D. Park, and K. Shin. 2013. “Growth Slowdowns Redux: New Evidence on the Middle-
     Income Trap,” NBER Working Paper 18673.
Farole, T. and D. Winkler. 2014. “The Role of Mediating Factors for FDI Spillovers in Developing
     Countries: Evidence from a Global Dataset,” in Farole, T. and D. Winkler (eds.), Making Foreign Direct
     Investment Work for Sub-Saharan Africa: Local Spillovers and Competitiveness in Global Value
     Chains, Washington, DC: The World Bank, 59-86.
Feenstra, R. C. and G. H. Hanson. 1996. “Foreign Investment, Outsourcing and Relative Wages,” in
     Feenstra, R. C., G. M. Grossman, and D. A. Irwin (eds.), Political Economy of Trade Policy: Essays in
     Honor of Jagdish Bhagwati, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 89-128.
Francesconi, G. and R. Ruben. 2014. “Fair Trade’s theory of change: an evaluation based on the
     cooperative life cycle framework and mixed methods,” Journal of Development Effectiveness, 6:3,
     268-83.
Görg, H. and A. Hanley. 2003. “International Outsourcing and Productivity: Evidence from Plant Level
     Data,” Research Paper Series: Globalisation, Productivity and Technology, Research Paper No.
     20/2003 (University of Nottingham).
Görg, H. and E. Strobl. 2001. “Multinational Companies and Productivity Spillovers: A Metaanalysis,”
     Economic Journal, 111(475), F723–F739.
Görg, H., A. Hanley, and E. Strobl. 2008. “Productivity effects of international outsourcing: evidence from
     plant-level data,” Canadian Journal of Economics, 41, 2, 670-88.
Görg, H., and D. Greenaway. 2004. “Much ado about nothing? Do domestic firms really benefit from
     foreign direct investment?”, The World Bank Research Observer, 19(2), 171-97.
Gorodnichenko Y., Svejnar J., and K. Terrell. 2007. “When Does FDI Have Positive Spillovers? Evidence
     from 17 Emerging Market Economies,” IZA Discussion Papers No. 3079, Institute for the Study of
     Labor (IZA).




                                                    34
Griffith, R., Redding, S., and H. Simpson. 2002. “Productivity Convergence and Foreign Ownership at the
      Establishment Level,” Institute for Fiscal Studies Working Paper 22, London.
Grossman, G. M. and E. Helpman. 1991. Innovation and Growth in the Global Economy, Cambridge, MA:
      MIT Press.
Grossman, G. M. and E. Rossi-Hansberg. 2008. “Trading Tasks: A Simple Theory of Offshoring,” American
      Economic Review, 98 (5), 1978-97.
Haddad, M. and A. Harrison. 1993. “Are there positive spillovers from direct foreign investment?
      Evidence from panel data for Morocco”, Journal of Development Economics, 42, 51-74.
Hale, G. and C. Long. 2011. “Did Foreign Direct Investment Put an Upward Pressure on Wages in
      China?”, IMF Economic Review, 59, 404-30
Harding T. and B. Javorcik. 2012. “Foreign Direct Investment and Export Upgrading,” The Review of
      Economics and Statistics, 94, 964-80.
Harrison, A.E., Love, I., and M.S. McMillan. 2004. “Global capital flows and financing constraints,”
      Journal of Development Economics, 75(1), 269–301.
Havranek, T. and Z. Irsova. 2011. “Estimating vertical spillovers from FDI: Why results vary and what the
      true effect is,” Journal of International Economics, 85, 234-44.
Heckscher, Eli F. 1919. “The effect of foreign trade on distribution of income,” Ekonomisk Tidskrift pp
      497-512, reprinted in Ellis H. S., Metzler L. A. (eds.) American Economic Association. Readings in the
      theory of international trade, 272-300, Philadelphia: Blakiston.
Helpman, E. and P. Krugman. 1985. Market Structure and Foreign Trade. Increasing Returns, Imperfect
      Competition, and the International Economy, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Henson, S. and S. Jaffee. 2008. “Understanding Developing Country Strategic Responses to the
      Enhancement of Food Safety Standards,” The World Economy, 31(4), 548-68.
Hummels, D., J. Ishii, and K.-M. Yi. 2001. “The nature and growth of vertical specialization in world
      trade,” Journal of International Economics 54 (1), 75-96.
Hummels, David, Peter Minor, Matthew Reisman, and Erin Endean. 2007. “Calculating Tariff Equivalents
      for Time in Trade,” Technical Report submitted to the U.S. Agency for International Development
      (USAID), Nathan Associates, Arlington, VA.
Humphrey, J. and H. Schmitz. 2002. “How Does Insertion in Global Value Chains Affect Upgrading in
      Industrial Clusters?”, Regional Studies, 36 (9), 1017-27.
Humphrey, J. 2004. “Upgrading in Global Value Chains,” Working Paper 28, Policy Integration
      Department, World Commission on the Social Dimension of Globalization, International Labour
      Office, Geneva.
Ito, K. and K. Tanaka. 2010. “Does Material and Service Offshoring Improve Domestic Productivity?
      Evidence from Japanese Manufacturing Industries,” RIETI Discussion Paper No. 10-E-010.
Javorcik, B. 2004a. “Does Foreign Direct Investment Increase the Productivity of Domestic Firms? In
      Search of Spillovers through Backward Linkages,” American Economic Review, 94(3), 605-27.
Javorcik, B. 2004b. “The composition of foreign direct investment and protection of intellectual property
      rights: evidence from transition economies”, European Economic Review 48 (1), 39-62.
Javorcik, B. and M. Spatareanu. 2005. “Do Foreign Investors Care about Labor Market Regulations?”,
      Review of World Economics, 141(3), 375-403.
Jetha, Q. and J. Linsen. 2015. “Survival of The Fittest – And Most Compliant Evidence on The
      Relationship Between Firm Survival And Social Protection Compliance,” Better Work, Better Work
      Discussion Paper Series: No. 19.
Kleeman, L. and Abdulai, A. 2012. “Organic Certification, Agro-Ecological Practices and Return on
      Investment: Farm Level Evidence from Ghana,” Kiel Institute for the World Economy, Kiel Working
      Papers, 1816.




                                                     35
Krugman, P. R. and A. J. Venables. 1995. “Globalization and the Inequality of Nations,” Quarterly Journal
      of Economics, 110, 857-880.
Kummritz, V. 2016. “Do Global Value Chains Cause Industrial Development?”, CTEI Working Papers 01-
      2016, Centre for Trade and Economic Integration, Graduate Institute Geneva.
Li, B., and Y. Liu. 2015. “Moving Up the Value Chain”, mimeo, Boston University.
Lipsey, R. E., and F. Sjöholm. 2005. “The Impact of Inward FDI on Host Countries: Why Such Different
      Answers?”, In T. H. Moran, E. Graham, and M. Blomström (eds.) Does Foreign Direct Investment
      Promote Development?, 23-43, Washington, D.C.: Peterson Institute for International Economics
      and Center for Global Development.
Mangelsdorf, A., Portugal-Perez, A., and Wilson, S. 2012. “Food Standards and Exports: Evidence from
      China,” World Bank, Policy Research Working Paper 5976.
Mann, C. 2003. “Globalization of IT services and white collar jobs: the next wave of productivity growth”.
      International Economic Policy Briefs, (PB03–11): Institute for International Economics.
Mayer, F. and G. Gereffi. 2010. “Regulation and Economic Globalization: Prospects and Limits of Private
      Governance,” Business and Politics, 12(3), Article 11.
Mayneris, F., Poncet, S. and T. Zhang. 2014. “The Cleansing Effect of Minimum Wage: Minimum Wage
      Rules, Firm Dynamics and Aggregate Productivity in China,” CEPII Working Paper No. 2014-16, CEPII
      Paris.
Melitz, M. 2003. “The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations and Aggregate Industry
      Productivity,” Econometrica, 71(6), 1695-1725.
Meyer K. and E. Sinani. 2009. When and where does foreign direct investment generate positive
      spillovers? A meta-analysis”, Journal of International Business Studies, 40(7), 1075-94.
Michel, B. and F. Rycx. 2011. “Productivity Gains and Spillovers from Offshoring,” CEB Working Paper
      No. 11/018, Centre Emile Bernheim Research Institute in Management Sciences, Solvay Brussels
      School, Economics & Management.
Ohlin, B. 1933. Interregional and international trade. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA.
Oka, C. 2012. “Does Better Labour Standard Compliance Pay? Linking Labour Standard Compliance and
      Supplier Competitiveness,” Better Work Discussion Paper Series: No. 5, Geneva: International
      Labour Office.
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development and World Trade Organization (OECD-WTO).
      2013. “Aid for Trade at a Glance 2013: Linking to Value Chains.” OECD, Paris.
Paus, E. A. and K. P. Gallagher. 2008. “Missing Links: Foreign Investment and Industrial Development in
      Costa Rica and Mexico,” Studies of Comparative International Development, 43, 53-80.
Portugal-Perez, A., Reyes, J., and J. Wilson. 2009. “Beyond the Information Technology Agreement:
      Harmonization of Standards and Trade in Electronics,” World Bank, Washington, DC.
Prakash, A. and M. Potoski. 2006. “Racing to the Bottom? Trade, Environmental Governance, and ISO
      14001,” American Journal of Political Science, 50(2), 350-64.
Pritchett, L. and L. H. Summers. 2014. “Asiaphoria Meets Regression to the Mean,” NBER Working Paper
      20573.
Quast, B. and V. Kummritz. 2015. “decompr: Global Value Chain decomposition in R,” CTEI Working
      Papers 2015-01, Geneva: Centre for Trade and Economic Integration.
Raiser, M. 2014. “Crossing the Threshold to High Income”, in Turkey's Transition: Integration, Inclusion,
      Institutions (Vol. 2), Chapter 8, 245-64.
Rogers, E. 1983 [1962]. Diffusion of Innovations. New York: Free Press.
Samuelson, P. A. 1948. International trade and the equalization of factor prices. Economic Journal,
      58(230), 163-84.




                                                   36
Seguino, S. 1997. “Export-Led Growth and the Persistence of Gender Inequality in the Newly
      Industrialized Countries,” in J. Rives and M. Yousifi (eds.), Economic Dimensions of Gender
      Inequality, Westport, CT: Praeger Publishers.
Seguino, S. 2000. “Accounting for Gender in Asian Economic Growth,” Feminist Economics, 6(3), 27-58.
Sexsmith, K. and J. Potts. 2009. “Voluntary Sustainability Standards and Value Chain Governance: How
      sustainability standards affect the distribution of decision-making power in global value chains,”
      IISD, Background Paper.
Sinani, E. and K. Meyer. 2004. “Spillovers of technology transfer from FDI: the case of Estonia,” Journal
      of Comparative Economics 32(3), 445-66.
Smeets, R. 2008. “Collecting the pieces of the FDI knowledge spillovers puzzle,” World Bank Research
      Observer, 23(2), 107-38.
Standing, G. 1989. “Global Feminization through Flexible Labor,” World Development, 17(7): 1077-95.
Swann, G.. 2010. “International Standards and Trade: A Review of the Empirical Literature”, OECD Trade
      Policy Working Papers, No. 97, OECD Publishing.
Taglioni, D. and D. Winkler. 2016. Making Global Value Chains Work for Development, Washington, DC:
      The World Bank.
Tejani, S. and W. Milberg. 2010. “Industrial Upgrading, Deindustrialization and the Defeminization of
      Manufacturing Employment,” SCEPA Working Paper, New York: The New School.
Tippman, C. and Racine, J. 2013. “The National Quality Infrastructure: A Tool for Competitiveness, Trade,
      and Social Well-being,” Washington, DC: The World Bank.
Topalova, P., and A. Khandelwal. 2011. “Trade Liberalization and Firm Productivity: The Case of India”,
      The Review of Economics and Statistics, 93(3), 995-1009.
Tytell I. and K. Yudaeva. 2007. “The Role of FDI in Eastern Europe and New Independent States: New
      Channels for the Spillover Effect,” in Liebscher K., Christl J., Mooslechner P., Ritzberger-Grünwald D.
      (eds.), Foreign direct investment in Europe: a changing landscape, Edward Elgar, Cheltenham, UK
      and Northampton, MA, USA.
UNCTAD (United Nations Conference on Trade and Development). 2013. World Investment Report
      2013—Global Value Chains: Investment and Trade for Development. Geneva: UNCTAD.
Venables, A. J. 2005. “New Economic Geography,” The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics. Steven N.
      Durlauf and Lawrence E. Blume (eds.), The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics Online, Palgrave
      Macmillan.
Wagner, J. 2007. “Exports and Productivity: A Survey of the Evidence from Firm-level Data,” World
      Economy, 30(1), 60-82.
WEF (World Economic Forum). 2013. “Enabling Trade: Valuing Growth Opportunities,” WEF, Geneva.
Winkler, D. 2010. “Services Offshoring and Its Impact on Productivity and Employment: Evidence from
      Germany, 1995-2006,” World Economy, 33(12), 1672-1701.
World Bank. 2012. Lao PDR - Labor Standards and Productivity in the Garments Export Sector: A Survey
      of Managers and Workers, Washington, DC: The World Bank.
World Bank. 2015. Interwoven: How the Better Work Program Improves Job and Life Quality in the
      Apparel Sector, Washington, DC: The World Bank.
Zi, Y. 2014. “Trade Costs, Global Value Chains and Economic Development,” CTEI Working Papers 2014-
      06, Centre for Trade and Economic Integration, Geneva.




                                                     37
Appendix 1: Country application of the empirical model
   We can apply our model to selected countries and their respective peers to exemplify successful
upgrading experiences and the role policy played in them. We therefore add a third interaction term to
equation (2) to separate country-specific experiences:
    ,, =  +  ,, +  ,, ∗  +  ,, ∗  +  ,, ∗  ∗  + ′ ,, +
, + , + , + ,,                                                                                                                     (3)
   here, peers represents a dummy that is equal to one for a selected country and its peers and zero
otherwise. Peers are countries with a similar income-level or within geographical proximity.
   We can finalize the assessment by testing whether the examined country itself is different from its
peers by reducing the sample to the peer countries and replacing the peers dummy by a dummy equal to
one only for the country under examination (ctry). To avoid multi-collinearity, we use time-varying policy
proxies in this specification:
    ,, =  +  ,, +  ,, ∗ , +  ,, ∗  +  ,, ∗ , ∗  + ′ ,, +
, + , + , + ,,                                                                                                                        (4)




                                                                               38
    Appendix 2: Sources, definitions, and coverage of policy variables
Variable       Source            Definition                           Category          Years       Country coverage
Infrainvest    OECD              Total infrastructure investment (% infrastructure 1995-2011 AUS, AUT, BEL, BGR, CAN, CHE, CZE, DEU,
                                 of GDP)                                                     DNK, ESP, EST, FIN, FRA, GBR, GRC, HRV,
                                                                                             HUN, IND, IRL, ISL, ITA, JPN, KOR, LTU, LUX,
                                                                                             LVA, MEX, MLT, NLD, NOR, NZL, POL, PRT,
                                                                                             ROU, RUS, SVK, SVN, SWE, TUR & USA

Air freight    WDI               Air transport, freight (million ton- infrastructure    1995-2011 Full except TWN
                                 km normalized by GDP)
Rail           WDI               Rail lines (total route-km            infrastructure   1995-2011 Full except TWN, BRN, CRI, CYP, HKG, ISL,
                                 normalized by population and                                     MLT, SGP
                                 intrapolated)
Port           WEF               Quality of port infrastructure, 1-7 infrastructure     2006-2011 Full
                                 (best)
Road           WEF               Quality of roads, 1-7 (best)          infrastructure   2006-2011 Full
Internet       WDI               Internet users (per 100 people)       connectivity     1995-2011 Full except TWN
LPI logistics LPI                Competence and quality of logistics connectivity       2007/10   Full except TWN & BRN
                                 services (1-5=high)
LPI customs LPI                  Efficiency of customs clearance       connectivity     2007/10     Full except TWN & BRN
                                 process (1-5=high)
LPI overall    LPI               Overall (1-5=high)                    connectivity     2007/2010   Full except TWN & BRN
Export time WDI                  Time to export (days)                 connectivity     2005-2011   Full except TWN
Import time WDI                  Time to import (days)                 connectivity     2005-2011   Full except TWN
Investment Heritage              Restrictions imposed on investment investment &        1995-2011   Full except BRN
freedom        foundation        (100=best)                            trade policy
STRI WB        Borchert, Gootiz, Services trade restrictiveness index, investment &     2008/09/10 Full except TWN, BRN, CHE, CYP, EST, HKG,
               and Mattoo        simple mean                           trade policy                HRV, ISL, ISR, LUX, LVA, MLT, NOR, SVK,
               (2012)                                                                              SVN, SGP
FDI inflows    WDI               Foreign direct investment, net        investment &     1995-2011 Full except TWN
                                 inflows (% of GDP)                    trade policy
Services trade WDI               Exports and imports of services (% investment &        2005-2011 Full except TWN
                                 of GDP)                               trade policy
Openness       WDI               Exports and imports of goods and investment &          1995-2011 Full except TWN
                                 services (% of GDP)                   trade policy
Political      WGI               Perceptions on political stability    business clim.   1996-2011 Full
stability                        and absence of violence/terrorism & institutions
                                 (2.5=best)
Corruption     Heritage          Freedom from corruption               business clim.   1995-2011 Full except BRN
               foundation        (100=best)                            & institutions
Property       Heritage          Degree to which a country’s laws business clim.        1995-2011 Full except BRN
rights         foundation        protect private property rights and & institutions
                                 to which its government and
                                 judiciary enforce those laws
                                 (100=best)
Doing          WDI               Ease of doing business distance to business clim.      2004-2011 Full except TWN
business                         frontier (100=best)                   & institutions
Dom.           WEF               Domestic competition, 1-7 (best) business clim.        2006-2011 Full
competition                                                            & institutions
For.           WEF               Foreign competition, 1-7 (best)       business clim.   2006-2011 Full
competition                                                            & institutions
Financial      Heritage          Banking efficiency and                financial        1995-2011 Full except BRN
freedom        foundation        independence from government          development
                                 control / interference (100=best)
Private credit WDI               Domestic credit to private sector (% financial         1995-2011 Full except TWN
                                 of GDP)                               development
Labor          Heritage          Legal and regulatory framework of labor markets        1995-2011 Full except BRN
freedom        foundation        a country’s labor market (100=best)




                                                                       39
ULC             OECD           Unit labor cost index (2005=100)       labor markets 2001-2011 AUS, AUT, BEL, CAN, CZE, DEU, DNK, ESP,
                                                                                              EST, FIN, FRA, GBR, GRC, HUN, IRL, ISR, ITA,
                                                                                              JPN, KOR, LTU, LUX, MEX, NLD, NOR, NZL,
                                                                                              POL, PRT, SVK, SVN, SWE & USA

Female labor WDI               Share of females in the workforce      labor markets   1995-2011 Full except TWN
Education    Barro and Lee     Expected Years of Schooling            education and   1995-2010 Full
             (2010)            (intrapolated)                         skills
Secondary    WDI               Share of workers with secondary        education and   1995-2011 Full except TWN, BRN, VNM & CHN
degree                         degree or higher in the workforce      skills
Educational WEF                Survey-based index of educational      education and   2006-2011 Full
Quality                        quality, 1-7(best)                     skills
On-the-job   WEF               Survey-based index of availability     education and   2006-2011 Full
training                       and quality of on-the-job training,    skills
                               1-7(best)
Quality ISOs    ISO            Stock of reported ISO certifications   quality and     1995-2011 Full
                               related to quality management per      innovation
                               capita
R&D             WDI            Research and development               quality and     1995-2011 Full except BRN, KHM & VNM
                               expenditure (% of GDP)                 innovation
Technology      WEF            Index on technology adoption, 1-7      quality and     2006-2011 Full
adoption                       (best)                                 innovation
Innovation      WEF            Index on innovation environment,       quality and     2006-2011 Full
                               1-7(best)                              innovation
Child labor     WDI            Children 7-14 in                       labor           1995-2011 Full except TWN
                               employment/Children 7-14               standards
Vulnerable      WDI            Vulnerable employment, % of total      labor           1995-2011 Full except TWN
employment                     employment                             standards
Basic ILO       ILO            Fundamental and governance ILO         labor           1995-2011 Full
conventions                    conventions signed                     standards
Female          WDI            Share of females in the workforce      labor           1995-2011 Full except TWN
workforce                                                             standards
Minimum         OECD           Minimum relative to median wage        labor           1995-2011 28 middle- and high-income countries
wage                           of full-time workers                   standards
Wage            ILO            Earnings dispersion among              labor           One year   25 countries across all income levels
dispersion                     employees (Decile 9/Decile 5)          standards
Total ILO       ILO            Total ILO conventions signed           social          1995-2011 Full
conventions                                                           standards
Health          ILO            Public health expenditure/General      social          2000-2011 Full except TWN, BRN
                               government expenditure                 standards
Pension         ILO            Active contributors to a pension       social          One year   56 countries
                               scheme/labor force                     standards
Unemploy-       ILO            Share of unemployed receiving          social          One year   Full except TWN, BRN
ment                           regular unemployment benefits          standards
Environ-        ISO            ISO 14000 certifications per capita    environmental   1995-2011 Full
mental ISOs                                                           standards
UNEP            UNEP           Number of elementary Unep              environmental   1995-2011 Full
conventions                    conventions signed (0-11)              standards
Pesticides      FAO            Pesticide use in Arable Land &         environmental   One year   54 countries
                               Permanent Crops (tonnes per 1000       standards
                               Ha)
Air pollution   WHO            Particulate matter with diameter of    environmental One year  28 low- and middle-income countries
                               2.5 μm or less in urban areas          standards
Renewables      WDI            Electricity production from            environmental 1995-2011 Full except TWN
                               renewables excl. hydro (% of total)    standards
Water           WDI            Annual freshwater withdrawals, %       environmental One year  Full except TWN
                               of internal resources                  standards

      Note: LPI = Logistics Performance Index, WDI = World Development Indicators, WEF = World Economic Forum, WGI = World
      Governance Indicators.




                                                                      40
Appendix 3: Country coverage
 ISO Country               Income group        Income group ISO Country                 Income group 2011 Income
 aus Australia             2011
                           HI: OECD            1995
                                               HI: OECD     sau Saudi Arabia            HI: nonOECD       group
                                                                                                          High
 aut Austria               HI: OECD            HI: OECD           sgp Singapore         HI: nonOECD       1995
                                                                                                          income:
                                                                                                          High
                                                                                                          nonOECD
                                                                                                          income:
 bel Belgium               HI: OECD            HI: OECD           twn Taiwan, China     HI: nonOECD       High
                                                                                                          nonOECD
                                                                                                          income:
 can Canada                HI: OECD            HI: OECD           hrv Croatia           HI: nonOECD       Upper
                                                                                                          nonOECD
                                                                                                          middle
 che Switzerland           HI: OECD            HI: OECD           ltu   Lithuania       HI: nonOECD       Upper
                                                                                                          income
                                                                                                          middle
 cze Czech Republic        HI: OECD            HI: OECD           lva   Latvia          HI: nonOECD       Upper
                                                                                                          income
                                                                                                          middle
 deu Germany               HI: OECD            HI: OECD           rus Russian Federation HI: nonOECD      Upper
                                                                                                          income
                                                                                                          middle
 dnk Denmark               HI: OECD            HI: OECD           chl   Chile           HI: OECD          Upper
                                                                                                          income
                                                                                                          middle
 esp Spain                 HI: OECD            HI: OECD           est Estonia           HI: OECD          Upper
                                                                                                          income
                                                                                                          middle
 fin Finland               HI: OECD            HI: OECD           pol Poland            HI: OECD          Upper
                                                                                                          income
                                                                                                          middle
 fra France                HI: OECD            HI: OECD           svk Slovak Republic   HI: OECD          Upper
                                                                                                          income
                                                                                                          middle
 gbr United Kingdom        HI: OECD            HI: OECD           arg Argentina         UMI               UMI
                                                                                                          income
 grc Greece                HI: OECD            HI: OECD           bra Brazil            UMI               UMI
 irl   Ireland             HI: OECD            HI: OECD           col   Colombia        UMI               UMI
 isl   Iceland             HI: OECD            HI: OECD           cri   Costa Rica      UMI               UMI
 isr   Israel              HI: OECD            HI: OECD           hun Hungary           UMI               UMI
 ita Italy                 HI: OECD            HI: OECD           mex Mexico            UMI               UMI
 jpn Japan                 HI: OECD            HI: OECD           mys Malaysia          UMI               UMI
 kor Korea, Rep.           HI: OECD            HI: OECD           rou Romania           UMI               UMI
 lux Luxembourg            HI: OECD            HI: OECD           tur Turkey            UMI               UMI
 nld Netherlands           HI: OECD            HI: OECD           zaf   South Africa    UMI               UMI
 nor Norway                HI: OECD            HI: OECD           bgr Bulgaria          UMI               LMI
 nzl New Zealand           HI: OECD            HI: OECD           chn China             UMI               LMI
 prt Portugal              HI: OECD            HI: OECD           tha Thailand          UMI               LMI
 svn Slovenia              HI: OECD            HI: OECD           tun Tunisia           UMI               LMI
 swe Sweden                HI: OECD            HI: OECD           idn Indonesia         LMI               LMI
 usa United States         HI: OECD            HI: OECD           phl Philippines       LMI               LMI
 brn Brunei Darussalam     HI: nonOECD         HI: nonOECD        ind India             LMI               LI
 cyp Cyprus                HI: nonOECD         HI: nonOECD        vnm Vietnam           LMI               LI
 hkg Hong Kong SAR, China HI: nonOECD          HI: nonOECD        khm Cambodia          LI                LI
 mlt Malta                 HI: nonOECD         HI: nonOECD

Note: HI = high income, UMI = upper middle income, LMI = lower middle income, LI = low income.




                                                             41
Appendix 4: Industry coverage (bold industries excluded due to non-tradability)
  ISIC 3 Industry (WIOD)                      ISIC 3 Industry (OECD)                   ISIC 3 Industry (Sample)
  01t05   Agriculture                         01t05   Agriculture                      01t05 Agriculture
  10t14   Mining and quarrying                10t14   Mining and quarrying             10t14 Mining and quarrying
  15t16   Food and tobacco                    15t16   Food and tobacco                 15t16 Food and tobacco
  17t18   Textiles and apparel                17t19   Textiles, apparel, and leather   17t19 Textiles, apparel, and leather
  19      Leather
  20      Wood                                20      Wood                             20     Wood
  21t22   Paper and print                     21t22   Paper and print                  21t22 Paper and print
  23      Refined petroleum                   23      Refined petroleum                23     Refined petroleum
  24      Chemicals                           24      Chemicals                        24     Chemicals
  25      Rubber and plastics                 25      Rubber and plastics              25     Rubber and plastics
  26      Non-metallic mineral products       26      Non-metallic mineral products    26     Non-metallic mineral products
  27t28   Basic and fabricated metals         27      Basic metals                     27t28 Basic and fabricated metals
                                              28      Fabricated metals
  29      Machinery and equipment n.e.c.      29     Machinery and equipment           29    Machinery and equipment
  30t33   Electrical and optical equipment    303233 n.e.c.
                                                     Electrical and optical            30t33 n.e.c.
                                                                                             Electrical and optical
                                              31     equipment
                                                     Electrical machinery and                equipment
  34t35   Motor and transport equipment       34      apparatus n.e.c
                                                      Motor vehicles                   34t35 Motor and transport
                                              35      Other transport equipment              equipment
  36t37   Other manufactures and              36t37   Other manufactures and           36t37 Other manufactures and
  40t41   recycling
          Electricity, gas and water supply   40t41   recycling
                                                      Electricity, gas and water       40t41 recycling
                                                                                             Electricity, gas and water
  45      Construction                        45      supply
                                                      Construction                     45     supply
                                                                                              Construction
  50      Sale, maintenance and repair of     50t52   Wholesale and retail trade;      50t52 Wholesale and retail trade;
  51      motor  vehicles
          Wholesale  trade                            repair                                 repair
  52      Retail trade
  55      Hotels and restaurants              55      Hotels and restaurants           55     Hotels and restaurants
  60      Land transport                      60t63   Transport and storage            60t63 Transport and storage
  61      Water transport
  62      Air transport
  63      Supporting and auxiliary
  64      transport activities
          Post and telecommunications         64      Post and telecommunications      64     Post and telecommunications
  65t67   Financial intermediation            65t67   Financial intermediation         65t67 Financial intermediation
  70      Real estate activities              70      Real estate activities           70     Real estate activities
  71t74   Renting and business activities     71      Renting of machinery and         71t74 Renting and business activities
                                              72      equipment
                                                      Computer and related
                                              73t74   activities
                                                      R&D and other business
  75      Public administration and           75      activities
                                                      Public administration and        75     Public administration and
          defence                                     defence                                 defence
  80      Education                           80      Education                        80     Education
  85      Health and social work              85      Health and social work           85     Health and social work
  90t93   Other services                      90t93   Other services                   90t93 Other services
  95      Private households with             95      Private households with          95     Private households with
          employed persons                            employed persons                        employed persons




                                                              42
Appendix 5: Derivation of GVC indicators
    This derivation is based on Hummels and others (2001) and follows the exposition of Kummritz (2016).
To derive the indicators for the analysis, Hummels and others (2001) suggested applying the standard
Leontief’s (1936) insight to ICIOs and in order to derive a decomposition of gross exports into value added
along the four dimensions: source country, source industry, using country, and using industry. This means
in a simple example for a given year with two countries, k and l, and two industries, i and j, that we multiply
the value-added multiplier, V (I-A)-1, with country-industry-level gross exports, E, to deduce their value-
added origins10:
                                                                                                                                                       
                                                          0                                                                                                         0
                                                                               0          0                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                                            0             0
                                                                                                                                                                                       
                                                        0                      0          0                                                      0                              0             0
             ( − )−1  =                                                                                                                                                                                                           =
                                                         0 0                             0             
                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                                              
                                                                                                                                                                        0                0                         0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                         0 0                      0                                                                       0                0               0              
                                                   (                                                  ) (                                       ) (                                                           )
                                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                                                                              
                                                                                                                                                                             
                                                                                                                            
                                                                                                            
                                                                                                                                  =                                                                                
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  ,
                               
                                                     
                                                                                                                      
                                                                                                                                                                               
                                                                                                                                                                                                      
                                                                                                                                                                             
                (                                             )                  (                                           )
                                                  
                                                        2        2 
     with                     =                ⁄     = 1 − ∑  − ∑                                                            ( ∈ ,                           ∈ , ),
                                                     
                                                                                                                                                                                                 −1
                                                                                                                                                           
                                                                              1 −                  −                            −              −
                                                                                                                                                                   
                                                                                −                1 −                            −              −
                                                              
                                                                                          =                                                                                           
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         ,
                                                                                    −            −                      1 −                      −
                                                                                                                                                                           
                     (                                )                (            −            −                           −                 1 −  )
                                                                             
                                                                   
     and                                            =                      ⁄                         (,  ∈ ,                       ,  ∈ , ),
                                                                                  
                                                                                          
    where      gives the share of domestic value added,  , in output,   , and  indicates gross exports.
                                                    
Finally,  denotes the share of inputs,  , in output. Accordingly, the elements of the
 ( − )−1  matrix are estimates for the industry-level value-added origins of each industry’s exports.
These estimates can be summed to get industry-country totals for FVAX and DVAR. Note that for FVAX we
exclude sourcing from the mining sector to avoid spurious effects driven by variations in raw material
prices such as oil.




10
 The decomposition was technically implemented using the R package decompr described in Quast and Kummritz (2015),
which automates the calculation of GVC indicators.



                                                                                                                  43
