                                                 WPS8109


Policy Research Working Paper                   8109




           Are Caste Categories Misleading?
              Relationship between Gender and Jati
                      in Three Indian States

                               Shareen Joshi
                              Nishtha Kochhar
                              Vijayendra Rao




Development Research Group
Poverty and Inequality Team
June 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 8109


  Abstract
 This paper examines the relationship between caste and                             are grouped by the narrower sub-caste categories of jati,
 gender inequality in three states in India. When house-                            where caste is lived and experienced, the paper finds the
 holds are grouped using conventional, government-defined                           relationships to be far more varied and nuanced. These
 categories of caste the paper finds patterns that are con-                         results suggest that focussing on broad caste categories
 sistent with existing literature: lower-caste women are                            such as “scheduled castes” and “scheduled tribes” can be
 more likely to participate in the labor market, have greater                       misleading for understanding the relationship between
 decision-making autonomy within their households, and                              caste and gender, and for targeting anti-poverty programs.
 experience greater freedom of movement. When households




  This paper is a product of the Poverty and Inequality Team, Development Research Group. It is part of a larger effort by
  the World Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions around
  the world. Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The authors may
  be contacted at vrao@worldbank.org.




         The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
         issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
         names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
         of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
         its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                       Produced by the Research Support Team
    Are Caste Categories Misleading? The
Relationship between Gender and Jati in Three
                Indian States
         Shareen Joshi*, Nishtha Kochhar† and Vijayendra Rao‡




JEL Classification Codes: I3, J4, O1

Keywords: Gender, Economic Empowerment, Rural Development, Caste,
Jati, India




*
  School of Foreign Service, Georgetown University, 3700 “O” St. NW, Washington DC, 20057; Phone:
(202) 997-6017; Email: sj244@georgetown.edu
†
  Department of Economics, Georgetown University, 3700 “O” St. NW, Washington DC, 20057; Email:
nk602@georgetown.edu
‡
  Development Research Group, World Bank, Washington DC; Email: vrao@worldbank.org

The authors are grateful to an anonymous referee and participants in the Economic Growth and Development
Conference in ISI, Delhi, and in the WIDER workshop, Towards Gender Equity in Development, in Namur
for very valuable comments on an earlier draft. They are indebted to the World Bank’s South Asia Food and
Nutrition Security Initiative, funded by the EU and DfID, and UNU-WIDER for financial support. This paper
reflects the individual views of the authors and does not in any way represent the official position of the
World Bank or its member countries.
1. Introduction

        Indian society is highly stratified and hierarchical. Caste, class and gender all
contribute to an individual’s status. Each of these three identities is powerful in its own
right and a large body of literature explores the importance of all three in determining social
and economic opportunities. The complex and dynamic interplay between these elements,
however, receives less attention even though across India it drives significant regional and
temporal variations in social structures (Dreze and Sen, 2002).

         This paper examines the relationship between two of these categories: caste and
gender. Numerous studies have argued that there is a paradoxical inverse relationship
between caste and gender in Indian society. Stringent patriarchal codes designed to
subordinate women have been observed to be restricted to high-status caste groups; women
from low-status castes thus display higher labor-force participation rates, fewer patriarchal
restrictions on mobility and greater decision-making autonomy (Boserup 1970; Liddle and
Joshi 1986; Mencher 1988; Chakravarty 1993; Chen 1995; Kapadia 1995; Eswaran,
Ramaswami and Wadhwa 2009). A related argument is that increases in wealth and income
among low-ranked castes can have a negative impact on the status of women: As these
castes emulate the customs, practices and patriarchal codes of higher-ranked castes, women
become disempowered (Srinivas 1977).

       However, some recent evidence from large-sample surveys is challenging this idea
of a negative relationship between caste and the status of women. Deshpande (2002) for
example, argues that far from being empowered, women from lower castes may actually
be in a trap of material deprivation, low education, limited employment opportunities,
inadequate safety and persistent indignity.

        A rigorous examination of the relationship between caste and gender has been
constrained by methodological challenges. First and foremost is the challenge of defining
caste. There is no universally accepted definition of the term.1,2 In Hindu texts, caste is
equated with varna, the ancient organization of society into four vertical categories: priests
(brahmins), kings and warriors (kshatriya), farmers and merchants (vaishyas), laborers
(shudras), and a fifth group of “untouchables” excluded from the system altogether. 3 The
Government of India as well as various state governments classify caste according to a
different group of categories, including Scheduled Caste (SC), Scheduled Tribe (ST),

1
  The Miriam Webster dictionary of 2016 offers three separate definitions: (1) one of the hereditary social
classes in Hinduism that restrict the occupation of their members and their association with the members of
other castes; (2) a division of society based on differences of wealth, inherited rank or privilege, profession,
occupation, or race; (3) a system of rigid social stratification characterized by hereditary status, endogamy,
and social barriers sanctioned by custom, law, or religion. (Miriam Webster Dictionary Online, Accessed on
7/24/2016).
2
  The very word “caste” is a European term that comes from 16th century Portuguese travelers who applied
their word for clan, casta, to describe the visibly segregated groups they observed as outsiders.
3
  Varna is the Sanskrit word for type, order, color or class.

                                                       2
Backward Caste (BC), Extremely Backward Caste (EBC) and Other Backward Caste
(OBC) to allow underprivileged groups to be targetted for benefits. SCs are groups
traditionally considered untouchable. STs are groups that traditionally live in forest and
hill regions and have been relatively excluded from economic development. BCs, EBCs,
and OBCs are generally defined at the state level to identify groups that are considered
materially deprived.

         Yet caste is lived, experienced and practiced in everyday life as jāti (henceforth,
jati) (Srinivas 1976; Beteille 1996; Bayly 2001; Dirks 2011).4 Jatis are hereditarily formed
endogamous groups whose identities are manifested in a variety of ways: occupational
status, property ownership, diets, gender norms, social practices, religious practices
emphasizing purity and pollution, and systems of self-governance. Though jatis are usually
regarded as sub-castes, placing them within the varna classification can be complicated
(Dumont 1980). Each region of India has several hundred jatis and there is no pan-Indian
system of ranking them (Srinivas 1976; Bayly 2001; Rao and Ban 2007; Dirks 2011).
However, anthropologists have documented numerous local criteria for ranking jatis, as
well as significant regional differences in rank orderings. Frequent conflicts over rank
order and numerous strategies and circumstances that can change rank order (Srinivas
1976, 1977, 1996).

        Much evidence exists on the importance of jatis in many aspects of life in India.5
Members of a given jati have strong social ties, even across villages (Srinivas 1976; Gupta
2000). Almost all marriages are conducted within these groups (Desai and Dubey 2010;
Banerjee, Duflo, Ghatak and Lafortune 2013). This creates an extensive insurance network
featuring loans and transfers at critical times which are often bigger in size and more
favorable in terms than other sources of finance (Munshi and Rosenzweig 2006; Mazzocco
2012). Thus, jati-based networks shape an individual’s prospects of marriage, employment
and out-migration (Munshi and Rosenzweig 2006; Munshi 2011; Munshi 2016). Jati
identity is often endogenously determined - shifting to respond to incentives from the state
or via the influence of social movements (Rao and Ban 2007, Cassan 2015). Recent work
has also found large differences in the allocation of benefits within Scheduled Castes by
jati (Kumar and Somanathan 2017), and evidence that jati-level population proportions
have significant implications for electoral outcomes (Huber and Suryanarayan 2016).

        Despite understanding the importance of jatis in everyday life, the Indian census
and most large national surveys such as the National Family Health Survey, the National
Sample Surveys of India, and the District Level Household Survey of India, do not have
jati-level identifiers. Caste, therefore, continues to be measured and generally understood
only in broad terms, with the emphasis on categories such as SC, ST, OBC and “Forward

4
  The word jāti literally translates to “birth”. The term jati appears in almost all Indian languages and is almost
always related to the idea of lineage or kinship group. There are perhaps more than 3000 jatis in India.
5
  Munshi (2016) provides a broad overview of this literature.

                                                        3
Castes” (FC) (a term that includes any jati that is not included in one of the officially
defined categories because they are considered more privileged).

        A second methodological challenge to understanding the relationship between
caste, class and gender is the paucity of data with detailed information on economic
indicators and women’s status. The National Family Health Survey, the District Level
Household Survey and the Annual Health Surveys, for example, all collect detailed
information on the status of women, but limit the list of economic indicators to a checklist
which includes only household assets and occupational status of household members.
Anthropologists and ethnographers have gathered in-depth qualitative information on these
issues but their work has typically focussed on small samples in a few villages or
communities (examples include Chen 1995; Kapadia 1995; Jeffrey and Jeffrey 1996;
Seymour 1999; Srinivas 1979; and many others). Given the enormous geographic,
demographic and cultural variations within India, this has limited the generalizeability of
the findings.

        This paper examines data with extensive information on caste and gender status
from three states–Bihar, Odisha and Tamil Nadu. Our data are unique in having not only
broad geographic coverage but also detailed information on jati category, consumption
expenditure, and indicators of the status of women. Conducted between 2011 and 2013,
these surveys served as a baseline for the evaluation of livelihoods programs that targeted
the poor. The sampling strategy for all the data from all the three states, therefore, was
designed to ensure that they were representative of vulnerable populations in rural areas
who are currently eligible for a variety of poverty-alleviation programs in these states. This
limits the data, which are not representative of the state as whole, but are more
representative of poor rural populations. However, the limitations of the data can also be
seen an advantage. Oversampling poor regions allows us to better understand how caste
and gender are experienced in poor rural communities in these states.

        We find that the relationship between caste and the status of women is more
nuanced than suggested by the literature: It depends heavily on location and the definitions
of caste. We examine three sets of indicators for the status of women in all three states:
employment, decision-making authority on key household decisions, and physical
mobility. We use a simple reduced-form regression model to explore the role of caste in
determining these outcomes. We begin our analysis by using broad caste categories and
then we turn to jati-level definitions of caste. In both sets of regressions, we control for
numerous individual, household and community characteristics.

       When we use broad caste categories that correspond to official definitions used by
the Government of India, we find evidence of the inverse relationship between caste and
gender status, but the relationship varies by state. For example, we see a relatively strong
negative relationship in Bihar, but almost no discernible relationship in Tamil Nadu where


                                              4
per-capita incomes are almost four times higher than Bihar and economic development has
raised the levels of education and formal employment for both men and women. When we
break down caste into jatis in the three states, however, the relationship between caste and
gender becomes far more complex. In Bihar for example, the inverse relationship is
concentrated in specific jatis and totally absent in others. Finally, we examine the
relationship between caste, class and gender by interacting the caste variables with
consumption expenditure in our reduced form specification. We see very little evidence
that increased expenditure is consistently associated with a decline in the status of women.

        The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 discusses the literature on
caste, empowerment and inequality; Section 3 describes our sample and data; and Section
4 presents the main findings on inequality between castes including variations of female
empowerment within castes and the role of economic advancement in female autonomy.


2.     Background: Caste and Gender in India

        It is often argued that India’s patriarchal kinship system is typical of settled
agricultural societies (Boserup 1970; Alesina, Giuliano and Nunn 2013). Private property
rights and the use of agricultural technology created a storable agricultural surplus, which
may have enabled social stratification of both class and gender. Patrilineal inheritance,
patrilocal exogamy and a rigid sexual division of labor may have emerged to assure
uncontested bloodlines that preserved social, economic and political statuses of families.
In such settings, women’s labor force participation, mobility and decision-making
autonomy arguably falls in response to increased economic status. Goldin (1994) argues
that the relationship is more complicated: Women’s labor force participation (and, more
broadly, their status) may follow a non-linear U-shape during the process of economic
development.

         In India, the status of women is also affected by the caste system. Ancient texts
such as the Rig Veda and the Manusmriti describe extremely unequal gender relations in
the highest castes (Chakravarty 1993; Desai and Krishnaraj 1993). Observations of ruling
and martial castes from the colonial period of history highlight the practices of sati, purdah
(total female seclusion), female infanticide, dowry and polygyny among the Brahmins and
ruling castes (Joshi 1995; Mani 1998).

        Conclusions drawn from ancient religious texts or treatises from the colonial era
may not be a valid lens for understanding contemporary gender relations, however. These
texts can be ideologically biased in favor of the groups by whom they were written, or of
the goals for which they were written, and it is unclear whether the codes of behavior
described in these texts were normative statements that were actually followed on the
ground. As argued in the introduction of this paper, caste is lived and practiced in India
through the system of jati. Very little can be gleaned about contemporary jati-gender

                                              5
relationship from religious texts or colonial writings. To gain knowledge of the
contemporary, we must rely on a growing literature of empirical studies that have been
conducted largely in post-independence India. Below we summarize two types of empirical
work: literature based upon large sample surveys of the relationship between caste and
gender using broad caste categories and empirical literature using smaller observational
studies that provide some granular understandings of the relationship between jati and
gender.



2.1 Perspectives from Large Datasets


        Empirical work on caste and gender has frequently compared groups at the bottom
of the hierarchy with the rest of the population. This comparison is problematic considering
that the groups that have been grouped together at the bottom have changed over time.

        The attempt to identify these groups began in the colonial period (Dirks, 2011). The
Government of India Act of 1935 created lists of castes and tribes entitled to affirmative
action policies throughout British controlled India. Castes and tribes included in these lists
were called “Scheduled Castes (SC)” and “Scheduled Tribes (ST)”. In independent India,
Articles 341 and 342 of the Indian constitution continued this practice and used the same
terminology as during colonial rule (Revankar 1971).6 However, the jatis who are deemed
eligible for inclusion in these groups have shifted over time, and the decisions regarding
inclusion in these categories have become increasingly politicized. For example, in 1935,
429 castes were listed as SC at the colonial government at the time. In the most recent
census of 2011 however, 1241 castes and 705 tribes had SC and ST status respectively
(Census of India, 2011), and there are additional lists at the state level. In recent years,
affirmative action benefits have also been extended to groups such as EBCs and OBCs who
have faced similar disadvantages to SCs and STs, but were not previously eligible for
compensatory programs. The groups included in this category also vary across states and
have changed over time.

       Given these difficulties in making comparisons between broad groups over time,
many studies have relied on cross-sectional approaches to examine the relationships
between caste, class and gender. Boserup, for example, examines these broad categories
during the 1956–57 period to argue that in India, most female agricultural labor is drawn
from SC/ST groups, and they are largely employed on “family farms belonging to men
with non-working wives” (Boserup 1970: 69). More recently, Deshpande (2001) uses data


6
 Article 46 of the 1950 Constitution states, “The State shall promote with special care the educational and
economic interests of the weaker sections of the people, and, in particular, of the Scheduled Castes and the
Scheduled Tribes, and shall protect them from social injustice and all forms of exploitation.”

                                                     6
from the NFHS survey and finds that 39 percent of SC women, 51 percent of ST women
and 30 percent of “Other” women report that they participate in the formal labor force. This
broadly confirms the hypothesis of the inverse relationship between caste and labor-force
participation rate.

        But to what extent does greater employment translate into greater empowerment?
Answering this question by using large national datasets is quite difficult, mainly because
of the paucity of data on the status of women. Deshpande (2001) uses measures of literacy,
asset ownership, mobility and autonomy that are included in the NFHS survey. She finds
that for India as a whole 77.3 percent of SC women and 69.7 percent of ST women have
no education, which is substantially higher than the average for other castes which is 51.6
percent. She reports lower overall asset ownership by SC and ST households and argues
that SC and ST women face higher levels of violence and less mobility and autonomy even
when they do participate in the labor force. She also emphasizes that estimates of female
labor-force participation rates fail to adjust for the quality of working conditions and job
security.

        In another study, Deshpande (2002) uses the 55th round of the NSS data, conducted
in 1999-2000, to show that the higher levels of poverty among SCs, STs, and OBCs—as
measured by their physical mobility—undermine rather than enhance the status of women.
In these groups, women are only marginally better off (in terms of mobility) than higher-
ranked castes. Here too, she finds that contrary to the prevailing wisdom, lower-caste
women are the worst off on measures of consumption and exposure to domestic violence.

         Another perspective on the determinants of empowerment using large data-sets
comes from the analysis of female-male sex ratios. The value of female children, as
measured by survival, has been shown to increase with the female labor force participation
rate (Dasgupta 1987). Early literature noted female-male sex ratios were more favorable
among SC/ST groups in the pre-independence period (Dreze and Sen, 2002).7 The decline
in this ratio in the post-indepedence period has often been attributed to Sanskritization8 of
SC jatis who have placed restrictions on women in an attempt to improve the group’s status,
particularly after benefitting from a variety of programs for social upliftment9. Establishing


7
  Dreze and Sen (2002: 241–45) summarize the findings on time trends of female-male sex ratios in the
SC/ST population of India. They note that in pre-independence India, female-male sex ratios among SC/ST
groups were significantly higher than the rest of the population, but by 1991, the sex ratio stood at 922 women
per 1,000 men, while the rest of the population was 927 per 1,000 men (Dreze and Sen 2000).
8
  The term Sanskritization was developed by M. N. Srinivas (1962, 1967, 1989). He defined this as the
process by which castes placed lower in the caste hierarchy seek upward mobility by emulating the rituals
and practices of the upper or dominant castes.
9
  The decline in the sex ratio among SC/ST groups is largely driven by states with the highest concentration
of SC/ST population such as Uttar Pradesh. Dreze and Sen (2002: 242) note that the Chamar caste of UP,
which is the largest SC caste in the state, had a female-male sex ratio of 986 in 1901, but by 1981 the SC/ST
sex ratio had aligned with the rest of the population.

                                                      7
the causal effect of Sanskritization, however, is quite difficult since there are many possible
mechanisms linking changes in survival rates to caste status.


2.2 Perspectives from Field Studies

        In recent years a large literature by anthropologists, sociologists and economists
has analyzed qualitiative and quantitative data on the relationship between caste and
gender. A series of ethnographies have largely confirmed that in most parts of rural India
upper-caste women are more likely to practice purdah (female seclusion), are more likely
to use the veil, and face significant restrictions on their mobility and labor force
participation opportunities (Srinivas 1977, 1979; Chen, 1995, Kapadia, 1995; Jeffrey and
Jeffrey 1996; Seymour 1999; and many others). These studies have also noticed that
increased caste status is associated with a greater subordination of women (Hutton 1946;
Srinivas 1977).10

        Field studies have also provided insights into the rigid sexual division of labor by
caste and class. Boserup (1970: 69–70), for example, uses data on female labor force
participation rates from several states of India to highlight the division of labor in
agriculture; ploughing is a male task but post-agricultural processing and preservation of
grain are female tasks, and almost all female labor is drawn from the poorest castes/classes.
In her comparison of India and Bangladesh, Chen (1995) reports that in India, villagers
display high levels of preoccupation with ensuring status-appropriate work for women.
They rank castes by “…whether they allow women to work in the following activities: only
within their courtyards/homesteads, only on their own farms, only within the courtyards or
homesteads of others, only at the farms of others, in other activities within the village, or
in other activities outside the village. Using this ranking scale, the more secluded the
woman, the higher her household’s status or prestige” (Chen 1995: 46). Mencher (1988)
conducts detailed analyses of female labor force participation in paddy cultivation in Tamil
Nadu and highlights the reluctance of upper-caste women to enter the labor force, even
when facing conditions of severe poverty that place them in a ranking of income below the
SC and ST women in the village.

        The sexual division of labor is also seen in non-agricultural occupations. In artisan
jatis such as potters and weavers, men specialize in specific skills, while female household
members are active participants in every other non-male stage of production (David and
Kramer 2001). Some studies have also found evidence that greater opportunities among
the lower-caste women can translate into empowerment. Kapadia (1995), for example,
finds that among the Pallar of Tamil Nadu—a highly impoverished, landless SC who
largely perform agricultural labor—women form a major share of the local labor force.
They enjoy significant independence in the domestic domain as well as in negotiations with

10
     A review of this literature is found in Liddle and Joshi (1986) and Mohanty (2004).

                                                       8
their employers. She reports that this pattern was not seen in the higher-caste Vellalar
women who worked as gem cutters in the rural synthetic gem-cutting industry.

        Another strand of literature that provides insights into the jati-gender relationship
is on marriage markets in India. Recent surveys find that 95 percent of Indians still marry
within their broad caste group (Desai and Dubey 2012). This has implications for the status
of women. Within broad caste groups, women are not permitted to marry a man of a lower
caste/jati, and strong punishments are imposed for transgressing that norm (Das 1975).
However, hypergamy is, in theory, permitted (i.e., a woman may marry upwards in the
caste/jati ranking).

        In summary, most large national sample surveys lack details about jatis. While
anthropologists have gathered in-depth information on the jati-gender relationship, their
work has typically focused on small samples in a single community. The enormous
geographic, demographic and cultural variations within India make it difficult to draw any
broad conclusions from these findings. Furthermore, much of the anthropological literature
is dated, and caste and gender relations have changed rapidly in recent years (Sanyal et al.
2015). Thus, examining recent survey data to discern patterns in these relationships could
help expand our understanding of caste and gender roles. In this paper, we use data from
three states to contribute to this literature.


3. Data

        We use data from baseline surveys collected between 2011 and 2013 for the impact
evaluations of State Rural Livelihoods Projects in three states in India: JEEViKA 11 in
Bihar, TRIPTI12 in Odisha and PVP13 in Tamil Nadu. The three states have very different
economic, social and demographic characteristics. Key indicators are summarized in Table
1. Bihar is a predominantly rural state whose agrarian structure has a strong caste and class
base (Rodgers and Rodgers 2001). Odisha is a coastal state with one of the highest
populations of Scheduled Tribes (STs) in the country. STs account for 22.1 percent of the
total population of the state and 9.7 percent of the tribal population of India (Census of
India 2001). Both Bihar and Odisha are considerably poorer than Tamil Nadu, which is the
8th wealthiest state in India and has made great strides in education as well as urbanization.
The average person in Tamil Nadu is approximately four times richer than their counterpart
in Bihar and twice as rich as their counterpart in Odisha. This significant regional
imbalance has been noted by other scholars (Dreze and Sen 2002).

       Our surveys include 9,000 households from seven districts in Bihar surveyed in
2011, 3,000 households from ten districts in Odisha also surveyed in 2011, and 3,900

11
   Bihar Rural Livelihoods Project
12
   Targeted Rural Initiatives for Poverty Termination and Infrastructure
13
   Tamil Nadu Empowerment and Poverty Alleviation Project

                                                     9
households from nine districts surveyed in Tamil Nadu in the first half of 2013 (see Table
2). The surveys were designed to be representative of the target population of state-
implemented livelihoods projects. The survey populations are concentrated in the poorer
regions of the three states, and we oversampled SC and ST households because they were
the intended targets of the project.14 For the purpose of this study, we restrict the sample
to those households for which we have both household and woman-specific information.15
This yields a sample of 8,969, 2,470, and 3,384 households from Bihar, Odisha and Tamil
Nadu respectively.

       Table 2, panel (a) summarizes the caste distribution for our data in the three states.
Due to the oversampling of Scheduled Castes, almost 70 percent of the sample in Bihar,
27 percent in Odisha and 32 percent in Tamil Nadu are comprised of SCs. The BCs
comprise the largest caste group in Tamil Nadu followed by SCs and Most Backward
Castes (MBCs). Odisha is the only state with a significant sample of households from
“general” or “forward” castes, which form the third largest caste category after OBCs and
SCs. Odisha also has the highest share of ST households in our sample.

         Table 2 panel (a) also contains the jati distributions considered for our analysis,
arranged by state. In order to avoid unduly small cells, we focus on the major jati groups
in the state and gather the smaller jatis into an ‘Others’ category for each broad caste group.
Musahar (26 percent), Chamar (20 percent), Dusadh (17 percent) and Yadavs (7 percent)
form the major jatis in our sample for Bihar. All belong to the SC caste group16. Khandayat

14
     For clarity, we detail the design of the sampling strategy below:

          (i) In Bihar, 180 panchayats were randomly picked in each of the 16 blocks chosen from the seven
project districts where the scale-up of JEEViKA was planned. Within each of the study villages, hamlets
(tolas) in which the majority of the population belonged to SC or ST castes were identified. Households were
then randomly selected from these hamlets.

         (ii) In Odisha, our sample is drawn from matched treatment-control pairs of blocks, which were
obtained from a sample of 10 backward districts of the state for the purpose of the rollout of the TRIPTI plan.
These were selected based on a ranking of the state’s districts using a backwardness index. The sample,
therefore, includes a project block with the lowest backwardness score (treatment block) and a non-project
block with the backwardness score closest to the last project block that was selected into TRIPTI (control
block). Since TRIPTI explicitly targets the poor who are overwhelmingly drawn from SC and ST groups, SC
and ST households are systematically oversampled in every village.

(iii) In Tamil Nadu, as in Odisha, selection of blocks within the ten districts was based on a backwardness
score. This score was composed of five equally weighted indicators: percentage unirrigated area to the total
cultivable land, infant mortality rate, industrial backwardness score, rural female literacy rate, and percentage
of SC/ST population. The 3 to 5 most backward blocks were chosen for inclusion into the program. In every
district, a pair of blocks—a treatment block with the last backward block chosen into the program and a
control block that had the closest score to the treatment block with the lowest score (i.e., the last treatment
block that was selected)—were selected for the sample. The oversampling of SC and ST households is
proportionate to their population in the village.
15
   Those households for which we could not match the women between the two modules have been dropped.
16
   This is due to oversampling of SCs in the baseline data.



                                                        10
(19 percent), Chasa (9 percent), and Pana (7.5 percent) form the sampled castes in Odisha,
and they belong to General, OBC and SC castes respectively. In Tamil Nadu, Adi Dravidar
(22 percent), Vanniyar (13 percent), and Vellalar, also known as Gounder (10 percent)
comprise our sample, and belong to SC, MBC and BC groups respectively.17


4. Results

Using these data, we examine the relationship between caste and female empowerment.
We measure empowerment with variables that are consistent with the literature described
earlier and include three categories of indicators:

        Measures of intra-household decision-making: Women were asked who was the
         primary decision-maker in the household on (i) purchases of household durables,
         (ii) children’s education/tuition, (iii) their own livelihood activity, and (iv) voting
         behavior. For each of these indicators, we examine two measures, whether a woman
         respondent provides any input into the decision, or whether she makes the decision
         entirely by herself.
        Measures of female mobility: Women were asked if they can go—without seeking
         permission—to the general store, health centre, bank, and to visit their friends,
         neighbors and relatives18.
        Labor force participation: We use a dummy variable that takes a value of 1 if a
         woman works for income (in cash or in kind) outside the home in at least one
         season, and 0 otherwise. We use information collected from the detailed livelihoods
         module in the household general questionnaire, which contains employment
         activities of all working adults in the household for both rainy and non-rainy
         seasons.19

        One hypothesis, based on the literature described earlier, is that there is a negative
relationship between these three types of variables and low caste status: SC and ST women
should have greater mobility, autonomy and the highest levels of labor-force participation
rates. We test the hypothesis using a linear probability model, using a set of dummy
variables for caste with the poorest group in each population (SCs in Bihar and Tamil Nadu,
and STs in Odisha) treated as the omitted category.

        We first regress empowerment indicators on official caste categories and then on
jati identifiers. We report three sets of regressions. First, to ensure consistency with the


17
   In our sample the jati distribution for Tamil Nadu is fairly representative of the general population, in
which Vanniyars make up roughly 20 percent, Gounders 8 percent, Thevar 10 percent, and Vellalars 7
percent.
18
   For Tamil Nadu, we use available indicators of female mobility, including whether woman can go to the
bank, the Taluk office (Block office) and the police station.
19
   An adult is considered employed if (s)he is employed in any income-generating activity in either season.

                                                    11
existing literature, we use official (broad) caste categories (all defined as dummy
variables). Next, we perform comparisons between jatis. We do this in two steps. First, we
regress outcome variables on dummy indicators for all non-SC jatis, with SC jatis as the
excluded group. Next, we regress our outcome variables on dummy variables for all SC
jatis, with all non-SC castes omitted so that we can focus on between-jati differences within
the SC category. To address the role of confounding factors, we include a set of control
variables and conduct an analysis for each state in our sample separately, using the same
set of control variables for all regressions. Controls include household level variables: per
capita monthly consumption expenditure, wealth (landholding), number of members in the
household, education and gender of the household head; female headship; and a set of
individual controls that includes education level, age, age squared, and age at marriage of
the woman respondent. To control for locational factors, we also include panchayat-
specific fixed effects.

4.1 Empowerment across Broad Caste Categories

        The results of our main specification for caste-level differences are reported in
Table 3 and Figure 1 (panels (a)–(c) correspond to each of the three states). In each of these
regressions, the omitted category is SC. In Bihar (Table 3, panel (a) or Figure 1(a)), OBCs
and FCs (who are the wealthier groups,) have significantly lower female employment
relative to the SCs (9.2 and 27 percentage points respectively). This is also true of women’s
decision-making authority on issues of their own livelihoods (9.4 and 18.5 percentage
points), and their mobility in terms of accessing the local store (11.7 and 27 percentage
points).

         The patterns of caste variation that emerge in Odisha (Table 3, panel (b) or Figure
1(b)) are similar to those in Bihar. We observe that women in the Forward Caste category
are 8.6 percentage points less likely to work than SCs, and 6 percentage points less likely
to visit the store on their own when compared to their SC counterparts. OBC women are 5
percentage points less likely to work, 9 percentage points less likely to make decisions
about durables, and 9 percentage points less likely to make decisions on their livelihood
activities compared to SC women. ST women, on the other hand, are 18 percentage points
more likely to be employed than SCs.

        Tamil Nadu has less variation at the caste level than the other two states (Table 3,
panel (c) or Figure 1(c)). ST women are 11 percentage points less likely to make decisions
on their children’s’ education. MBC women are less likely to make decisions related to
their children’s education or their own livelihood activity (by 5 percentage points each)
and have less mobility in terms of accessing the block office. Women in the BC group are
5 percentage points less likely than SC women to participate in the labor market. However,
they are 4 percentage points more likely to visit a bank.



                                             12
4.2 Empowerment across Jati Categories

        Next, we examine jati-level regressions for all three states. As before, we present
the results separately for each state. The results are in Tables 5, 6 and 7 and Figures 2, 3
and 4. For each state, we present two sets of regression results. In the top panel, we present
estimation results for regressions with the jati-level categories for SC groups only (with all
other castes treated as the excluded category), and in the bottom panel we present
estimation results from regressions with the jati-level categories for other groups,
excluding the SC groups. For reasons of brevity, in all these tables we only present jati
coefficients. We do not report the effects of the control variables which are not very
different in their magnitude and significance from the results from the broad caste
categories.

         At first glance, what is most striking about the results is the level of variation within
and across the three states. In Table 5 and Figure 2(a) reporting Bihar results, for example,
we see in the top panel that Musahars have significantly higher female employment than
any other SC jati. They are 17 percentage points more likely to work than the OBCs, FCs
and Muslims and are at least twice as likely to work as the Dobhas, Chamars and ‘Other’
SC jatis. This is consistent with anthropological studies that have noted that this particular
jati, geographically concentrated in Bihar and Eastern Uttar Pradesh, has a very distinctive
history and is one of the most politically, economically and socially marginalized groups
in India (Mukul 1999).20

        In the lower panel of Table 5 and Figure 2(b) we see that relative to the SC and ST
groups, female employment is 7–8 percentage points lower among the Yadavs, Kurmis,
EBCs and other jatis, who are also classified as backward castes.21 Note that women from
the highest ranked castes, Brahmins and Rajputs, are 33 and 22 percent less likely to be
employed compared to SCs. The lower labor force participation rates of women in the

20
   Both the Musahars and Chamars are traditionally outcastes, (i.e., they are outside of the caste system and
regarded as untouchables (Hasan, Rizvi and Das 2005)). But these groups are quite distinct. The Musahar
jati actually consists of three sub-jatis: Bhagat, Sakatiya and Turkahia. Each of these sub-jatis is endogamous.
The Musahars were traditionally rat catchers, but are now largely agricultural laborers. In recent years, the
adoption of agricultural technologies has created widespread male unemployment and driven Musahar men
to migrate out of the state for several months a year, with women performing the traditional manual labor
(Mukul 1999). The Chamar jati, on the other hand, though also classified as SC, is found throughout India
and consists of many different sub-jatis that vary significantly in status. Traditionally tanners, Chamars have
diversified into agriculture and many other occupations. In many states such as Uttar Pradesh and Punjab,
they have been successful in mobilizing themselves politically.
21
   Yadavs are traditionally a group of jatis whose main occupations were related to dairy farming and pastoral
agriculture in the Bihar and Uttar Pradesh region (Hutton 1946). The group now includes a wide range of
pastoral agriculturalists in numerous states of India. Since the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries,
the Yadav community has mobilized itself to improve its social standing (Jaffrelot 2003). Strategies of
upward mobility have included participation in the Indian and British armed forces, expansion of economic
opportunities to include other, more prestigious business fields, and active participation in politics (Jaffrelot
2003). As a result of these efforts, Yadavs have increasingly claimed Kshatriya status within the varna
system.

                                                      13
higher-ranked jatis is consistent with our hypothesis, as well as with the large body of
literature described earlier on the subordination of women in these specific groups.

        We see similar patterns for women’s input into livelihood decisions, as well as for
patterns of mobility. In the top panel in Table 5, we see that women from the Musahar jati
appear to have the highest level of input in family decisions related to livelihoods and they
have greatest freedom of mobility for going to a store. They appear to have lower input
into children’s tuition funds, though this could be driven by the lower levels of schooling
in this group. In the bottom panel, we see again that Brahmin and Rajput women have
significantly lower levels of empowerment on all our indicators (employment, decision-
making autonomy and mobility), but Brahmin women have even lower levels of labor force
participation than Rajputs. We also note that Muslim women’s employment is 19
percentage points lower than the SCs in Bihar.

        Similar mixed patterns are evident for Odisha. In the top panel of Table 6 and Figure
3(a), we see that in Odisha, ST women and SC women from the Barui caste are 21
percentage points more likely to be employed than the higher-ranked castes. In the bottom
panel and Figure 3(b), we see that women from the highest ranked Brahmin, Karan and
Khandayat castes have 9–17 percentage points lower labor force participation rates
compared to SC/ST groups. Chasa, Goala and Tanti women of the OBC group are 5–12
percentage points less likely to work than SC/ST women. Higher-caste women from the
Chasa, Goala and Khandayat jatis are also less likely to make decisions on buying
household durables. We do not, however, see much evidence of jati-level variation for
mobility indicators in this state. This suggests that perhaps in the case of Odisha, location
and issues specific to the tribal culture in the poorest regions of the state could be playing
a key role in determining women’s autonomy.

         Finally, in Tamil Nadu (Table 7 and Figure 4), we find in the top panel and Figure
4(a) that Adi Dravidars exhibit higher employment among the SCs relative to higher
castes. 22 The other SC castes—Chakkalians, Pallars and others—do not appear to be
statistically distinguishable from their upper-caste counterparts, possibly because these
castes have mobilized themselves very successfully in the state.23 The lower panel of Table
7 and Figure 4(b) show differences within the BC and MBC groups. Naidu, Gounder and
Reddiyar women of the BC caste are less likely to work than SC/ST women by 14.7, 7 and



22
   Adi-Dravida or Adi-Dravidars are also known as Pariyars or Pareiyas. They have historically served higher
castes and/or colonial officers (Bergunder, Frese and Schroder, 2010). Today they are classified as a
Scheduled Caste and are the largest SC group in Tamil Nadu (http://tnpsc.gov.in/communities-list.html,
Accessed on Nov 30th, 2016).
23
   The Pallars of Tamil Nadu are also an SC jati. Largely concentrated in the southern area of the state, this
jati has mainly consisted of agricultural laborers with both men and women working in paddy cultivation.
The Pallars have been very effective in mobilizing for political action, and they created Tamil Nadu’s first
all-Dalit party, the DKV (Mosse 2012).

                                                     14
15.5 percentage points respectively. These results stand in contrast to our findings when
we used broad indicators of caste.

        The caste and mobility relationships in Tamil Nadu are difficult to compare to those
of Bihar and Odisha because we lack comparable indicators on mobility. In Tamil Nadu
we only measure whether women have the freedom to visit a bank, Taluk office and police
station without needing permission. In the top panel, we see that women from the Adi
Dravidar jati visit the Taluk office 6 percentage points more often than the higher-ranked
BC and MBC groups and is also 2 percentage points more likely to visit a police station,
respectively. In the lower panel of Table 6, we again see considerable within-caste
variation. Yadava, Parkavakulam, and Naidu women in the BC group show higher mobility
for trips to banks. Some other BC jatis show less mobility for trips to the Taluk office and
police station. For instance, MBC Ambalakarar women and Gounder women are 14 and 6
percentage points less likely to go to the Taluk Office than SC/ST groups. Nadar, Reddiyar
and Gounder women have less freedom to access the police station.

        We also—separately from each of the regressions in Table 5, 6 and 7—perform a
test for pairwise equality of coefficients between SC/ST jatis, and between Non-SC/ST
jatis. We combine the indicators of decision-making autonomy and the indicators of
mobility and report, in Table 11, the percentage of pairwise coefficient differences,
between SC/ST jatis and between Non-SC/ST jatis that are significant different from each
other. Results obtained here are consistent with the above analysis. In Bihar, there is
substantial variation within SC/ST jatis and within Non-SC jatis on all three counts. In
Odisha, the differences between jatis are present for labor force participation but are less
dramatic for decision-making autonomy and mobility. We see very little difference, if any,
between jatis in Tamil Nadu, except some evidence of variation on employment between
BC and MBC jatis.

        Overall, we find evidence in support of an inverse relationship between caste status
and female employment rates, but we find that there is considerable variation at the jati
level. The relationship between caste and female employment is more pronounced in Bihar
and Odisha than in Tamil Nadu, and the effect is concentrated within a few jatis. We also
note that evidence of a negative relationship between caste and female intra-household
bargaining authority emerges only when we group households at the jati level. Because the
negative relationship is concentrated within specific jatis, this information is less visible
when households are grouped within broad caste categories because they compute averages
over highly heterogeneous groups.

4.3 Empowerment, Caste and Income: Regression Results

       The next step in our analysis is to examine the relationship between caste, the status
of women and economic status. As discussed earlier, a large body of literature on India
argues that economic advancement intensifies the negative relationship between caste and

                                             15
gender since groups may seek to improve their status by imposing constraints on women.
To test for this, we run separate linear probability models interacting caste and jati with
per-capita monthly consumption expenditure. We employ the same specification as
previously, (i.e., we control for the role of a respondent woman’s characteristics, her
household’s characteristics, and local characteristics in the form of panchayat-specific
fixed effects.) Results for the broad caste-level aggregates are included in Table 4. In the
case of Bihar, we see that employment for ST women is likely to rise by 42 percentage
points with a 1,000-rupee increase in per capita monthly consumption expenditure and fall
by 18 percentage points for FCs. We emphasize that these patterns should be viewed purely
in an associative manner—expenditure is likely to be endogenous with employment as well
as with autonomy and mobility.

       Otherwise interactions between caste and income are not statistically significant
(beyond two coefficients at the 10% level) for any of the other states (Panels (b) and (c)),
suggesting that there is almost no evidence of income effects with broad categories of caste
for Odisha and Tamil Nadu.

        Jati-level results for Bihar, Odisha and Tamil Nadu are reported in Tables 8, 9 and
10 respectively. For the sake of brevity, we report only the coefficients for the term
interacting jati and per-capita expenditure. As before, we present the results for all jatis,
first by using non-SC/ST jatis as the excluded group (panel(a) of all tables) and then by
using the SC/ST jatis as the excluded group (panel(b) of all tables).

        We find striking differences across jatis in all three states. Bihar shows the most
significant variations. For the regression on female employment, the interaction of jati and
expenditure is positive and statistically significant at the 5 percent level for Chamars and
STs and at the 10 percent level for Musahars and Dusadhs. The estimates indicate that an
extra 1,000 rupees of per-capita household expenditure among the Chamar and Musahar
population is associated with a 13-percentage-point and 11-percentage-point increase in
labor force participation of women.24

         When we examine the bottom panel for Bihar in Table 8, we see that some higher
jati groups display lower likelihoods of female labor force participation and empowerment
relative to lower-ranked SC castes. Increases in per-capita household expenditure are
associated with rather significant declines in female labor force participation for Rajputs
(27 percentage points) and these are statistically significant at the 5 percent level. We
emphasize that this is insufficient evidence to draw any conclusions about deliberate
attempts to improve status in these groups through the process of Sanskritization described
earlier, or any other mechanism. Simple mechanisms such as a backward-bending labor
supply curve for women could be salient here. Furthermore, unobserved variables such as

24
  We focus on the Chamars and Musahars, mainly due to the small size of the ST sample and the rather
significant population share of these jatis in Bihar.

                                                16
differential rates of migration, education and employment between men and women across
these groups could provide alternate explanations. These results emphasize the salience of
within jati variations in income that might drive indicators of women’s empowerment;
results that are far less salient when we look at broad caste categories.

        In Odisha and Tamil Nadu, there are almost no significant differences between
broad caste-expenditure interactions. However, there are some variations at the jati level.
In Odisha (Table 4(b)), the decision-making autonomy of OBCs rises by 2 percentage
points with a 1,000-rupee rise in expenditure. As in the case of Bihar, the jati-level
regressions (Table 9) suggest that this effect is driven by specific jatis. In Panel (a) of Table
9, we observe that the Pana and Kondara jatis drive the overall negative relationship
between expenditure and women’s autonomy on their own political decisions. In Panel (b)
of Table 9, we see that this relationship is strongest in the Chasa and Goala jatis who fall
into the OBC caste category.

        Results for Tamil Nadu using caste and jati-level aggregations are presented in
Tables 7 and 10 respectively. In Table 7 we see that increased expenditure is associated
with lower levels of mobility (as measured by visiting banks) for MBC women as a broad
group. Table 10, however, reveals that this difference is solely driven by a single jati
(Vanniyar) among the MBCs. We also observe a differential effect in the rise in
expenditure on other indicators. Most notably, while there was no difference at the broad
caste level, the freedom to go to a Taluk office decreases by 8 percentage points for the
smaller MBC-jati women and for Reddiyar women in a BC group with a 1,000-rupee
higher per-capita expenditure, but it increases for Muthuraja women in the MBC group and
Thevar women in the BC group. There is similar heterogeneity observed for women’s
autonomy on own livelihood activity at the jati level.


5. Program targeting under the States’ Livelihoods Programs

         The removal of caste-based barriers has been a major focus of Indian public policy
for more than a hundred years. As mentioned earlier, the collection of data and design of
policies has largely focused on and been determined by broad caste categories. Our results
thus far raise the question of whether aggregate caste groupings are an effective strategy,
and whether benefits disproportionately accrue to specific jatis.

        To address this question in our own data, we examine how effectively the State
Rural Livelihoods Programs were able to target households belonging to specific castes
and jatis in the three states of this study. These programs are livelihoods-focused,
community-driven development (CDD) projects that organize women into self-help groups
(SHG) that enable them to save and access formal-sector credit to support themselves and
their families. Much existing research highlights the role of these groups in empowering



                                              17
women and their communities (Pitt, Khandekar and Cartwright 2006; Desai and Joshi,
2013; and Khanna, Kochhar and Palaniswamy 2015, Sanyal, Rao and Majumdar 2015).

         We obtain information on SHG membership using the endline surveys from the
three samples that are the focus of this paper.25 The SHG membership variable is a proxy
for participation in the respective state programs: JEEViKA in Bihar, TRIPTI in Odisha
and PVP in Tamil Nadu. Since the treatment was universal in the treated villages, we
restrict our analysis to households in treatment areas. We find significant variations in
uptake of the programs: 43, 36 and 21 percent of women in the treatment areas of Bihar,
Odisha and Tamil Nadu reported participation in an SHG (Appendix Figure 5).26

       We use a linear probability model to regress a dummy variable for whether any
household member is part of an SHG under its respective program, using the same set of
baseline controls as in the previous specifications. As above, we do this analysis first by
broad caste categories, and then separately by first excluding non-SC/ST jatis and then by
excluding SC/ST jatis. The results are presented in Table 12 and Figures 6, 7 and 8.

        The results using broad caste groupings show that in Bihar, EBCs, OBCs, Muslims
and FCs are 8–30 percentage points less likely to participate in SHGs compared to SC
women (Table 12, panel (a), and Figure 6(a)). We also observe that STs and Muslims in
Odisha and MBCs in Tamil Nadu are at least 10 percent less likely to participate than SC
women (Table 12, panel (b) and (c), and Figures 7(a) and 8(a)). These results indicate
selection in favor of SC status rather than on economic deprivation.

        Disaggregation of caste categories into jatis shows that the uptake is not uniform.
In Bihar, Table 12(b) and Figure 6(b) we see that SC Chamars and Dusadhs are more likely
to participate in an SHG program than the Non-SC/ST groups by 14 and 18 percentage
points respectively. Table 12(c) and Figure 6(c) shows that SHG membership under the
livelihood program is lower for OBC Kurmi by 19 percentage points and for Brahmins,
Rajputs and other FC jatis by 20–42 percentage points. It is interesting to note that earlier
in this paper, we found that these jatis had lower levels of empowerment, as measured by
female autonomy and mobility. Taken together, the two sets of results highlight the
complexity of implementing anti-poverty programs for women in settings like rural Bihar.

      In Odisha we see, in Table 12(a) and Figure 7(a), that STs who have higher
employment and female empowerment are less likely to participate in the SHG program.
However, there is variation within other caste groups. Table 12(b) and Figure 7(b) show


25
   Endline surveys were collected at a gap of 1.5 to 2 years from the baseline surveys. We merge the SHG
membership from these surveys, along with the baseline data.
26
   In our sample, although membership under PVP SHGs is only 21 percent, SHG membership as a whole is
almost 50 percent, which reflects the long history of the SHG movement in Tamil Nadu.

                                                  18
that Pana households, who belong to the SC group, are 18 percentage points more likely to
be covered under TRIPTI than the non-SC/ST households. Similarly, jati-level analysis
reported in Table 12(a) and Figure 8(a) in Tamil Nadu indicates that there is no differential
coverage of the program for BCs relative to SC/ST households. However, Table 12(b) and
Figure 8(b) show that the Adi-Dravidar among the SCs are significantly more likely to be
members of SHG under PVP while all Table 12(c) and Figure 8(c) show that the MBC jatis
are significantly less likely to be covered by PVP.

        These results suggest that jati-level differences matter when it comes to the
implementation of rural livelihoods programs. Within broad caste groups, some jatis
disproportionately benefit from state-run programs. The results also show that women who
access such programs are not necessarily the women who could benefit the most from the
opportunity for empowerment. In Bihar, for example, upper-caste women who display
lower levels of empowerment in the baseline surveys are less likely to benefit from an SHG
program that explicitly seeks to expand opportunities for empowerment and economic
opportunity. This is consistent with the findings of previous research studies that highlight
the difficulty of poverty targeting (Galasso and Ravallion; 2005). This study suggests that
some jatis may have better political, economic or social networks for harnessing state
programs. Understanding the mechanisms behind this would be an important question for
future research.


6. Conclusion

This paper has examined the relationship between caste and gender inequality in three
states of India: Bihar, Odisha and Tamil Nadu. We use detailed data on caste to understand
its effects on three measures of female status: labor-force participation, decision-making
autonomy and mobility.

        When we group households using conventional, government-defined categories of
caste, we find overall patterns that are consistent with the literature on India. Lower-caste
women are more likely to participate in the labor market, have greater decision-making
autonomy within their households and have greater freedom of movement. There is some
evidence of regional variations. Women in Bihar appear to be significantly affected by
broad caste-based divisions, women in Odisha appear to be more affected by location and
micro-contexts, and women in Tamil Nadu seem to be affected by education and income
rather than by caste status.

         However, when we group households by the narrower categories of jati, where
caste is lived and experienced at the local level, we find more variability across the three
states. In all three states, the overall relationship between caste and female employment is
driven by specific jatis (such as the Musahars in Bihar and the Adi-Dravidars in Tamil


                                             19
Nadu). Evidence of a negative relationship between caste and female intra-household
bargaining authority emerges only when we group households at the jati level. Finally, we
find that there is a strong relationship between empowerment and economic status in some
jatis but not in others. We also show that this matters for public policy because women
from specific jatis—rather than from broad caste groups—and more likely to benefit from
state-run anti-poverty programs. In conclusion, these results suggest that focussing on
broad caste categories such as “Scheduled Castes” and “Scheduled Tribes” can be
misleading because they mask important differences at the jati level.


References

Alesina, A., Giuliano, P., and N. Nunn. (2013). On the origins of gender roles: Women
and the plough. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 128(2), 469-530.
Ban, R., Jha, S., and V. Rao (2012). 'Who has voice in a deliberative democracy?
Evidence from transcripts of village parliaments in south India'. Journal of Development
Economics, 99(2), 428-438.
Banerjee, A., Duflo, E., Ghatak, M., and J. Lafortune (2013). ‘Marry for what? Caste and
mate selection in modern India’. American Economic Journal: Microeconomics, 5(2): 33-
72.
Bayly, S. (2001). Caste, Society and Politics in India from the Eighteenth Century to the
Modern Age, Cambridge University Press.
Beteille, A. (1996). Caste in contemporary India. Caste today, 150-79.
Bergunder M., H. Frese and U. Schröder. (2010). Ritual, caste, and religion in colonial
South India (Vol. 9). Otto Harrassowitz Verlag.
Boserup, E. (1970). Woman's role in economic development. Earthscan Publications.
Cassan, G. (2015). 'Identity-Based Policies and Identity Manipulation: Evidence from
Colonial Punjab', American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 7(4): 103-131.

Chen, M. (1995). ‘A Matter of Survival: Women’s Right to Employment in India and
Bangladesh’. In M. Nussbaum and J. Glover (eds), Women, Culture and Development.
Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Chakravarty, U. (1993). ‘Conceptualising Brahmanical patriarchy in early India: Gender,
caste, class and state’. Economic and Political Weekly, 579-585.
Das, V. (1976). ‘Indian women: Work, Power and Status’. In B. R. Nanda (ed.) Indian
Women from Purdah to Modernity. New Delhi: Vikas.
Dasgupta, M. (1987). Selective discrimination against female children in rural Punjab,
India. Population and development review, 77-100.
Desai, S. and A. Dubey (2012). ‘Caste in 21st century India: competing
narratives’. Economic and Political Weekly, 46(11): 40.




                                           20
Desai, N., and M. Krishnaraj (2004). An overview of the status of women in
India. Class, Caste, Gender. Ed. Manoranjan Mohanty. New Delhi: Sage Publications,
296-319.
Desai, R. M., and S. Joshi (2014). ‘Collective Action and Community Development:
Evidence from Self-Help Groups in Rural India’. World Bank Economic Review, 28(3):
492-524.
Deshpande, A. (2000). ‘Does caste still define disparity? A look at inequality in Kerala,
India’. The American Economic Review, 90(2): 322-325.
Deshpande, A. (2001). ‘Caste at birth? Redefining disparity in India’. Review of
Development Economics, 5(1): 130-144.
Deshpande, A. (2002). ‘Assets versus autonomy? The changing face of the gender-caste
overlap in India’. Feminist Economics, 8(2): 19-35.
Dirks, N. B. (2011). Castes of mind: Colonialism and the making of modern India.
Princeton University Press.
Dreze, J., and A.K. Sen (2002). India: Development and participation. Oxford University
Press, USA.
Dubey, A., Gangopadhyay, S., and W. Wadhwa (2001). ‘Occupational Structure and
Incidence of Poverty in Indian Towns of Different Sizes’. Review of Development
Economics 5(1): 49-59.
Dumont, L. (1980). Homo Hierarchicus: The Caste System and Its
Implications. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Dube, S. (2005). ‘UNTOUCHABLES’. In Lindsay Jones, Encyclopedia of Religion, 14
(2nd ed.), Thomson Gale, 9474–9478.
Eswaran, M., Ramaswami, B., and W. Wadhwa (2013). Status, caste, and the time
allocation of women in rural India. Economic Development and Cultural Change, 61(2),
pp.311-333.
Galasso, E., and M. Ravallion (2005). ‘Decentralized targeting of an antipoverty
program’. Journal of Public economics, 89(4): 705-727.
Goldin, C. (1994). ‘The U-shaped female labor force function in economic development
and economic history’ (Number. w4707). National Bureau of Economic Research.
Gupta, D. (2000). Interrogating caste: Understanding hierarchy and difference in Indian
society. Penguin Books India.
Hasan, A. B. R. Rizvi and J. K. Das. (2005). People of India: Uttar Pradesh, Volume 42,
Part 2, Anthropological Survey of India.
Huber, J. D., and P. Suryanarayan (2016). ‘Ethnic Inequality and the Ethnification of
Political Parties: Evidence from India’. World Politics, 68(1): 149-188.
Hutton, J. H. (1946). Caste in India: Its Nature, Function and Origin. Bombay: Indian
Branch.
Jaffrelot, C. (2003). India's silent revolution: the rise of the lower castes in North India.
Columbia University Press, 210–211.


                                              21
Jeffery, P. and R. Jeffery (1996). Don't marry me to a plowman! Women's everyday lives
in rural North India. Boulder, CO: Westview Press.
Joshi, V. (1995). Polygamy and purdah: Women and society among Rajputs. India:
Rawat Publications.
Kapadia, K. (1995). Siva and Her Sisters: Gender, Caste, and Class in Rural South India.
Boulder, San Francisco, Oxford: Westview Press.
Khanna, M., Kochhar, N., and N. Palaniswamy (2015). ‘A retrospective impact
evaluation of the Tamil Nadu Empowerment and Poverty Alleviation (Pudhu Vaazhvu)
Project’. The Journal of Development Studies, 51(9): 1–14.
Kumar, H., and R. Somanathan (2017). 'Caste connections and government transfers: The
Mahadalits of Bihar'. Working Paper No. 270. Delhi: Centre for Development
Economics.
Liddle, J. and R. Joshi (1986). Daughters of Independence: Gender, Caste, and Class in
India. New Delhi: Kali for Women; London: Zed Books; Totowa, NJ: Biblio Distribution
Center.
Mani, L. (1998). Contentious traditions: The debate on sati in colonial India. Univ of
California Press.
Mazzocco, M. (2012). Testing efficient risk sharing with heterogeneous risk
preferences. The American Economic Review, 102(1), 428-468.
Mencher, J. P. (1988). ‘Women’s Work and Poverty: Women’s Contribution to
Household Maintenance in South India’. In Daisy Dwyer and Judith Bruce (ed.), A Home
Divided. Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.
Mohanty, M. (ed.) (2004). Class, caste, gender. SAGE Publications India.
Mosse, D. (2012). The saint in the banyan tree: Christianity and caste society in India
(Vol. 14). Univ of California Press.
Mukul, (1999). ‘The Untouchable Present: Everyday Life of Musahars in North
Bihar’. Economic and Political Weekly, 3465-3470.
Munshi, K. (2011). ‘Strength in numbers: Networks as a solution to occupational
traps’. The Review of Economic Studies, 78(3): 1069-1101.
Munshi, K. (2016). ‘Caste Networks in the Modern Indian Economy’. In Development in
India (pp. 13-37). Springer India.
Munshi, K., and M. R Rosenzweig (2006). ‘Traditional Institutions Meet the Modern
World: Caste, Gender and Schooling Choice in a Globalizing Economy’. The American
Economic Review, 96(4): 1225–1252.
Pitt M. M., Khandekar, S. R., and J. Cartwright (2006). ‘Empowering Women with Micro
Finance: Evidence from Bangladesh’. Economic Development and Cultural Change,
54(4): 791-831.
Rao, N. (2014). ‘Caste, Kinship, and Life Course: Rethinking Women's Work and
Agency in Rural South India’. Feminist Economics, 20(3): 78-102.



                                           22
Rao, V., and R. Ban (2007). 'The political construction of caste in South
India'. Processed. Washingon DC: the World Bank.
Revankar, R. G. (1971). The Indian constitution--: a case study of backward classes.
Fairleigh Dickinson Univ Press.
Rodgers, G., and J. Rodgers (2001). ‘A leap across time: When semi-feudalism met the
market in rural Purnia’. Economic and Political Weekly, 36: 1976–1983.
Sanyal, P., Rao, V., & Majumdar, S. (2015). Recasting culture to undo gender: A
sociological analysis of Jeevika in Rural Bihar, India.
Seymour, S. C. (1999). Women, family, and child care in India: A world in transition.
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Sharma, A. N. (2005). ‘Agrarian relations and socio-economic change in Bihar’. Economic
and Political Weekly, 960-972.
Srinivas, M.N. (1962). ‘Caste in modern India and other essays’. Caste in modern India
and other essays.
Srinivas, M. N. (1967). ‘The cohesive role of Sanskritization’. India and Ceylon: unity
and diversity, 67-82.
Srinivas, M.N. (1976). The remembered village (No. 26). California: University of
California Press.
Srinivas, M. N. (1977). The changing position of Indian women. Man, 221-238.
Srinivas, M. N. (1996). Caste: Its Twentieth Century Avatar. New Delhi: Penguin Books.




                                            23
Tables

Table 1: State-level differences

                                                                    India          Bihar            Odisha     Tamil Nadu
 GDP per-capita at current prices                                 Rs. 74,380     Rs. 33,199       Rs. 59,229   Rs. 128,366
 GDP per-capita at 2004-2005 prices                               Rs. 39,904     Rs. 16,801       Rs. 26,531    Rs. 66,635
 GDP per capita in $ at current market exchange rates              $1,627           $682            $1,150       $2,464
 Rank (among 33 states and union territories of India) for GDP         -             33               27             8
 SC population                                                     16.20%          8.20%            16.50%       20.00%
 ST population                                                      8.60%          1.30%            22.80%        1.10%
 Literacy                                                          74.04%         63.82%            73.45%       80.33%
 Literacy among SCs                                                66.10%         48.65%            69.02%       73.26%
 Urban Population                                                  31.16%         11.30%            16.68%       48.45%
 Sex-ratio                                                            943            996              979           916
 Female literacy                                                   65.46%         53.33%            64.36%       73.86%
 Source: GDP numbers are from the Ministry of State Planning and Implementation (2016). Retrieved from
 http://statisticstimes.com/economy/gdp-of-indian-states.php (Nov 8, 2016). Demographic numbers are from the Census of India
 (2011).
Table 2: Summary Statistics
Panel (a): State characteristics: districts, caste and jatis
             Bihar                           Odisha                    Tamil Nadu
                          Sample                      Sample                        Sample
                            %                           %                             %
 (i) Sampled Districts
 Gaya                      3.4     Anugul              11.7    Ariyalur               21
 Madhepura                  31     Balasore            11.8    Dharmapuri             5.2
 Madhubani                 5.1     Bhadrak             10.2    Dindigul              10.3
 Muzaffarpur               18.5    Cuttack             11.7    Karur                  7.9
 Nalanda                   5.6     Jagatsinghpur        8.3    Krishnagiri           16.5
 Saharsa                   19.1    Jajpur               3.3    Madurai                9.4
 Supaul                    17.4    Kendrapada          11.8    Pudukkottai           10.7
                                   Khurda               8.5    Sivaganga              9.9
                                   Nayagarh            10.9    Virudhunagar           9.1
                                   Puri                11.8
 (ii) Caste Composition
 SC                        69.9    SC                  26.7    SC                    31.6
 ST                        1.1     ST                   7.2    ST                    1.8
 EBC                       4.7     OBC                 33.8    MBC                   24.7
 OBC                      16.88    Muslim              1.7     BC                    41.9
 Muslim                    3.8     FC                  30.3
 FC                        3.6
 (iii) Jati Composition
 EBC/MBC: Others           4.7     BC/OBC: Others       13     Kallar                4.8
 Brahmin                   1.3     Brahmin             5.5     Naidu                 1.3
 Rajput                    1.5     Karan               2.7     Parkavakulam            4
 General: Others           0.8     Khandayat           18.7    Thevar                1.9
 Muslim: Others            3.8     General: Others     3.5     Vellalar              10.1
 Dhanuk                    1.2     Muslim: Others      1.7     Yadava                2.1
 Kurmi                     1.3     Chasa                 9     EBC/MBC: Others         6
 Yadav                     6.6     Goala               4.5     Adi Dravidar          22.3
 OBC:Others                7.8     Guria               2.2     Pallar                4.2
 Chamar                    20.5    Tanti                2.5    SC: Others            3.5
 Dobha/Dobh                2.5     Teli                2.5     ST: Others            1.8
 Dushad                    16.7    Barui               3.1     Ambalakarar           3.4
 Musahar                   25.9    Dobha                2.6    Muthuraja             1.9
 Sardar                    2.1     Keuta                2.5    Vanniyar              13.3
 SC: Others                2.3     Kondara              3.9    Chettiar               1.6
 ST: Others                1.1     Pana                7.5     Nadar                 1.2
                                   SC: Others          7.4     Reddiyar              1.4
                                   ST: Others           7.2    Chakkaliyan           1.6
                                                               Vishwakrma            1.3
                                                               BC: Others            12.2




                                                                                    25
Panel (b): Household characteristics
                                                                                                 Bihar    Odisha     Tamil Nadu
Sample size                                                                                      8969      2462         3384
Per capita household monthly consumption expenditure (average in rupees)                         610.1    1176.9       2150.3
Land holding (average in acres)                                                                   0.5       0.6         1.96
Female household head                                                                             16.3      5.9         16.7
Number of members in the household (average)                                                       5.9      5.2          4.4
Distance to nearest town ( average in kilometers)                                                 22.5     54.4         18.8
Employed adults females                                                                           68.2     17.5         62.1
Education profile of the household head
Never went to school                                                                              56.6      20.5         31.3
Primary                                                                                           18.2      33.2         10.1
Above primary but below or equal to senior secondary                                              22.5      20.1         54.7
Above senior secondary                                                                            2.6       26.2         3.9
Panel (c): Characteristics of female respondents (means)
                                                                                                    Bihar Odisha            TN
Age                                                                                                  34.1    42.3          39.8
Age at the time of marriage                                                                          17.9    18.9          19.3
Employment                                                                                           80.3    24.1          76.9
Marital status of the female respondent
Married                                                                                              96.3    93.1           90
Unmarried                                                                                             1.3     0.9           0.7
Widowed/Separated/Not cohabiting                                                                      2.4    5.9            9.3
Education profile of female respondents
Never went to school                                                                                 78.1    37.6           40
Primary                                                                                               11     29.4           9.1
Above primary but below or equal to senior secondary                                                 10.3    17.7          48.5
Above senior secondary                                                                                0.6    15.3           2.4
Intra-household decision making: Does female respondent provide any input in the following decisions made in the household?
Purchase of household durables                                                                       91.7    82.9          86.3
Children's education                                                                                 84.1     63           84.8
Own livelihood activity                                                                              79.5    64.2          77.4
Politics (like who to vote for)                                                                      78.6    41.6          87.3
Mobility of female respondent
Bank                                                                                                 20.1    21.1           76
Store                                                                                                75.1    45.3            -
Health centre                                                                                        93.1    94.1            -
Friend/ neighbour/ relative                                                                          97.4     96             -
Taluk Office                                                                                           -       -            30
Police Station                                                                                         -       -            5.5
Source: Authors' calculations based on data collected by Social Observatory, World Bank and state Government of Bihar, Odisha and
Tamil Nadu, respectively.




                                                                                        26
Table 3: Empowerment regressions with government-defined caste categories

 Panel (a): Bihar                  (1)            (2)            (3)                (4)          (5)         (6)            (7)             (8)         (9)
                                                                       Input                                                     Mobility
                                                                                                                            Health
                               Employed        Durables        Tuition         Livelihoods    Politics       Store          Centre        Friend        Bank
 ST                              -0.0342        -0.0491        -0.0434           -0.0317      -0.105*       0.0252         -0.0753       0.00463      0.0460
                                  (-0.88)        (-1.37)        (-1.08)           (-0.80)      (-2.37)      (0.55)          (-1.92)       (0.24)       (0.98)
 OBC                           -0.0917***       0.00301        0.0226*         -0.0942***    -0.00350     -0.117***      -0.0239**      0.00192      -0.00377
                                  (-8.32)        (0.35)         (2.10)            (-7.09)      (-0.28)      (-8.44)         (-2.78)       (0.42)       (-0.28)
 EBC                           -0.0808***      -0.00748         0.0167         -0.0916***     0.0148      -0.0409*        -0.00227      -0.00809      0.0210
                                  (-4.67)        (-0.58)        (1.05)            (-4.43)      (0.77)       (-2.09)         (-0.20)       (-0.97)      (0.97)
 Muslim                         -0.191***     -0.000158       -0.00925          -0.134***     -0.0332     -0.118***      -0.000230       -0.0129      -0.0220
                                  (-8.72)        (-0.01)        (-0.44)           (-4.97)      (-1.38)      (-4.73)         (-0.02)       (-1.10)      (-0.91)
 General                        -0.271***       -0.0113       -0.00355          -0.185***     -0.0192     -0.271***        0.00219       -0.0210      -0.0501
                                 (-12.01)        (-0.80)        (-0.18)           (-6.59)      (-0.86)      (-9.52)         (0.16)        (-1.82)      (-1.85)
 Some Schooling                -0.0936***       0.0198*       0.0364***          -0.0035      0.0256*    -0.0598***         0.0052       0.0084      0.115***
                                  (-8.62)        (2.38)         (3.49)            (-0.27)      (2.13)       (-4.49)         (0.67)        (1.79)       (8.85)
 Female headed household        0.0507***       0.0193*       0.0338**          0.0596***     0.0272*     0.0462***        -0.0145       -0.0084      0.0158
                                  (4.98)         (2.34)         (3.03)            (5.13)       (2.21)       (3.85)          (-1.77)       (-1.51)      (1.26)
 Per capita expenditure          -0.156**       -0.0684        0.0299             -0.106       0.122*      -0.0328         -0.0151       0.0335      0.225***
                                  (-3.00)        (-1.77)        (0.54)            (-1.70)      (2.00)       (-0.53)         (-0.42)       (1.31)       (3.34)
 Per capita expenditure
 squared                          0.0237        0.0223         -0.0440        0.0417      -0.0697*         -0.0343        0.00265         -0.0170       -0.0573
                                  (0.82)         (1.14)         (-1.45)        (1.24)      (-2.11)          (-1.04)         (0.15)         (-1.32)       (-1.51)
 Land                           -0.0112***      0.0007          0.004*         -0.005       0.001        -0.0163***        -0.0022        0.0023*        0.01**
                                  (-4.84)        (0.38)         (1.98)        (-1.45)       (0.38)          (-4.41)         (-0.91)        (2.45)        (2.93)
 Observations                     12584           8637           8637           8637         8637            8637            8637           8637          8637
 Adjusted R-squared                0.302         0.087           0.122         0.118        0.135            0.205           0.090          0.024         0.086
 Notes: (1) Source: Author's calculations based on data collected by Social Observatory, World Bank and Government of Bihar. (2) SC is the omitted caste
 group. (3) Each column represents a separate regression wherein an `empowerment indicator’ is regressed on variables that are reported as well as
 additional controls: age, age squared, marital status of the woman, age at marriage, and a dummy variable for some schooling of the female respondent; a
 dummy variable for whether it is female-headed household, per-capital expenditure, per-capita expenditure squared, landholdings, education of the
 household head, number of members in the household and panchayat level fixed-effects. The female employment is run for all female adults in the sample
 (individual level). (4) We report robust standard errors in the brackets. (5) We report the level of significance: * p value < .05 , ** p value < .01 and *** p
 value < .001.




                                                                                       27
Panel (b): Odisha                   (1)            (2)            (3)                  (4)               (5)      (6)            (7)          (8)        (9)
                                                                          Input                                                   Mobility
                                                                             Livelihood                                        Health
                                Employed        Durables        Tuition            s              Politics        Store        Centre       Friend       Bank
ST                               0.187***        -0.0166       -0.0354         -0.0610            -0.0613       0.0493         0.0256       0.0165     -0.0453
                                   (4.81)         (-0.45)       (-0.67)         (-1.19)            (-1.24)       (0.97)        (1.16)        (1.03)     (-1.03)
OBC                             -0.0511***     -0.0899***       0.0017       -0.0864***            0.0460       -0.0346        -0.006       0.0078      0.0277
                                   (-3.31)        (-4.15)       (0.06)          (-3.34)            (1.66)        (-1.28)       (-0.41)       (0.60)     (1.18)
Muslim                              0.101          0.119         0.148         -0.0703             0.0135      -0.00933       0.00558       0.0164     -0.0318
                                   (1.69)         (1.58)        (1.61)          (-0.77)            (0.14)        (-0.10)       (0.11)        (1.30)     (-0.47)
FC                              -0.0859***       -0.0364        0.0173        -0.0572*             0.0335       -0.0521        0.0135       0.0110      0.0403
                                   (-5.63)        (-1.59)       (0.61)          (-2.10)            (1.16)        (-1.87)       (0.98)        (0.81)     (1.60)
Some Schooling                  -0.0726***      0.0630**       0.0629**         0.0237            0.00656      -0.0751**      0.00636       0.0023 0.117***
                                   (-4.57)        (3.24)        (2.69)          (1.02)             (0.27)        (-3.17)       (0.51)        (0.23)     (6.06)
Female headed household          0.0767**         0.0206       -0.0164         -0.0616            0.188**         0.105        0.0270       0.0193     -0.0534
                                   (2.67)         (0.37)        (-0.26)         (-0.96)            (2.75)        (1.58)        (0.88)        (0.56)     (-1.00)
Per capita expenditure            -0.0087        -0.0007        0.0065          0.0147            -0.0067        -0.008        0.0046       0.0031     -0.0031
                                   (-1.77)        (-0.09)       (0.80)          (1.76)             (-0.86)       (-0.94)       (1.04)        (1.46)     (-0.38)
Per capita expenditure                                                                                                                          -
squared                            0.0004*        0.0001         -0.0001       -0.0005         0.0003         0.0005        -0.00009        0.0000      0.0003
                                    (2.10)         (0.20)         (-0.44)       (-1.50)        (0.91)         (1.35)         (-0.63)        (-0.14)     (0.90)
                                                                                                                                            0.0054
Land                              -0.0087*        0.0088          0.0034       -0.0141         0.0033       -0.0328***       0.0029             *      -0.0090
                                   (-2.09)         (1.64)         (0.40)        (-1.76)        (0.39)         (-3.88)         (0.93)         (2.29)     (-1.36)
Observations                         4077           2246           2246          2246           2246           2246            2246           2246       2246
Adjusted R-squared                  0.212          0.141           0.188         0.199         0.201           0.244          0.075          0.063       0.088
Notes: (1) Source: Author's calculations based on data collected by Social Observatory, World Bank and Government of Odisha. Notes (2) - (5) of Table 3(a)
apply.




                                                                                             28
Panel (c): Tamil Nadu               (1)          (2)          (3)             (4)        (5)            (6)             (7)           (8)
                                                                     Input:                                          Mobility:
                                Employed      Durables      Tuition      Livelihood    Politics       Bank        Taluk Office   Police Station
ST                                0.0867      -0.0609       -0.111*       -0.0884      -0.0986      -0.0304          0.0165        -0.00567
                                   (1.78)      (-1.16)       (-2.07)        (-1.35)     (-1.73)      (-0.44)         (0.24)         (-0.16)
MBC                              -0.00889     -0.0305      -0.0437*       -0.0201     -0.0454**     0.00678        -0.0584**       -0.00910
                                  (-0.52)      (-1.73)       (-2.55)        (-1.00)     (-2.67)      (0.32)          (-2.64)        (-0.78)
BC                              -0.0486***     0.0101       -0.0143       0.00286      -0.0107      0.0411*         -0.0334        -0.0259**
                                  (-3.31)      (0.72)        (-0.93)        (0.16)      (-0.76)      (2.27)          (-1.76)        (-2.62)
                                                           0.000037
Some schooling
                                 0.0395**      0.00402          1         0.0347*      0.0118      0.0478**         0.0454*        0.00979
                                  (2.99)        (0.29)       (0.00)         (2.08)      (0.89)       (2.92)          (2.46)         (1.04)
Female-headed household         0.0601***     0.0703***    0.0842***        0.0151    0.0710***    0.0711**         0.0208           0.006
                                  (3.37)        (3.60)       (4.17)         (0.61)      (3.89)       (2.94)          (0.81)         (0.40)
Per-capita expenditure          -0.0196***     0.00143      0.00436       0.0110*      0.00678     0.0351***       0.0470***       0.0107**
                                  (-3.53)       (0.28)       (0.85)         (1.97)      (1.46)       (5.95)          (5.25)         (2.60)
Per-capita expenditure
squared                         0.0001***     -0.00001      -0.0003      -0.0001*      -0.0000     -0.0002***     -0.0003***       -0.0001**
                                  (3.94)       (-0.25)       (-0.87)      (-2.20)       (-1.25)      (-5.74)        (-5.61)          (-2.80)
Land                             0.0001       -0.0011**     0.0003      -0.0012**      0.0004        0.0002         0.0004          -0.0002
                                  (0.25)       (-2.66)       (0.80)       (-2.59)       (1.95)       (0.43)         (0.66)           (-1.05)

Observations                        5190         3284          3280          3283        3279          3299         3299             3299
Adjusted R-squared                  0.276        0.119         0.119         0.150       0.077        0.135         0.149           0.051
Notes: (1) Source: Author's calculations based on data collected by Social Observatory, World Bank and Government of Tamil Nadu. . Notes (2) -
(5) of Table 3(a) apply.




                                                                                         29
Table 4: Empowerment regressions with caste categories interacted with per capita monthly consumption expenditure (exp.)

                                                                  Input                                                      Mobility
                                                                                                                       Health
                    Employed         Durables          Tuition         Livelihoods        Politics        Store        Centre       Friend          Bank
 (a) Bihar
                                                                                                                          -
 ST x exp             0.416*           0.176           -0.0509               0.197        -0.210           0.129      0.00211         0.162        -0.493*
                      (2.28)           (1.43)           (-0.28)             (1.41)       (-1.48)           (0.51)      (-0.01)       (1.43)         (-2.06)
 OBC x exp           -0.0491         0.000703          0.0678               0.0453       0.0829*         -0.00848      0.0303        0.0183        -0.0837
                      (-1.24)          (0.02)           (1.74)              (1.04)        (2.02)          (-0.17)      (1.02)        (0.99)         (-1.81)
                                                                                                                          -
 EBC x exp          0.00654           -0.0837          -0.0484              -0.149       0.0930          -0.0155      0.00958       -0.0433         0.0859
                     (0.09)            (-1.33)          (-0.64)             (-1.80)       (1.28)          (-0.20)      (-0.20)       (-0.94)        (0.90)
 Muslim x exp       -0.0614           0.0632           0.0117               -0.135       -0.0305          0.0303      -0.0793       -0.0178        -0.0268
                     (-0.77)           (1.14)           (0.12)              (-1.26)       (-0.32)         (0.32)       (-1.10)       (-0.40)        (-0.30)
 FC x exp           -0.183**          0.0335           0.0815               0.0366       -0.0650          0.0234      -0.0115        0.0175        -0.0836
                     (-2.72)           (0.92)           (1.33)              (0.45)        (-0.89)         (0.25)       (-0.28)       (0.57)         (-1.09)
 (b) Odisha
 ST x exp            -0.0418          0.0171           0.0323               0.0125        0.0556          0.0532       0.0175       0.00632        -0.0399
                      (-0.95)          (1.08)          (0.84)                (0.26)       (1.54)          (1.77)       (1.21)        (0.76)         (-1.60)
 OBC x exp           -0.0115          0.00804          0.0131              -0.00263       0.0169         0.00563      0.00534      -0.000744      0.000194
                      (-1.73)          (0.67)          (1.16)               (-0.21)       (1.56)          (0.45)       (0.59)        (-0.25)        (0.01)
                                                                                                             -
 Muslim x exp       0.00351          -0.00375         -0.00671              -0.0321      -0.0208        0.0000347 0.00458          -0.00215       -0.00692
                      (0.19)           (-0.19)         (-0.20)               (-1.14)      (-1.21)         (-0.00)      (0.57)       (-0.63)        (-0.31)
 FC x exp           -0.00238          0.00631         0.00969               0.00260      0.0167*         0.00557      0.00547      0.000148       0.00509
                     (-0.35)           (0.66)           (1.21)               (0.32)       (2.35)          (0.60)       (1.27)        (0.07)         (0.57)
                                                                  Input:                                       Mobility:
                                                                                                                        Taluk       Police
                    Employed         Durables          Tuition             Livelihood     Politics         Bank
                                                                                                                        Office      Station
 (c) TN
 ST x exp             -0.00738            0.0164             0.0324        0.0496           0.0645          0.0400     -0.0673        -0.0212
                        (-0.23)            (0.33)            (0.66)        (0.96)           (1.81)          (0.83)      (-1.45)        (-1.49)
 MBC × exp            -0.00862           -0.00203           -0.0107       -0.0177          -0.0118         -0.0314*    -0.0277       -0.00177
                        (-0.61)            (-0.14)           (-0.83)       (-1.16)          (-0.92)         (-2.03)     (-1.38)        (-0.16)
 BC × exp              -0.0116            0.00119          -0.00241      0.00142          -0.00679         0.00430      0.0145       -0.00670
                        (-1.11)            (0.14)            (-0.28)       (0.15)           (-0.96)         (0.40)       (0.82)        (-0.79)
 Notes: (1) Source: Author's calculations based on data collected by Social Observatory, World Bank and Government of Bihar, Odisha and Tamil Nadu for
 the respective states. (2) SC is the omitted caste group. (3) Each column represents a separate regression wherein an `empowerment indicator’ is
 regressed on variables that are reported as well as additional controls: age, age squared, marital status of the woman, age at marriage, and a dummy
 variable for some schooling of the female respondent; a dummy variable for whether it is female-headed household, per-capital expenditure, per-capita
 expenditure squared, landholdings, education of the household head, number of members in the household and panchayat level fixed-effects. The female
 employment is run for all female adults in the sample (individual level). (4) We report robust standard errors in the brackets. (5) We report the level of
 significance: * p value < 05 , ** p value < .01 and *** p value < .001.




                                                                                            30
Table 5: Empowerment regressions with jati identifiers, Bihar

                                                          Input:
                                    Employed             Durables         Tuition      Livelihood        Politics          Store       Health center      Friend             Bank
 Panel (a): SC-ST Jatis
 SC: Chamar                             0.125***         -0.00461        -0.00392      0.102***          0.0221          0.126***        0.00781          0.00661          0.00429
                                        (10.79)            (-0.52)         (-0.34)       (7.52)           (1.69)          (9.26)           (0.97)          (1.27)           (0.31)
 SC: Dobha                             0.0673**           -0.0264         0.0164        0.0667*          -0.0563        -0.00181          0.0291*        -0.00699           0.0154
                                         (2.70)            (-1.35)         (0.70)        (2.25)           (-1.89)         (-0.06)          (2.20)          (-0.57)          (0.53)
 SC: Dushad                            0.0872***           0.0152        -0.00129      0.0975***        0.00896         0.0979***         0.0159         0.00948           0.0467**
                                         (7.05)            (1.74)          (-0.11)       (6.75)           (0.67)          (6.84)           (1.84)          (1.87)           (3.19)
 SC: Musahar                            0.172***         -0.00449        -0.0312**     0.123***          -0.0102         0.156***         0.0189*         0.00109          -0.0219
                                        (15.93)            (-0.47)         (-2.68)       (9.61)           (-0.78)        (11.56)           (2.14)          (0.19)           (-1.67)
 SC: Sardar                              0.0366            0.0112         -0.0160       0.141***         0.0944*          0.0180          0.00144        0.000129           0.0251
                                         (0.93)            (0.31)          (-0.38)       (3.40)           (2.15)          (0.35)           (0.05)          (0.00)           (0.50)
 SC: Others                            0.0757**           0.0152         -0.0747**     0.143***         0.00961          0.0710*         -0.00892        -0.00359          -0.0389
                                         (2.87)            (0.85)          (-2.64)       (5.29)           (0.32)          (2.37)           (-0.45)         (-0.28)          (-1.40)
 ST                                     0.0976*           -0.0492         -0.0634       0.0830*         -0.0977*         0.149**          -0.0603         0.00741           0.0455
                                         (2.47)            (-1.35)         (-1.55)       (2.05)           (-2.17)         (3.16)           (-1.52)         (0.39)           (0.96)
 Observations                            12584              8637            8637          8637             8637            8637             8637            8637             8637
 Adjusted R-squared                      0.300              0.087           0.123        0.117             0.136           0.204            0.090           0.023            0.088
 Panel (b): Non-SC Jatis
 OBC: Dhanuk                                  -0.0424           0.0244       0.0159        -0.0558           0.00743          -0.0872       -0.0922**        -0.00324            -0.0292
                                               (-1.30)           (0.78)       (0.47)        (-1.43)           (0.18)           (-1.94)         (-2.62)         (-0.21)            (-0.76)
  OBC: Kurmi                                 -0.0910**           0.0285       0.0571       -0.0394           0.00484          -0.0584          0.0179         0.00726           0.00790
                                               (-2.84)           (1.29)       (1.89)        (-0.94)           (0.12)           (-1.50)         (0.85)          (0.72)             (0.19)
  OBC: Yadav                                -0.0877***          0.00336       0.0184     -0.0936***           0.0284        -0.157***        -0.00916         0.00732            -0.0104
                                               (-5.36)           (0.26)       (1.20)        (-4.57)           (1.63)           (-7.20)         (-0.75)         (1.19)             (-0.54)
  OBC: Other                                 -0.101***         -0.00327      0.0227       -0.109***          -0.0277        -0.104***        -0.0285*        -0.00269           0.00182
                                               (-6.69)           (-0.29)      (1.55)        (-6.07)           (-1.64)          (-5.53)         (-2.38)         (-0.41)            (0.10)
  EBC                                       -0.0801***         -0.00666       0.0173     -0.0913***           0.0165         -0.0423*       -0.000900        -0.00815             0.0202
                                               (-4.63)           (-0.52)      (1.09)        (-4.41)           (0.86)           (-2.16)         (-0.08)         (-0.98)            (0.93)
  FC: Brahmin                                -0.336***         -0.00521      -0.0136      -0.238***          -0.0166        -0.255***          0.0253         -0.0184           -0.0906*
                                              (-10.10)           (-0.25)      (-0.45)       (-5.34)           (-0.48)          (-5.60)         (1.41)          (-1.03)            (-2.28)
  FC: Rajput                                 -0.218***         -0.00985      0.00279      -0.165***          -0.0491        -0.383***         0.00328         -0.0279            -0.0186
                                               (-6.21)           (-0.47)      (0.10)        (-3.90)           (-1.37)          (-9.30)         (0.15)          (-1.55)            (-0.44)
  FC: Others                                 -0.242***          -0.0195      0.00648       -0.120*            0.0510          -0.106*         -0.0264         -0.0113            -0.0421
                                               (-5.51)           (-0.65)      (0.16)        (-2.22)           (1.33)           (-1.98)         (-0.92)         (-0.55)            (-0.79)
  Muslims                                    -0.190***         0.000654     -0.00842      -0.133***          -0.0325        -0.118***       0.000623          -0.0130            -0.0223
                                               (-8.69)           (0.04)       (-0.40)       (-4.94)           (-1.36)          (-4.73)         (0.04)          (-1.12)            (-0.93)
  Observations                                 12584              8637         8637          8637              8637             8637            8637            8637               8637
  Adjusted R-squared                            0.302             0.086        0.122         0.118             0.135            0.208           0.090           0.023              0.086
Notes: (1) Source: Authors' calculations based on data collected by Social Observatory, World Bank and Government of Bihar. (2) In panel (a), Non-SC jatis are the excluded group while in
Panel (b), SCs are the excluded group. (3) Each column represents a separate regression wherein an `empowerment indicator’ is regressed on variables that are reported as well as
additional controls: age, age squared, marital status of the woman, age at marriage, and a dummy variable for some schooling of the female respondent; a dummy variable for whether it is
female-headed household, per-capital expenditure, per-capita expenditure squared, landholdings, education of the household head, number of members in the household and panchayat
level fixed-effects. The female employment is run for all female adults in the sample (individual level). (4) We report robust standard errors in the brackets. (5) We report the level of
significance: * p value < .05 , ** p value < .01 and *** p value < .01.

                                                                                            31
Table 6: Empowerment regressions with jati identifiers, Odisha
                                                                                      Input:                                                        Mobility:
                                       Employed           Durables         Tuition        Livelihood       Politics          Store       Health center     Friend       Bank
 Panel (a): SC-ST Jatis
 SC: Barui                             0.179***           0.0695          -0.0483          0.00416          0.0719          0.183**         -0.0356         0.0173      -0.0190
                                         (4.53)            (1.22)          (-0.77)          (0.07)          (1.16)           (2.94)          (-1.07)        (0.70)       (-0.40)
 SC: Dobha                              0.0501             0.106*          0.0676          0.172**         -0.0123           0.0612          0.0210       -0.00333     0.00376
                                         (1.63)            (1.98)          (1.01)           (3.21)          (-0.17)          (0.87)          (1.94)         (-0.09)      (0.07)
 SC: Keuta                              0.0706           0.0980***        -0.0206           0.0957         -0.151*           0.0213         0.00288        0.0239*      -0.0653
                                         (1.82)            (3.53)          (-0.35)          (1.65)          (-2.40)          (0.34)          (0.09)         (1.99)       (-1.12)
 SC: Kondara                           -0.00784           0.126**         0.00819          0.0975*         -0.0259          -0.0184         0.0355*         0.0300      -0.0448
                                        (-0.29)            (2.96)          (0.17)           (2.00)          (-0.52)          (-0.39)         (2.24)         (1.53)       (-1.04)
 SC: Pana                               0.0152            -0.0105         -0.0186          0.0981*        -0.00120           0.0136         -0.0228        -0.0475       0.0167
                                         (0.63)            (-0.30)         (-0.42)          (2.27)          (-0.03)          (0.32)          (-0.88)        (-1.92)      (0.46)
 SC: Others                            0.111***           0.0452          -0.0423          0.00767         -0.114*          0.0449         -0.00315        -0.0248     -0.0827*
                                         (4.02)            (1.48)          (-1.02)          (0.20)          (-2.45)          (1.04)          (-0.13)        (-1.13)      (-2.29)
 ST                                    0.250***            0.0492         -0.0468           0.0139         -0.105*          0.0889          0.0237        0.00590       -0.0762
                                         (6.77)            (1.45)          (-0.94)          (0.29)          (-2.27)          (1.86)          (1.22)         (0.47)       (-1.87)
 Observations                             4077              2246            2246             2246            2246             2246            2246           2246         2246
 Adjusted R-squared                      0.214              0.138           0.187           0.200            0.204            0.246           0.075          0.067        0.088
 Panel (b): Other Jatis
 OBC: Chasa                             -0.0533*          -0.122***         0.0117         -0.0604         0.115**          -0.0531        -0.00199        -0.00522    0.105**
                                          (-2.12)           (-3.86)         (0.29)          (-1.42)         (3.11)           (-1.24)         (-0.13)         (-0.31)    (2.79)
 OBC: Goala                            -0.124***           -0.131**       -0.00955         -0.0717         -0.0239          -0.0658        -0.00921          0.0246    0.00334
                                          (-4.48)           (-3.14)         (-0.19)         (-1.51)         (-0.48)          (-1.36)         (-0.42)         (1.19)     (0.08)
 OBC: Guria                             -0.114**           -0.0342         0.0762          0.00820           0.122            0.104         -0.0293         -0.0640    -0.0307
                                          (-2.99)           (-0.51)         (1.03)          (0.13)          (1.65)           (1.25)          (-0.72)         (-1.35)    (-0.45)
 OBC: Tanti                             -0.106**            0.0188          0.0700          -0.102        -0.00954          -0.0199        0.000958         0.00808     0.0851
                                          (-2.85)           (0.32)          (1.10)          (-1.54)         (-0.14)          (-0.27)         (0.02)          (0.24)     (1.43)
 OBC: Teli                               -0.0382           -0.0311         0.0602          -0.0988          0.0210           -0.126        0.00476           0.0378    0.0249
                                          (-1.13)           (-0.63)         (0.88)          (-1.60)         (0.29)           (-1.96)         (0.16)          (1.56)     (0.41)
 OBC: Others                          -0.0893***         -0.0880***        -0.0195        -0.0979**         0.0561          -0.0436         -0.0174         0.00873    0.00812
                                          (-4.75)           (-3.36)         (-0.58)         (-2.99)         (1.60)           (-1.31)         (-0.85)         (0.58)     (0.27)
 FC: Brahmin                           -0.173***            0.0430          0.0492         -0.0384          0.0543          -0.0592         0.0457*          0.0200     0.0383
                                          (-7.64)           (1.15)          (1.00)          (-0.81)         (1.04)           (-1.21)         (2.24)          (0.89)     (0.83)
 FC: Karan                             -0.0940**           -0.0730          0.0220         -0.205**       -0.00969          -0.0698          0.0186         0.00570     0.0624
                                          (-2.96)           (-1.32)         (0.35)          (-3.05)         (-0.14)          (-1.19)         (0.52)          (0.23)     (0.94)
 FC: Khandayat                         -0.105***          -0.0569*         0.00384         -0.0496          0.0167         -0.0765*        -0.00327         0.00821     0.0334
                                          (-6.56)           (-2.20)         (0.12)          (-1.70)         (0.53)           (-2.44)         (-0.22)         (0.56)     (1.20)
                                                                                                                                                                 -
 FC: Others
                                        -0.0995**           0.0101           0.0722         0.0190        0.146**        0.0206            0.0172         0.000242      0.0879
                                         (-2.96)            (0.24)           (1.25)         (0.34)         (2.89)         (0.43)            (0.65)           (-0.01)    (1.74)
 Muslims                                 0.0814              0.124            0.157        -0.0576        0.0192        -0.00512          0.00275            0.0106    -0.0339
                                          (1.34)            (1.65)           (1.70)         (-0.63)        (0.20)        (-0.06)            (0.05)           (0.79)     (-0.50)
 Observations                              4077              2246             2246           2246           2246           2246              2246             2246       2246
 Adjusted R-squared                       0.206              0.145            0.188          0.199         0.203          0.245             0.073             0.064      0.089
 Notes: (1) Source: Authors' calculations based on data collected by Social Observatory, World Bank and Government of Odisha. . Notes (2) - (5) of Table 5 apply.


                                                                                            32
Table 7: Empowerment regressions with jati identifiers, Tamil Nadu
                                                              Input:                                              Mobility:
                          Employed    Durables    Tuition              Livelihood        Politics     Bank       Taluk Office   Police Station
 Panel (a): SC-ST Jatis
 SC: Adidravidar          0.0394**     0.0136     0.0400**               0.0222           0.0254     -0.0176      0.0599**         0.0208*
                           (2.72)      (0.96)      (2.70)                (1.27)           (1.79)      (-0.96)      (3.05)           (1.99)
 SC: Chakkaliyan           0.0454     -0.0276      0.0226               -0.0798          -0.0560      0.0126      -0.0342          0.0436
                           (0.87)      (-0.46)     (0.41)                (-1.28)          (-0.96)     (0.20)       (-0.47)          (1.01)
 SC: Pallar                0.0365     -0.0109     -0.0237              -0.00954           0.0541     -0.0160       0.0191         -0.00603
                           (1.10)      (-0.34)     (-0.68)               (-0.25)          (1.83)      (-0.39)      (0.45)          (-0.32)
 SC: Others               -0.0200     -0.0208     -0.0135               -0.0555          0.00477     -0.143**     -0.0167          0.0352
                           (-0.51)     (-0.58)     (-0.36)               (-1.31)          (0.13)      (-3.03)      (-0.39)          (1.21)
 ST                        0.116*     -0.0497     -0.0784               -0.0792          -0.0730     -0.0565       0.0637          0.0139
                           (2.36)      (-0.94)     (-1.46)               (-1.21)          (-1.28)     (-0.81)      (0.92)           (0.40)
 Observations               5190        3284        3280                  3283             3279        3299         3299             3299
 Adjusted R-squared         0.276       0.117       0.119                 0.151            0.076       0.136        0.149           0.050
 Panel (b): Non-SC
 Jatis
 MBC: Ambalakarar           0.0463     -0.0110     -0.0867              0.00655           -0.0636     -0.0640     -0.141**        0.00288
                            (1.25)      (-0.24)     (-1.95)              (0.14)            (-1.64)     (-1.36)      (-3.18)         (0.10)
 MBC: Muthuraja             0.0383     -0.0558      0.0171              0.00438           -0.0263    -0.00620      -0.0146         -0.0165
                            (0.77)      (-0.95)     (0.35)               (0.07)            (-0.59)     (-0.11)      (-0.24)         (-0.57)
 MBC: Vanniyar            -0.00369     -0.0143     -0.0261              -0.0203           -0.0124      0.0388      -0.0440         -0.0154
                            (-0.17)     (-0.68)     (-1.23)              (-0.79)           (-0.57)     (1.35)       (-1.40)         (-1.02)
 MBC: Others              -0.0745**    -0.0492     -0.0485              -0.0299          -0.0729*     0.00309      -0.0549       -0.00608
                            (-2.65)     (-1.61)     (-1.65)              (-0.89)           (-2.51)     (0.10)       (-1.62)         (-0.33)
 BC: Chettiar              -0.0327     -0.0101    -0.00425              -0.0505           -0.0364      0.0261      -0.0150          0.0362
                            (-0.57)     (-0.18)     (-0.08)              (-0.73)           (-0.60)     (0.40)       (-0.21)         (0.91)
 BC: Kallar               -0.00500      0.0276    -0.00618               0.0739           -0.0458    0.00543        0.0194         -0.0103
                            (-0.15)     (0.81)      (-0.17)              (1.78)            (-1.32)     (0.13)       (0.44)          (-0.38)
 BC: Nadar                 -0.0761     -0.0258     -0.0564              -0.0439           -0.0408      0.0539      0.00706       -0.0481**
                            (-1.16)     (-0.45)     (-0.87)              (-0.66)           (-0.72)     (0.90)       (0.08)          (-2.62)
 BC: Naidu                 -0.155*      0.0730     -0.0141              -0.0149            0.0607     0.0948*      -0.0340         -0.0370
                            (-2.14)     (1.39)      (-0.21)              (-0.20)           (1.39)      (2.11)       (-0.51)         (-1.06)
 BC: Parkavakulam          0.0434      0.0354      0.00918              -0.0390            0.0129     0.0879*      -0.0472        0.00936
                            (1.16)      (1.18)      (0.25)               (-0.80)           (0.46)      (2.08)       (-0.94)         (0.34)
 BC: Reddiyar              -0.147*     -0.0949      -0.104              -0.0691            -0.123     -0.0652     -0.00880        -0.0601*
                            (-2.52)     (-1.44)     (-1.54)              (-0.98)           (-1.82)     (-0.89)      (-0.13)         (-2.45)
 BC: Thevar                0.0522      0.0191      -0.0178               0.0625            0.0224      0.0559       0.0616        0.00206
                            (1.03)      (0.53)      (-0.43)              (1.87)            (0.56)      (0.95)       (1.02)          (0.06)
 BC: Vellalar             -0.0669**    0.0177     -0.00181              0.0224           0.00684     0.00447      -0.0605*       -0.0404**
                            (-2.74)     (0.73)      (-0.07)              (0.79)            (0.28)      (0.15)       (-2.08)         (-2.58)
 BC: Vishwakrma            -0.0127     -0.0426      0.0312               0.0342            0.0414      0.0446      -0.0930         -0.0329
                            (-0.25)     (-0.76)     (0.59)               (0.52)            (0.84)      (0.80)       (-1.34)         (-0.97)
 BC: Yadava                -0.0692    -0.00205     -0.0310              -0.0200           -0.0276    0.171***       0.0448         -0.0363

                                                                                    33
                                                                          Input:                                                Mobility:
                             Employed         Durables           Tuition         Livelihood      Politics        Bank         Taluk Office       Police Station
                               (-1.46)          (-0.04)           (-0.65)          (-0.35)        (-0.61)       (3.38)            (0.72)            (-1.18)
BC: Others                   -0.0806***        0.00856           -0.0187          -0.00469       -0.0139        0.0506          -0.0572*           -0.0328*
                               (-3.70)          (0.41)            (-0.82)          (-0.18)        (-0.64)       (1.89)            (-2.09)           (-2.39)
Observations                    5190             3284              3280             3283           3279          3299              3299               3299
Adjusted R-squared              0.279            0.117             0.117            0.149          0.077         0.136             0.149             0.050
Notes: (1) Source: Authors' calculations based on data collected by Social Observatory, World Bank and Government of Tamil Nadu. . Notes (2) - (5) of Table 5
apply..




                                                                                          34
Table 8: Empowerment regressions with jati identifiers interacted with per capita monthly consumption expenditure (exp.), Bihar
                                                                    Input:                                                Mobility:
                               Employed        Durables      Tuition    Livelihood      Politics       Store       Health center    Friend         Bank
 Panel (a): SC-ST Jatis
 SC: Chamar x exp               0.129**        0.00700      -0.131**       0.0445      -0.0615       -0.0257         -0.00361        0.00937      0.0387
                                 (2.94)         (0.24)       (-2.83)       (0.91)       (-1.29)       (-0.49)          (-0.12)        (0.59)      (0.77)
 SC: Dobha x exp                 -0.139        0.0899        0.177*       0.0195        -0.216       0.00440           0.0104        -0.0383       0.139
                                 (-1.52)        (1.39)       (1.98)        (0.19)       (-1.90)       (0.03)           (0.28)         (-0.83)     (1.16)
 SC: Dushad x exp                0.115*        -0.0263       0.0214       -0.0164      -0.0227        0.0402           0.0422        -0.0302      0.0648
                                 (2.32)         (-0.73)      (0.41)        (-0.29)      (-0.43)       (0.72)           (1.16)         (-1.07)     (1.14)
 SC: Musahar x exp               0.106*        -0.0159      -0.0775       -0.0274      -0.0212        0.0766          -0.0577       -0.00331      0.0263
                                 (2.42)         (-0.36)      (-1.42)       (-0.52)      (-0.37)       (1.41)           (-1.28)        (-0.12)     (0.52)
 SC: Sardar x exp               -0.0661         0.0443      -0.0493        0.0115       -0.137       0.0430           0.00305         0.0670       0.159
                                 (-0.54)        (0.56)       (-0.48)       (0.10)       (-1.36)       (0.29)           (0.06)         (1.32)      (1.14)
 SC: Others x exp                 0.143         -0.130      -0.0604       -0.0131      -0.257*         0.186          -0.0142        -0.0348      0.0811
                                 (1.26)         (-1.13)      (-0.47)       (-0.11)      (-2.02)       (1.52)           (-0.13)        (-0.43)     (0.55)
 ST x exp                       0.496**          0.223      -0.0175         0.192       -0.190         0.152          -0.0131          0.157      -0.437
                                 (2.69)         (1.02)       (-0.07)       (0.78)       (-0.82)       (0.59)           (-0.06)        (1.37)      (-1.81)
 Observations                    12584           8637         8637          8637         8637          8637             8637           8637        8637
 Adjusted R-squared               0.301          0.087        0.124         0.116        0.136         0.204            0.090          0.023       0.088
 Panel (b): Non-SC Jatis
 OBC: Dhanuk x exp                -0.0148         0.0495           0.117        -0.162        0.0608     0.112         -0.168         0.0357       -0.266*
                                   (-0.09)         (0.43)         (0.82)        (-0.90)       (0.35)    (0.53)         (-0.90)        (0.89)        (-2.06)
 OBC: Kurmi x exp                   0.126         -0.0133          0.134        0.0698        0.216*    0.0532         0.0730         0.0272       -0.274*
                                   (1.39)          (-0.32)        (1.61)        (0.65)        (2.31)    (0.44)         (1.20)         (1.23)        (-2.27)
 OBC: Yadav x exp                 -0.0858         -0.0121         0.0245         0.101        0.0552   -0.0246         0.0296        0.00520        0.0217
                                   (-1.45)         (-0.28)        (0.44)        (1.70)        (1.00)    (-0.31)        (0.67)         (0.17)        (0.32)
 OBC: Other x exp                 -0.0518         0.0229          0.0958       0.0187         0.117*   -0.0298         0.0377         0.0252        -0.117
                                   (-0.98)         (0.55)         (1.78)        (0.30)        (2.06)    (-0.46)        (0.97)         (1.08)        (-1.92)
 EBC x exp                       0.00208          -0.0947        -0.0640        -0.153        0.0826   -0.0156        -0.0103        -0.0447       0.0905
                                   (0.03)          (-1.42)        (-0.82)       (-1.83)       (1.11)    (-0.20)        (-0.22)        (-0.97)       (0.95)
 FC: Brahmin x exp                 -0.128         0.0276          0.0628       0.0246         0.0337     0.105        -0.0181        -0.0165       -0.0613
                                   (-1.14)         (0.41)         (0.56)        (0.18)        (0.30)    (0.84)         (-0.26)        (-0.31)       (-0.53)
 FC: Rajput x exp                -0.271**         0.0735         0.220***      0.253**       -0.0167    0.0827         0.0190         0.0213        -0.114
                                   (-3.18)         (1.67)         (3.66)        (2.68)        (-0.16)   (0.58)         (0.40)         (0.65)        (-1.01)
 FC: Others x exp                  0.0125         -0.0951         -0.249      -0.532**        -0.289   -0.0625         -0.180          0.124      0.00479
                                   (0.06)          (-0.81)        (-1.08)       (-2.80)       (-1.33)   (-0.26)        (-1.14)        (1.35)        (0.03)
 Muslims x exp                    -0.0645         0.0693          0.0516       -0.0878       -0.0320    0.0270        -0.0799        -0.0191       -0.0237
                                   (-0.81)         (1.19)         (0.55)        (-0.81)       (-0.32)   (0.28)         (-1.12)        (-0.43)       (-0.26)
 Observations                      12584            8637           8637          8637          8637      8637           8637           8637          8637
 Adjusted R-squared                 0.303           0.086          0.122         0.119         0.135     0.207          0.090          0.023         0.087
 Notes: (1) Source: Authors' calculations based on data collected by Social Observatory, World Bank and Government of Bihar. (2) In panel (a), Non-SC
 jatis are the excluded group while in Panel (b), SCs are the excluded group. (3) Each column represents a separate regression wherein an
 `empowerment indicator’ is regressed on variables that are reported as well as additional controls: age, age squared, marital status of the woman, age at
 marriage, and a dummy variable for some schooling of the female respondent; a dummy variable for whether it is female-headed household, per-capital
 expenditure, per-capita expenditure squared, landholdings, education of the household head, number of members in the household and panchayat level
 fixed-effects. The female employment is run for all female adults in the sample (individual level). (4) We report robust standard errors in the brackets.
 (5) We report the level of significance: * p value < .05 , ** p value < .01 and *** p value < .001.

                                                                                             35
Table 9: Empowerment regressions with jati identifiers interacted with per capita monthly consumption expenditure (exp.), Odisha
                                                                              Input:                                                           Mobility:
                                Employed         Durables         Tuition        Livelihood         Politics           Store         Health center       Friend         Bank
 Panel (a): SC-ST Jatis
 SC: Barui x exp                  0.0129          -0.0109         -0.00341       -0.00705          -0.0102            0.00304           -0.00349         0.00101      -0.00480
                                   (1.29)          (-0.89)          (-0.33)        (-0.62)          (-1.31)            (0.35)             (-0.79)         (0.41)        (-0.43)
 SC: Dobha x exp                   0.0152        0.000230        -0.0805***       0.00749           0.0154            -0.0391           -0.00732        0.000160       -0.0125
                                   (1.10)          (0.02)           (-4.29)        (0.47)           (0.53)             (-1.18)            (-1.77)         (0.02)        (-0.84)
 SC: Keuta x exp                 -0.00437         0.00518         -0.00274        0.0139*         -0.00742            -0.0144            0.00173        -0.00212       -0.0123
                                   (-0.55)         (0.57)           (-0.30)        (2.10)           (-0.74)            (-1.49)            (0.49)          (-1.42)       (-1.14)
 SC: Kondara x exp                -0.0126        -0.00888          -0.0308        -0.0518         -0.114***           -0.0223            -0.0162        0.000544      -0.0687**
                                   (-0.71)         (-0.48)          (-0.67)        (-1.00)          (-5.03)            (-0.57)            (-1.79)         (0.07)        (-3.11)
 SC: Pana x exp                    0.0172         -0.0265          0.00513       -0.00362         -0.0365**            0.0132            -0.0307        -0.00148       0.0216
                                   (1.07)          (-1.22)          (0.20)         (-0.17)          (-2.90)            (0.72)             (-1.52)         (-0.21)       (1.02)
 SC: Others x exp                -0.0208*         -0.0150          -0.0446        0.00101         -0.00281            -0.0317            0.00727        -0.00373        0.0193
                                   (-2.32)         (-0.75)          (-1.82)        (0.04)           (-0.11)            (-1.14)            (0.93)          (-0.36)       (0.78)
 ST x exp                         -0.0353         0.00899          0.0195          0.0125           0.0400             0.0496             0.0103         0.00751       -0.0411
                                   (-0.82)         (0.66)           (0.52)         (0.27)           (1.09)             (1.70)             (0.77)          (0.93)        (-1.77)
 Observations                       4077            2246             2246           2246             2246               2246               2246            2246          2246
 Adjusted R-squared                 0.214           0.137            0.187          0.198            0.205              0.245              0.075           0.064         0.088
 Panel (b): Other Jatis
 OBC: Chasa x exp                 -0.00168          0.0139         0.000250         0.0137         0.0350**         -0.00662             0.0185*           0.00172      0.00234
                                    (-0.16)         (0.92)           (0.01)         (0.72)           (2.73)           (-0.32)             (2.29)            (0.39)       (0.14)
 OBC: Goala x exp                  0.0623          0.0858*           0.0231        -0.0609           0.110*          0.00607             -0.0233         -0.000751       0.0689
                                    (1.56)          (2.52)           (0.39)         (-0.83)          (2.36)           (0.09)              (-1.24)           (-0.09)      (1.32)
 OBC: Guria x exp                  0.00247          0.0269           0.0271       -0.00708         -0.00735          0.00933            -0.00628           0.00436      -0.0196
                                    (0.26)          (1.51)           (1.51)         (-0.53)          (-0.50)          (0.37)              (-0.50)           (0.75)       (-0.81)
 OBC: Tanti x exp                 -0.0177*          0.0130           0.0118        0.00893           0.0167          -0.0225             0.0250*          -0.00750     0.0443**
                                    (-2.19)         (1.19)           (0.48)         (0.33)           (0.67)           (-0.72)             (2.37)            (-1.40)      (2.62)
 OBC: Teli x exp                 -0.000442         -0.0375          -0.0204        -0.0170          0.0169            0.0504           -0.000685           0.00395      -0.0266
                                    (-0.04)         (-1.52)          (-0.64)        (-0.35)          (0.49)           (1.70)              (-0.08)           (0.45)       (-0.75)
 OBC: Others x exp                -0.00806        0.00456            0.0114        -0.0129         0.00554         -0.000207             0.00169          -0.00165    -0.000155
                                    (-1.05)         (0.24)           (0.87)         (-0.66)          (0.29)           (-0.01)             (0.09)            (-0.45)      (-0.01)
 FC: Brahmin x exp                -0.00168        0.00928          -0.00921         0.0109           0.0186          -0.0112             0.00524          -0.00445      0.00878
                                    (-0.13)         (0.83)           (-0.75)        (1.07)           (1.35)           (-1.00)             (0.79)            (-1.50)      (0.66)
 FC: Karan x exp                   0.00101          0.0187           0.0112        0.0370*         0.0488**           0.0115             0.0220*         -0.000402       0.0290
                                    (0.09)          (1.47)           (0.73)         (2.32)           (3.07)           (0.82)              (2.31)            (-0.07)      (1.61)
 FC: Khandayat x exp               0.0175          0.0200           0.0176         0.00197           0.0117          0.00682            0.00429          0.0000429     -0.00229
                                    (1.58)          (1.61)           (1.16)         (0.15)           (0.88)           (0.45)              (0.58)            (0.01)       (-0.17)
 FC: Others x exp                 -0.00724        -0.00500          0.00958       -0.00638          0.00752          0.00735             0.00320           0.00190      0.00304
                                    (-0.84)         (-0.36)          (1.08)         (-0.76)          (0.95)           (0.58)              (0.91)            (0.94)       (0.28)
 Muslims x exp                     0.00803        -0.00135         -0.00871        -0.0303          -0.0212         -0.00201             0.00575          -0.00286     -0.00578
                                    (0.42)          (-0.07)          (-0.26)        (-1.07)          (-1.19)          (-0.09)             (0.69)            (-0.77)      (-0.26)
 Observations                        4077            2246             2246           2246             2246             2246                2246              2246         2246
 Adjusted R-squared                  0.206           0.145            0.186          0.199            0.203            0.243               0.072             0.060        0.088
 Notes: (1) Source: Authors' calculations based on data collected by Social Observatory, World Bank and Government of Odisha. . Notes (2) - (5) of Table 8 apply.



                                                                                             36
Table 10: Empowerment regressions with jati identifiers interacted with per capita monthly consumption expenditure (exp.), Tamil Nadu
                                                                    Input:                                   Mobility:
                              Employed      Durables    Tuition       Livelihood   Politics       Bank       Taluk Office    Police
                                                                                                                             Station
 Panel (a): SC-ST Jatis
 SC: Adidravidar x exp          0.0177      0.00194     0.00623        0.00984     0.00633       0.00780      0.000753       0.00695
                                (1.67)        (0.23)     (0.72)         (1.00)      (0.89)        (0.71)        (0.04)        (0.73)
 SC: Chakkaliyan x exp         -0.0169       -0.0132    0.0455         -0.0345     0.0542        0.00115      -0.0950*      -0.00241
                                (-0.35)       (-0.20)    (1.16)         (-0.61)     (1.55)        (0.03)        (-2.55)       (-0.11)
 SC: Pallar x exp              -0.0249       -0.0338    -0.0362        -0.0258     0.0130        -0.0115       -0.0444        0.0104
                                (-0.75)       (-0.82)    (-1.05)        (-0.93)     (0.62)        (-0.29)       (-1.07)       (0.54)
                                                  -
 SC: Others x exp
                               0.000451    0.0000963    0.00343        -0.0177     0.00307       -0.00491      0.00553      -0.00554
                                 (0.02)       (-0.01)    (0.22)         (-0.88)     (0.16)        (-0.15)       (0.18)        (-0.27)
 ST x exp                      0.00767        0.0133    0.0352          0.0509     0.0687*        0.0449       -0.0730       -0.0144
                                 (0.24)       (0.27)     (0.72)         (1.00)      (1.98)         (0.95)       (-1.61)       (-1.06)
 Observations                     5190         3284       3280           3283        3279           3299         3299          3299
 Adjusted R-squared              0.275         0.116     0.119           0.150      0.076          0.135         0.149         0.049
 Panel (b): Non-SC Jatis
 MBC: Ambalakarar x exp         -0.0270      -0.0276     -0.0361       -0.0595      -0.0586       -0.0267       0.0144       0.00520
                                 (-0.80)      (-0.54)     (-0.84)       (-1.28)      (-1.23)       (-0.75)       (0.24)       (0.18)
 MBC: Muthuraja x exp           -0.0320      -0.0283     -0.0522       -0.187*     -0.00308       -0.0475        0.156*      -0.0264
                                 (-0.48)      (-0.33)     (-0.67)       (-2.26)      (-0.05)       (-0.65)       (2.04)       (-1.04)
 MBC: Vanniyar x exp           -0.00775    0.0000716    -0.00678       -0.0192      -0.0278      -0.0382*       -0.0215     0.000573
                                 (-0.47)      (0.00)      (-0.40)       (-0.99)      (-1.74)       (-2.00)       (-0.87)      (0.04)
 MBC: Others x exp              0.00618      0.00205     -0.0121       0.00982       0.0180       -0.0367     -0.0767***    -0.00700
                                 (0.26)       (0.10)      (-0.66)       (0.46)       (1.05)        (-1.44)       (-3.34)      (-0.46)
 BC: Chettiar x exp             -0.0647       0.0206      0.0303       -0.140*      -0.0852       -0.0885       -0.0220      -0.0444
                                 (-1.16)      (0.64)      (0.89)        (-2.51)      (-1.41)       (-1.69)       (-0.40)      (-1.92)
 BC: Kallar x exp               0.00104       0.0340     0.0507*        0.0105      -0.0407       -0.0189      0.00292       -0.0321
                                 (0.07)       (1.49)      (2.19)        (0.37)       (-1.63)       (-0.55)       (0.09)       (-1.69)
 BC: Nadar x exp                 0.0193       -0.109    -0.00155       -0.0659       0.0225        0.0259        0.0307      -0.0254
                                 (0.22)       (-1.40)     (-0.02)       (-0.69)      (0.30)        (0.27)        (0.32)       (-1.01)
 BC: Naidu x exp                -0.0302      -0.0249     -0.0265       0.00721      -0.0203      -0.00865        0.102*       0.0213
                                 (-0.59)      (-0.94)     (-0.74)       (0.18)       (-0.92)       (-0.30)       (2.29)       (0.38)
 BC: Parkavakulam x exp         -0.0102     0.00358       0.0152       0.132***    -0.00849        0.0160        0.0753     -0.00258
                                 (-0.30)      (0.16)      (0.69)        (4.10)       (-0.46)       (0.59)        (1.56)       (-0.13)
 BC: Reddiyar x exp           -0.000492     -0.00871     -0.0301       0.00392      -0.0108       -0.0103      -0.0876*     -0.00951
                                 (-0.01)      (-0.25)     (-0.79)       (0.12)       (-0.29)       (-0.29)       (-1.99)      (-0.86)
 BC: Thevar x exp              -0.0948*      -0.0171     -0.0777       -0.0265       0.0131        0.0454      0.149***       0.0285
                                 (-2.11)      (-0.78)     (-1.63)       (-1.06)      (0.43)        (1.15)        (3.30)       (0.71)
 BC: Vellalar x exp             -0.0147     0.00301      -0.0127       -0.0125     -0.00714     -0.000204       -0.0120      -0.0123
                                 (-1.03)      (0.33)      (-1.24)       (-1.27)      (-0.87)       (-0.02)       (-0.60)      (-1.39)
 BC: Vishwakrma x exp           0.0609*      -0.0392     -0.0481       -0.0395      -0.0251       -0.0399       -0.0225      -0.0313
                                 (2.41)       (-1.41)     (-1.85)       (-1.20)      (-1.24)       (-1.16)       (-0.66)      (-1.49)
 BC: Yadava x exp                0.0126       0.0263      0.0411        0.0562      0.00217        0.0398        0.0420      -0.0136
                                 (0.36)       (0.99)      (1.39)        (1.83)       (0.08)        (1.24)        (0.74)       (-0.53)
                                                                      37
                                                                                        Input:                                                       Mobility:
                                         Employed          Durables         Tuition       Livelihood           Politics               Bank           Taluk Office        Police
                                                                                                                                                                         Station
 BC: Others x exp                          -0.0142          0.000136         0.00290        0.00559          0.00259              0.0148               0.0410*           0.0116
                                            (-0.95)           (0.01)          (0.20)         (0.43)           (0.25)               (0.98)               (2.05)           (0.99)
 Observations                                5190              3284            3280           3283             3279                 3299                 3299             3299
 Adjusted R-squared                          0.278            0.115           0.117           0.156           0.076                 0.136               0.157             0.050
 Notes: (1) Source: Authors' calculations based on data collected by Social Observatory, World Bank and Government of Tamil Nadu. . Notes (2) - (5) of Table 8 apply..




Table 11: Percentage of pairwise differences that are significantly different

                                                  Input in intra-
                                                household decision
                         Employment                  making            Mobility
 Bihar       SC-ST                      47.6                   28.6            25.0
             Others                     66.7                   45.8            58.3
 Odisha      SC-ST                      61.9                   14.3            19.0
             Others                     38.2                   16.8             9.5
 TN          SC-ST                      10.0                   15.0            13.3
             Others                     31.4                     7.6            9.8

 Source: Authors' calculations based on data collected by Social Observatory,
 World Bank and state Government of Bihar, Odisha and Tamil Nadu, respectively.




                                                                                            38
Table 12: Targeting of livelihoods program in the three states
  Panel (a): Government defined caste categories
                             Bihar                                                  Odisha                                                  Tamil Nadu
                                      JEEViKA household                                        TRIPTI household                                            PVP household
  ST                                          -0.170        ST                                       -0.186**         ST                                         -0.052
                                             (0.089)                                                  (0.063)                                                   (0.101)
  OBC                                       -0.084***       OBC                                        -0.009         MBC                                      -0.101**
                                             (0.023)                                                  (0.038)                                                   (0.031)
  EBC                                        -0.083*                                                                  BC                                         -0.028
                                             (0.036)                                                                                                            (0.025)
  Muslim                                    -0.173***       Muslim                                    -0.204*
                                             (0.042)                                                  (0.095)
  FC                                        -0.307***       FC                                         -0.054
                                             (0.040)                                                  (0.039)
  Some Schooling                              -0.018        Some Schooling                             0.044          Some Schooling                             0.013
                                             (0.021)                                                  (0.033)                                                   (0.024)
  Female headed household                    0.066**        Female headed household                     0.132         Female headed household                     0.046
                                             (0.022)                                                  (0.089)                                                   (0.031)
  Per capita expenditure                       0.119        Per capita expenditure                    -0.026*         Per capita expenditure                     -0.006
                                             (0.103)                                                  (0.010)                                                   (0.007)
  Per capita expenditure                                    Per capita expenditure                                    Per capita expenditure
  squared                                     -0.037        squared                                  0.001***         squared                                     0.000
                                             (0.054)                                                  (0.000)                                                   (0.000)
  Land                                      -0.019***       Land                                        0.001         Land                                        0.001
                                             (0.005)                                                  (0.013)                                                   (0.001)
  Observations                                 4187         Observations                                1298          Observations                                1629
  Adjusted R-squared                           0.129        Adjusted R-squared                          0.194         Adjusted R-squared                          0.195
Notes: (1) Source: Author's calculations based on data collected by Social Observatory, World Bank and Government of Odisha. (2) Non-SC jatis are the omitted group. (3) Each
column represents a separate regression wherein an `empowerment indicator’ is regressed on variables that are reported as well as additional controls: age, age squared,
marital status of the woman, age at marriage, and a dummy variable for some schooling of the female respondent; a dummy variable for whether it is female-headed household,
per-capital expenditure, per-capita expenditure squared, landholdings, education of the household head, number of members in the household and panchayat level fixed-effects.
The female employment is run for all female adults in the sample (individual level). (4) We report robust standard errors in the brackets. (5) We report the level of significance:
* p value < .05 , ** p value < .01 and *** p value < .001.




                                                                                             39
 Panel (b): SC Jatis
                          Bihar                                                   Odisha                                                  Tamil Nadu
                                  JEEViKA household                                          TRIPTI household                                            PVP household
 SC: Chamar                            0.146***          SC: Barui                                 -0.056           SC: Adidravidar                         0.074**
                                       (0.024)                                                    (0.107)                                                   (0.028)
 SC: Dobha                               0.048           SC: Dobha                                 0.034            SC: Chakkaliyan                          -0.092
                                       (0.053)                                                    (0.083)                                                   (0.066)
 SC: Dushad                            0.184***          SC: Keuta                                 -0.012           SC: Pallar                               -0.027
                                       (0.024)                                                    (0.099)                                                   (0.050)
 SC: Musahar                           0.070**           SC: Kondara                               -0.032
                                       (0.024)                                                    (0.065)
 SC: Sardar                              0.053           SC: Pana                                 0.182**
                                       (0.072)                                                    (0.064)
 SC: Others                            -0.113*           SC: Others                                0.005            SC: Others                                 0.089
                                       (0.055)                                                    (0.059)                                                    (0.050)
 ST                                     -0.066           ST                                       -0.149*           ST                                         0.019
                                       (0.090)                                                    (0.058)                                                    (0.101)
 Some Schooling                         -0.026           Some Schooling                            0.044            Some Schooling                            0.013
                                       (0.021)                                                    (0.033)                                                    (0.024)
 Female headed household               0.060**           Female headed household                    0.133           Female headed household                    0.049
                                       (0.022)                                                    (0.088)                                                    (0.031)
 Per capita expenditure                  0.122           Per capita expenditure                  -0.028**           Per capita expenditure                    -0.005
                                       (0.104)                                                    (0.011)                                                    (0.007)
 Per capita expenditure                                    Per capita expenditure                                 Per capita expenditure
 squared                                  -0.042           squared                                0.001***        squared                                      0.000
                                         (0.055)                                                  (0.000)                                                     (0.000)
 Land                                   -0.021***          Land                                    0.001          Land                                         0.001
                                         (0.005)                                                  (0.013)                                                     (0.001)
 Observations                              4187            Observations                             1298          Observations                                 1629
 Adjusted R-squared                       0.133            Adjusted R-squared                      0.195          Adjusted R-squared                           0.195
Notes: (1) Source: Author's calculations based on data collected by Social Observatory, World Bank and Government of Odisha. . Notes (2) - (5) of Table 12(a) apply.




                                                                                            40
 Panel (c): Non-SC jatis
                           Bihar                                                  Odisha                                                    Tamil Nadu
                                    JEEViKA household                                        TRIPTI household                                                    PVP household
 OBC: Dhanuk                               -0.135           OBC: Chasa                            -0.017           MBC: Ambalakarar                                   0.017
                                          (0.076)                                                (0.054)                                                            (0.076)
 OBC: Kurmi                              -0.199**           OBC: Goala                            -0.016           MBC: Muthuraja                                   -0.221*
                                          (0.074)                                                (0.076)                                                            (0.101)
 OBC: Yadav                                -0.057           OBC: Guria                             0.159           MBC: Vanniyar                                   -0.117**
                                          (0.033)                                                (0.097)                                                            (0.040)
 OBC: Other                               -0.078*           OBC: Tanti                            0.132            MBC: Others                                      -0.104*
                                          (0.031)                                                (0.081)                                                            (0.041)
                                                            OBC: Teli                             -0.158           BC: Chettiar                                      0.297
                                                                                                 (0.098)                                                            (0.156)
 EBC                                       -0.082*          OBC: Others                            0.065           BC: Kallar                                        -0.050
                                           (0.036)                                               (0.048)                                                            (0.051)
 FC: Brahmin                              -0.203**          FC: Brahmin                           -0.099           BC: Nadar                                         -0.001
                                           (0.063)                                               (0.069)                                                            (0.088)
 FC: Rajput                              -0.421***          FC: Karan                             -0.071           BC: Naidu                                         -0.134
                                           (0.045)                                               (0.079)                                                            (0.088)
 FC: Others                               -0.286**          FC: Khandayat                         -0.007           BC: Parkavakulam                                  -0.092
                                           (0.089)                                               (0.042)                                                            (0.059)
                                                            FC: Others                             0.031           BC: Reddiyar                                       0.012
                                                                                                 (0.071)                                                            (0.094)
 Muslim                                  -0.173***          Muslims                               -0.184           BC: Thevar                                        -0.005
                                          (0.042)                                                (0.096)                                                            (0.104)
                                                                                                                   BC: Vellalar                                      -0.017
                                                                                                                                                                    (0.041)
                                                                                                                   BC: Vishwakrma                                     0.045
                                                                                                                                                                    (0.079)
                                                                                                                   BC: Yadava                                        -0.036
                                                                                                                                                                    (0.082)
                                                                                                                   BC: Others                                        -0.014
                                                                                                                                                                    (0.037)
 Some Schooling                            -0.014           Some Schooling                          0.047          Some Schooling                                     0.011
                                          (0.021)                                                  (0.033)                                                          (0.024)
 Female headed household                  0.065**           Female headed household                 0.124          Female headed household                            0.045
                                          (0.022)                                                  (0.092)                                                          (0.031)
 Per capita expenditure                     0.109           Per capita expenditure                 -0.024*         Per capita expenditure                            -0.005
                                          (0.103)                                                  (0.011)                                                          (0.007)
 Per capita expenditure                                      Per capita expenditure
 squared                                    -0.028           squared                              0.001***      Per capita expenditure squared                          0.000
                                           (0.054)                                                (0.000)                                                              (0.000)
 Land                                     -0.020***          Land                                  -0.000       Land                                                    0.001
                                           (0.005)                                                (0.013)                                                              (0.001)
 Observations                                4187            Observations                           1298        Observations                                            1629
 Adjusted R-squared                         0.129            Adjusted R-squared                     0.192       Adjusted R-squared                                      0.196
Notes: (1) Source: Author's calculations based on data collected by Social Observatory, World Bank and Government of Odisha. . Notes (2) - (5) of Table 12(a) apply.



                                                                                            41
Appendix: Figures
Figure 1: Estimates from employment regression (caste coefficients)




Notes: 1) SC is the omitted caste group. (2) 99%, 95% and 90% confidence intervals included
Source: Authors’ illustration based on data used in column 1 of Table 3, panel (a), (b) & (c) respectively.

Figure 2: Estimates from employment regression, Bihar (jati coefficients)




Notes: (1) In panel (a), OBC, EBC, FC and Muslim jatis are the omitted group and in panel (b) SC-ST jatis are the omitted group. (2) 99%, 95% and 90% confidence intervals included
Source: Authors’ illustration based on data used in column 1, Table 4.


                                                                                               42
Figure 3: Estimates from employment regression, Odisha (jati coefficients)




Notes: (1) In panel (a), OBC, FC and Muslim jatis are the omitted group and in panel (b) SC-ST jatis are the omitted group. (2) 99%, 95% and 90% confidence intervals included
Source: Authors’ illustration based on data used in column 1, Table 5.

Figure 4: Estimates from employment regression, Odisha (jati coefficients)




Notes: (1) In panel (a), MBC and BC jatis are the omitted group and in panel (b) SC-ST jatis are the omitted group. (2) 99%, 95% and 90% confidence intervals included
Source: Authors’ illustration based on data used in column 1, Table 6.


Figure 5: Proportion of households covered under State Rural Livelihoods Programmes

                                                                                           43
Source: Authors’ illustration based on data collected by Social Observatory, World Bank and State governments of Bihar, Odisha and Tamil Nadu, respectively.

Figure 6: Targeting of households under JEEViKA, Bihar




Notes: (1) In panel (a), SC is the omitted caste group. In panel (b), OBC, EBC, FC and Muslim jatis are the omitted group. And inn panel (c), SC-ST jatis are the omitted group. (2) 99%, 95%
and 90% confidence intervals included.
Source: Authors’ illustration based on data used in column 1 of Table 12, panel (a), (b) and (c), respectively.


Figure 7: Targeting of households under TRIPTI, Odisha


                                                                                             44
Notes: (1) In panel (a), SC is the omitted caste group. In panel (b), OBC, FC and Muslim jatis are the omitted group. And inn panel (c), SC-ST jatis are the omitted group. (2) 99%, 95% and
90% confidence intervals included.
Source: Authors’ illustration based on data used in column 2 of Table 12, panel (a), (b) and (c), respectively.


Figure 8: Targeting of households under PVP, Tamil Nadu




Notes: (1) In panel (a), SC is the omitted caste group. In panel (b),MBC and BC jatis are the omitted group. And inn panel (c), SC-ST jatis are the omitted group. (2) 99%, 95% and 90%
confidence intervals included.
Source: Authors’ illustration based on data used in column 3 of Table 12, panel (a), (b) and (c), respectively.


                                                                                             45
