                                                              WPS8183


Policy Research Working Paper                                8183




     Investigating the Transmission Channels
          behind Dutch Disease Effects
          Lessons from Mongolia Using a CGE Model

                               Tehmina S. Khan
                                Jan Gottschalk




Macroeconomics and Fiscal Management Global Practice Group
September 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 8183


  Abstract
 This paper uses a computable general equilibrium model                             public investment rather than public consumption or lower
 —Maquette for Millennium Development Goal Simula-                                  taxes. This finding suggests that policy makers face real
 tions (MAMS)—calibrated to Mongolia to investigate                                 trade-offs, namely that, as an equilibrium response, Dutch
 how the development of major mining projects leads to                              disease is unavoidable and at odds with an export-led, man-
 Dutch disease. The simulations suggest that the process                            ufacturing-oriented development strategy unless resources
 is complex, with the relative strength of the different                            are left in the ground (or mining earnings are saved
 spending and resource movement channels determined                                 abroad). If the objective is to limit Dutch disease, then the
 by structural features of the economy, such as factor                              simulations point to policies that minimize the usage of
 input needs of the mining sector and substitution elas-                            domestic inputs by the mining sector, or that accommo-
 ticities, and how mineral windfalls are eventually spent.                          date the growing demand for key inputs such as labor e.g.
 In Mongolia, mining sector demand for domestic factor                              through immigration. Regarding spending, policy makers
 inputs explains two-thirds of the appreciation of the real                         should channel mining revenues toward public invest-
 exchange rate, with demand for labor, a “quasi-fixed” factor,                      ment, to expand the economy’s long-run supply potential.
 the most potent channel for transmitting Dutch disease.                            Where large direct income flows from the mining sector to
   The simulations also suggest that public policies may only                       households are important, monetary policy may be more
 play a limited role in limiting Dutch disease, even if growing                     useful than fiscal policy in constraining private spending.
 fiscal revenues are channeled toward productivity-enhancing




  This paper is a product of the Macroeconomics and Fiscal Management Global Practice Group. It is part of a larger effort
  by the World Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions
  around the world. Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The authors
  may be contacted at tkhan@worldbank.org.




         The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
         issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
         names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
         of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
         its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                       Produced by the Research Support Team
     Investigating the Transmission Channels behind Dutch Disease Effects:
                   Lessons from Mongolia Using a CGE Model


                                         Tehmina S. Khan and Jan Gottschalk1




         JEL: D57, D58, E60, O53, Q33
         Keywords: CGE, MAMS, Dutch disease, Mongolia, Natural Resources



1Tehmina S. Khan is from the Macro-Fiscal Management Global Practice (MFMGP) and Jan Gottshalk is at the International
Monetary Fund, Washington DC. Contact author: tkhan@worldbank. The views expressed are those of the authors and do not
necessarily reflect those of the World Bank Group or the IMF. The authors are particularly grateful to Hans Lofgren for detailed
comments, and to James Anderson, Rogier Van Den Brink, Steve Barnett and Julia Bersch for many helpful comments and
suggestions.
                     Contents



Contents ........................................................................................................................................................ 1
I.       Introduction ........................................................................................................................................... 1
II.      Model framework.................................................................................................................................. 5
      Baseline scaling-up scenario: Mining output doubles and the mining sector is fully integrated into the
      economy .................................................................................................................................................... 6
      Reference scenario: Mining output doubles but mining sector is not integrated into the economy, i.e., is
      an enclave sector ....................................................................................................................................... 7
III.          Transmission Mechanisms Leading to Dutch-Disease Effects ......................................................... 9
      The role of domestic production factors in the scaling-up of mining production ..................................... 9
         a)      Using only intermediate inputs as domestic production inputs..................................................... 9
         b)      Using only labor as domestic production factor ......................................................................... 13
         c)      Using only capital as domestic input .......................................................................................... 16
         d)      Combined effect of domestic inputs ........................................................................................... 18
      The role of domestic spending of mining receipts in the scaling-up of mining production.................... 20
         a)      Government spending of mining receipts ................................................................................... 20
           Spending additional government revenues on public consumption ................................................ 22
           Spending additional government revenues on tax reductions ......................................................... 23
           Spending additional government revenues on public investment ................................................... 24
         b) Private sector spending of dividends from the mining sector ..................................................... 25
IV.           Lessons............................................................................................................................................ 29
         Complexity of the transmission channels ........................................................................................... 29
         Equilibrium outcomes ......................................................................................................................... 29
         Policy implications.............................................................................................................................. 30
      Appendix A: Mongolia Social Accounting Matrix ................................................................................. 34
      Appendix B: Macro Indicators in the BASE (Business-As-Usual) case. .............................................. 35
      Appendix C: Macro indicators in the baseline (mining sector doubles in size) ...................................... 36




                                                                                  1
    I.        Introduction

Dutch disease, a term originally used by The Economist in 1977 to describe the appreciation of the Dutch
guilder after oil was after the start of North Sea oil exports, refers to the macroeconomic effects of natural
resource windfalls. Following seminal papers by Corden and Neary (1982), Corden (1984), and Van
Wijnbergen (1984), economists have recognized a factor of production movement effect and a spending
effect as key elements of the disease.2 With government spending of resource revenues also playing an
important role in transmitting Dutch disease to the economy, a large literature focused on appropriate fiscal
policies in resource rich countries has also emerged (Van der Ploeg and Venables, 2012; Barnett and
Ossowski, 2002; Davis et al. 2002).
Dutch disease is potentially relevant to Mongolia, where natural resource dependence has grown fast over
the past decade-and-a-half. Mineral wealth is estimated at $1 trillion to $3 trillion for a population of just
3 million (IMF, 2015). As major mining projects – notably, the giant copper-gold Oyu Tolgoi (OT) mine3
– have come onstream, growth has surged, making the country one of the fastest growing in the world in
recent years. Mining exports account for more than 90 percent of total exports and nearly a fifth of
government revenues, leaving the economy highly vulnerable to commodity price volatility. Despite the
adoption of a fiscal rule in 2010, fiscal policy has remained pro-cyclical and the public sector has become
a conduit for Dutch disease to the economy in recent years. Public spending has expanded strongly, and
Mongolia is perhaps the only country in the world which has employed a direct resources-to-cash scheme
– operating a universal cash transfer scheme between 2010 and 2012 (Ying and Howes, 2015). Arguably,
these policies came up against to domestic absorption constraints – regarded as a key factor in why
developing countries experience problems with resource windfalls (Van der Ploeg, 2012; Van der Ploeg
and Venables, 2010) – that are visible in the form of structurally high inflation and large (non-mining) trade
deficits.
Looking beyond fiscal policy, private spending of income from the mineral sector has emerged as another
channel of transmission for Dutch disease. In 2012, the government allotted a notional 20 percent of the
equity of the state-owned mining company, Erdenes Tavan Tolgoi (TT), 4 to the population. Prior to
elections in mid-2012, it monetized the value of these shares by offering the public a choice of selling their
stake back to the government if they did not wish to wait for the public listing of Erdenes TT. Approximately
half the population – about 1.2 million people – elected to receive cash for their shares, with the remainder
opting to retain shares.5 It is estimated that 1.5 million Mongolians still own shares in Erdenes TT, and in
June 2016, the Mongolian PM announced plans to buy another 30 percent of the shares from the public.6
This study analyzes the transmission mechanism behind Dutch disease effects within a computable general
equilibrium (CGE) framework. Specifically, the study examines what are most important channels by which
Dutch disease is transmitted to the Mongolian economy when the mining sector scales up in size and the


2 The literature has also expanded to include similar effects from other shocks such as capital inflows, aid, and remittances and
tourism. See Auty, 2001; Adams and Bevan, 2003; and Acosta et al, 2009. Magud and Sosa (2010) also provide a comprehensive
overview of the analytical literature and associated empirical evidence.
3 The OT mine is one of the largest copper-gold mine complexes in the world. It is expected to produce 0.5 million tons of copper,

0.65 million ounces of gold, and 3 million ounces of silver a year, on average, during its first 10 years. Escondida, the world’s
largest copper mine located in Chile, in comparison, produced 0.81 million tons of copper in 2011 and 1.09 million tons in 2010.
4 Erdenes Tavan Tolgoi (Erdenes TT) is the subsidiary of Erdenes MGL a government-owned company that owns Tavan Tolgoi (TT).

TT is one of the world’s largest untapped coking and thermal coal deposits, and is divided into six sections the largest two of
which are referred to as the Tsankhi coalfields. Erdenes TT manages the development of the East Tsankhi block.
5 IMF (2011) and Van den Brink et al. (2012).
6 http://theubpost.mn/2016/06/13/cabinet-to-buy-back-erdenes-tavan-tolgoi-shares-from-the-public/.

                                                                2
associated policy implications. It uses model-based analysis to gain conceptual clarity on these issues. The
drawback is that such an analysis is necessarily highly stylized and therefore model results provide only a
limited degree of realism. That is, the simulation results presented here for Mongolia should be seen as
sketching out the underlying processes, with individual numerical results providing qualitative insights but
not quantitative precision.
Regarding our modeling strategy, a CGE framework is preferred as it allows us to take into account complex
interactions across time, across different factor inputs and a multitude of sectors in the economy. In contrast,
DSGE models that are frequently used to model Dutch disease in existing literature are more limited with
respect to the number of variables that can be considered and the degree to which economies/sectors can be
disaggregated. The paper is accompanied by a background paper that benchmarks a CGE model for
Mongolia against actual developments in the economy during the 2006-09 commodity boom-bust period
(Khan and Gottschalk, 2017). That paper shows that a CGE framework is able to approximate
macroeconomic impacts associated with commodity price fluctuations, but that it underestimates
macroeconomic demand pressures, in part due to the inherent complexity of commodity boom-and-bust
cycles and the long-term focus of MAMS simulations in which economic adjustment to shocks takes time.
The paper proceeds as follows. It calibrates the World Bank’s CGE model MAMS (“Maquette for
Millennium Development Goal Simulations”) to Mongolia. The model provides an economy-wide multi-
sectoral framework for medium-to-long-run analysis. 7 Baseline simulations are set up to benchmark the
impact of a doubling of mining sector output between 2013 and 2016, with simulation results reported until
2026. In these simulations, all transmission channels for Dutch Disease are allowed to operate, i.e., the
mining sector is fully integrated into the economy, drawing upon available factor inputs and generating
income for households and the public sector. The simulations show that a doubling in mining production
results in an appreciation of the real exchange rate of 15 percent and in a contraction of tradable sector
output by approximately 20 percent.8 These two variables are considered to be key indicators of Dutch
disease effects.
A key issue that needs to be clarified at the outset relates to the role of foreign direct investment (FDI) for
Dutch disease effects. Arguably, none of the Dutch disease effects described above would have happened
if it had not been for large FDI projects that build the major mining projects in the first place. This study
attempts to dig deeper and show that what really matters for Dutch disease effects is (i) to what extent these
projects utilize domestic inputs, and (ii) to what extent natural resource revenues generated by them are
spent domestically. To illustrate this, the study constructs a reference scenario where FDI projects bring
about a major expansion in mining but the rest of the Mongolian economy remains completely insulated as
long as the mining sector is a perfect enclave that utilizes no domestic inputs (i.e., all production factors
and inputs are imported) and all income generated by the project accrues to foreigners and never enters the
Mongolian economy. Our simulations show that Dutch disease effects arise only as the enclave character
of the mining sector is loosened and spillovers to the domestic economy occur.
Finally, alternative scenarios are set up to gauge the relative importance of individual transmission
channels, including the use of domestic factor inputs (intermediate, labor and capital); government spending
of income from the mining sector on public consumption, investment and tax cuts; and household spending
of dividend income from the mining sector.




7   See Lofgren et al. (2013) for a description of the basic features of MAMS.
8   Again, these results should be seen qualitatively.
                                                                  3
To our knowledge, this is the first study to unpack the channels through which Dutch disease is transmitted
in such extensive detail. The simulations provide the following insights:
       The use of domestic inputs (versus spending of revenues by the government and households) by
        the mining sector seems to explain about two-thirds of the total simulated real appreciation, and 80
        percent of the shrinkage of the tradable sector that occurs in the baseline.
       Unpacking the relative importance of domestic input, the use of labor by the mining sector is the
        most potent channel for transmission of Dutch disease. This is reflected in a larger shrinkage of the
        traded sector and larger real appreciation, accounting for just over a third of the total appreciation
        that occurs in the baseline (capital inputs account for less than 10 percent). This reflects the fact
        that labor is a “quasi-fixed” factor that grows only in line with population growth. In contrast,
        domestic capital inputs can be “endogenously” increased over time through higher savings and
        investment. This points to a role for active labor force policies (immigration, or increases in labor
        force participation rates) in reducing Dutch disease pressures.
       Rising household incomes due to rising wages can have positive or negative effects. Higher
        household incomes are partly spent on goods and services (reinforcing Dutch disease), but are also
        partly saved, thus helping to finance investment and helping to increase the economy’s capital
        stock. On aggregate, though it seems they are positive in our simulations.
       The impact of government spending on Dutch disease effects depends critically on the additional
        revenues the government receives and how they are spent. Simulations suggest a sizable (or one-
        for-one) fiscal impact from spending higher mining revenues on public consumption or tax cuts. In
        the case of rising public consumption, simulations also point to some crowding out of private
        consumption. When revenues are spent on public investment, the real appreciation is minimal in
        the short run (due to the higher import content of public investment). In the long run, the real
        exchange rate depreciates because higher public investment raises productive capacity of the
        economy. However, when all channels are operational, government spending on public investment
        alone is insufficient to reverse Dutch disease impacts from the other channels.
       The impact of spending of dividend income by households on the tradable sector is similar in
        magnitude to those individual scenarios where rising government revenues are spent on public
        consumption and tax reductions. This suggests that rising spending on goods and services has
        approximately the same impact on tradable sector production, irrespective of the source of
        spending.
The results imply a number of policy lessons. First, Dutch disease is complex even in a highly stylized
model setting: myriad prices change in the economy, and multiple channels are at work when mining output
is scaled up. Which channel of transmission dominates depends critically on the structural features of the
economy including factor elasticities, the intensity by which mining uses certain inputs and their import
shares, and the size of revenues flowing to the government.
The results also suggest that Dutch disease is unavoidable and inherently at odds with an export-led
development strategy. On the production side, limiting Dutch disease impacts would require minimizing
domestic inputs into the mining sector as it scales up production, or encouraging faster accumulation of the
needed inputs. As discussed above, “labor” is arguably the most potent channel in the simulation: unlike
other factor inputs that can be endogenously increased over time (for instance capital inputs through greater
savings), labor can only expand in line with population growth. Accordingly, it remains a bottleneck over
the long term, driving appreciation of the real exchange rate and causing the non-resource traded sector to
shrink as the latter donates labor to the other sectors. This suggests a role for labor force policies that
encourage greater labor force participation or immigration.

                                                      4
On the spending side, limiting Dutch disease impacts will require focusing on activities that have a high
import content and that boost the overall supply potential of the economy, especially that of the tradable
sector. This likely means focusing spending on public investment. If household spending of mining income
is also an important channel of transmission, then there may be a role for tighter monetary policy to reduce
the potency of this channel.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II summarizes the key features of MAMS and the
calibration strategy for Mongolia with the underlying structure of the economy. Section III analyzes the
results for a set of simulations designed to explore the relative importance of the spending and resource
movement channels through which Dutch disease occurs in Mongolia. Section IV discusses the main policy
conclusions.


II.          Model framework

MAMS is a recursive dynamic CGE model developed at the World Bank to analyze strategies for achieving
MDGs, and for undertaking country-level, medium-to-long-run policy analysis (Lofgren et al., 2013). The
model is dynamic recursive in that the solution in any time period depends on current and past periods, not
the future. Only relative prices matter and these help to clear the markets for factors, goods, and services.
As part of the micro foundations of the model, producers maximize profits and consumers maximize utility.
The calibration strategy for Mongolia is detailed in the companion paper (Khan et al., 2017) and this section
only describes the broad framework. The underlying Social Accounting Matrix (SAM) that sets out the
basic relationships and income flows in the economy was calibrated using publicly available 2005 data
from the National Statistical Office (NSO), notably input-output tables for that year. These data were
supplemented with other NSO data on employment, balance of payments, and public finances.
In the Mongolia CGE model, there are seven sectors (i.e. activities, each of which produces a specific good
or service), five of which are in the private sector (Table 1). In addition, there ae three institutions: a single
representative household, the government and the “rest of the world” (ROW). None owns a sector or
industry, but rather earns income from a share of the relevant production factors (labor, capital and mining
capital). For the household, the income sources also include transfers from the government and remittances
from overseas, while the government also earns revenues from indirect and direct taxes. The SAM is set
out in Appendix A.
Production technologies are nested. At the top level, output for each sector is generated by aggregates of
value added and intermediates. At the lower level, these aggregates are produced by a CES aggregation of
production factors and a Leontief aggregation of intermediate inputs, respectively. The mining sector is a
special case in that factor use also is determined by a Leontief formulation. Factor inputs other than the
mining factor are paid market wages; the mining factor (“mining capital”) is paid the residual. Overall
labor supply is determined by exogenous population growth, so that labor is a relatively scarce factor.
Finally, the selection of production, trade, input and demand elasticities is set to match actual economic
developments as closely as possible (see Khan et al. 2017).
The choice of mechanisms for maintaining internal and external balances are as follows. With respect to
the budget, spending adjusts in response to revenues, with additional revenues spent on government
consumption (unless specified otherwise as is the case with some individual simulations that explored later).
Private investment is kept constant as a share of total absorption while private saving adjusts to provide
needed financing. A flexible real exchange rate clears the balance of payments. The numéraire is the CPI
so that nominal values like wages, household income, household expenditures are CPI-indexed.
                                                        5
 Table 1: Model Disaggregation
 Sectors (Activities and     Non-government (5)                  Agriculture
 Commodities                                                     Construction
                                                                 Private Traded Sector
                                                                 Private Non-traded
                                                                 Mineral
                             Government (2)                      Public Infrastructure services
                                                                 Other government services
 Factor Inputs               Primary Factors (3)                 Labor
                                                                 Private Capital
                                                                 Mining Capital
                             Wholly Imported factors (2)         Fuel
                                                                 Intermediate Mining Capital
 Institutions                Institutions (3)                    Household
                                                                 Government
                                                                 Rest of the World (ROW)




Calibration strategy
To analyze the channels by which a scaling up of the mineral sector causes Dutch disease, three key
scenarios are developed.
  “BASE” (business-as-usual). This simulation assumes that, in the absence of a structural expansion
   in the mining sector, the economy grows at an annual rate of 5 percent. Selected results for key
   macroeconomic indicators are shown in Appendix B and show a continuation of long run trends. The
   GDP shares of key macroeconomic variables remain broadly constant over time. The long run growth
   rate for government consumption is the same as government investment. The real exchange rate is
   broadly stable. As the economy grows, factor payments received by each of the factor inputs increase
   over time, but wages increase sharply over the simulation period (2005-2026), reflecting the fact that it
   is a relatively scarce factor. Other details of the calibration strategy are outlined in Khan et al. (2017).
 “Baseline scaling up” simulations: In this scenario, the OT mine starts to produce in 2013 with mining
   output doubling by 2016. In this scenario, the mining sector is fully integrated into the economy, using
   labor, capital and intermediate inputs, and generating income for the government and households.
 “Reference” scenario: In this scenario, mining becomes a perfect enclave sector, so that even as
   mining output doubles, there is no impact on the economy at all. With this scenario in hand, the
   different channels through which Dutch disease occurs are switched on, one-by-one, in order to
   examine their effects in isolation.
Since the main scenarios of interest are the scaling up of the mining sector, and the individual reference
scenarios, the following sub-section sets out how these are calibrated, and their impacts.


Baseline scaling-up scenario: Mining output doubles and the mining sector is fully
integrated into the economy
The scenario assumes that OT production starts in 2013, with the mine reaching full capacity by 2016.
Production increases are gradual between 2013 and 2016. By 2016, production doubles relative to
                                                      6
underlying BASE projections (Figure 1). 9 Post-2016, production plateaus with annual mining output
growth projected at 3 percent in line with projected production plans. This implies that the relative size of
OT output diminishes over time, with total output slowly converging to BASE in relative and absolute
terms as the OT project reaches the end of its life. The trajectory of the key macroeconomic variables is
shown in Appendix C.
The scenario assumes that additional
                                                                           Figure 1: The baseline scenario
government receipts are used for
increasing government consumption.                        A.   Mining output                       B.   Dutch disease effects
Mining products are reclassified to be
                                                     Difference to BASE in %                 Difference to BASE in %
perfectly substitutable between exports
and domestic production, unlike all
other commodities in the model that are
imperfectly substitutable between
export and domestic sales.          This
captures the fact that the startup of the
OT mine produces for exports only. 10
Under this scenario, a doubling in
mining production leads to 15 percent Notes:         BASE is the business-as-usual scenario in which there is no resource windfall
                                              and the economy grows at a 5% pace over the long term. The baseline scenario assumes
real appreciation and a shrinkage in mining output doubles by 2016, and that the mining sector is fully integrated into the
                                              economy, with all Dutch disease transmission channels fully switched on.
tradable     sector      production     of
approximately 20 percent (Figure 1B). These two variables are considered as key indicators of Dutch
disease effects in this study. As neither a real appreciation nor a shrinkage in the tradable sector is inherently
‘bad’ for the economy, for these effects to become a “disease” it is necessary to assume that the tradable
sector is of special significance for economic development or an engine of innovation (e.g. see van
Wijnbergen, 1984). If so, a shrinkage of the tradable sector could then undermine overall growth prospects,
if the resulting reduction in growth outweighs the benefits of increased mining production. One way to
mechanically implement this is to make the rate of TFP growth a function of the size of the tradable sector.
However, this is beyond the scope of the paper and the study therefore focuses on the transmission
mechanism that leads to the decline in the tradable sector in the first place.


Reference scenario: Mining output doubles but mining sector is not integrated into
the economy, i.e., is an enclave sector
To understand how Dutch disease effects come about when mining production is scaled up, a reference
scenario where mining has no impact on the economy is needed. With this in hand, it is possible to examine
the individual transmission channels in isolation. Doing so is the objective of the remainder of this paper.
A priori, there are two main transmission channels:


9 This is much smaller than the impact of the OT project, which is expected to raise output by about 250 percent. However, a
doubling of production creates a more intuitive scaling up scenario.
10 A few technical issues merit discussion. First, the scaling up of mining production is going to lead to a large increase in nominal

GDP. This affects variables programmed in terms of GDP shares, especially private transfers from the rest of the world and FDI.
As this is not realistic, the foreign currency unit (FCU) value for these variables is kept the same as in the BASE scenario.
Accordingly, private transfers are set to grow at a fixed rate of 5 percent in FCU terms (the economy-wide growth rate). For FDI,
the FCU growth rate is set at 6.5 percent, somewhat higher than the economy-wide growth rate, to reflect the increasing role of
FDI as Mongolia’s economy matures, and these assumptions are the same as in the BASE simulations. Growth in mining
production is set to 4 percent per annum during 2008-12 in order to align this period reasonably closely with BASE simulations.
                                                                  7
        Use of domestic production factors: scaling up mining production will require domestic production
         inputs such as domestically-produced intermediate inputs, domestic labor, or domestic capital,
         which lead to Dutch-disease effects.
        Domestic spending of mining receipts: scaled-up mining production will lead to higher incomes for
         the government and domestic households, and part of this additional income will be spent; the
         resulting increase in domestic demand could be another source of Dutch-disease effects.


Isolating these two effects requires a modification of the SAM such that: (i) no domestic factor inputs are
used when mining production is scaled up; and (ii) neither households nor the government receive any
additional income when mining output increases. This means that mining production would: (i) only use
imported inputs; (ii) the mining sector would be fully foreign-owned; and (iii) it would pay no taxes or
import duties. Beginning with the production side, the following changes are made to the SAM. First, usage
of domestic intermediate inputs, labor and capital used in the mining sector is set to zero. Second, domestic
production factors are replaced with imported intermediate, mining-specific production factors. Apart from
imported intermediate inputs, the only remaining production factor is mining-specific capital, which is
assumed to be fully foreign owned.
On the income side, the production-side modifications rule out any increase in income for households:
neither labor nor domestic capital (from which households earn income) are employed in the mining sector.
This leaves only the government via higher tax collection as a potential beneficiary from scaled-up mining
production. To switch this channel off, import duty, export taxes, production or sales taxes, and dividends
from this sector accruing to the government are set to zero. 11 However, these modifications reduce
household income in the steady state while at the same time creating a current account imbalance due to
higher demand for imported intermediate inputs. To rebalance the SAM, transfers from ROW to households
are increased, which also compensates for the rising current account deficit. On the fiscal side, lost revenue
from the mining sector is replaced via higher budget support from abroad.
 As Figure 2 shows, even though mining output is doubled in both the reference and baseline scenarios, the
effects on the real exchange rate and tradable sector output are negligible in the former. Higher mining
production yields higher income for the mining sector and higher foreign exchange earnings for the
economy at large in both scenarios. However, in the reference scenario, the extra FX earnings flow
immediately out of the domestic economy as payment for imported intermediate inputs and increased
dividend payments for foreign owners of the mining-specific production factor. Accordingly, there is no
need for relative price changes, a real appreciation or changes in the structure of the domestic economy;
rather, the domestic economy is fully insulated from the mining sector. This corresponds with the mining
sector being a perfect enclave sector.




11There was no need to set income taxes to zero as well because income taxes related to the mining sector accrue to the
government only through the involvement of domestic households with this sector. Foreign ownership is proxied via their
ownership of the mining sector specific production factor, which is not subject to income taxes. In the simulations, the role of
income taxes paid by foreign companies operating in the mining sector is instead simulated via (i) dividend income to the
government (reflecting that the foreign investors in the OT project offered the government an ownership share in the project)
and the imposition of a mining-specific production tax.
                                                               8
                                        Figure 2: Baseline and reference scenarios

                               A.   Real exchange rate                           B.   Traded sector output

                 Difference to BASE                                  Difference to BASE




                 Notes: BASE is the business-as-usual scenario in which there is no resource windfall and the
                 economy grows at a 5% pace over the long term. The baseline scenario assumes mining output
                 doubles by 2016, and that the mining sector is fully integrated into the economy. The reference
                 scenario switches off all Dutch disease transmission channels while scaling up mineral output. In
                 this scenario, the mining sector is a perfect enclave using no domestic inputs, and with all mining
                 revenues repatriated overseas.




    III.    Transmission Mechanisms Leading to Dutch-Disease Effects

The remainder of this paper is going to investigate the two main transmission channels that lead to Dutch
disease. It does so by undoing the modifications implemented in the reference scenario. Recall that in
the reference scenario, mining production is scaled up without any domestic impacts as it is a complete
enclave sector. Alternative scenarios are set up where the mining sector starts to draw upon domestic inputs
and where mining income is spent domestically. These scenarios are then compared to the reference
scenario in order to judge their importance in contributing to Dutch disease.
An example is a simulation where the mining sector requires domestic intermediate inputs; by evaluating
the simulations results against the reference scenario it should be possible to discern the economic effects
of higher intermediate demand by the mining sector in isolation. However, the results in the following
sections should be considered as approximate only. This is because it is not possible to switch on/off the
transmission channels of scaled-up mining production without affecting the underlying structure of the
economy and the SAM as described below.


The role of domestic production factors in the scaling-up of mining production

    a) Using domestic intermediate inputs

In this scenario, the mining sector requires only domestic intermediate inputs. These account for about 15
percent of total inputs in the mining sector, and are mostly tradable and non-tradable goods with the first
accounting for about half of total domestic intermediate demand, and the last for about a third. The re-
introduction of domestic intermediate inputs into the mining sector is offset by a corresponding reduction
in imported intermediate inputs. The other major change in the SAM is a reduction in foreign transfers to

                                                                 9
 households, needed to
                                                    Figure 3: Scenario where mining uses only intermediate inputs
offset the impact of lower
import demand in steady                      A.   Real exchange rate:                          B.    Change in domestic demand by
                                                                                                    sector
state on the current account            Difference to BASE in %                          Difference to reference scenario in %
and to balance the SAM.
Size of Dutch disease
effects: The increased
demand       for   domestic
intermediate inputs as
mining output increases
leads to a moderate real
appreciation (Figure 3) and
a decline in tradable sector
                                             C.    Change in domestic production by            D.   Change in labor allocation
output (not shown). In                             sector
isolation, the demand effect            Difference to reference scenario in %            Difference to reference scenario in %

for domestic intermediate
inputs accounts for about 25
percent of Dutch disease
effects observed in the
baseline scenario.12
Transmission mechanism:
Why       does     a     real
appreciation and shrinkage
in the tradable sector arise Notes: BASE is the business-as-usual scenario in which there is no resource windfall and the economy
in this scenario? The grows            at a 5% pace over the long term. The baseline scenario assumes mining output doubles by 2016,
                                and that the mining sector is fully integrated into the economy. The reference scenario switches off
driving force is the rise in all Dutch disease transmission channels while scaling up mineral output, so that the mining sector is a
domestic            demand, perfect     enclave, using no domestic inputs, and with all mining revenues repatriated overseas. Other
                                govt. refers to government consumption. The simulations in Figures 3B, C and D show scenarios in
especially     for      non- which mining remains an enclave for all intents and purposes, with the exception of domestic
                                intermediate inputs which it utilizes in production.
tradables. Meeting this
demand requires a supply response that involves a reallocation of production factors between sectors in the
economy, including a transfer of production factors from the tradable to the non-tradable sector. The real
appreciation plays a key role in this reallocation of factors.
The starting point of the transmission mechanism is an increase in domestic demand in all major sectors
(except agriculture) that produce the intermediate products that are in especially high demand in the mining
sector (Figure 3B). Demand for public sector consumption and construction services also increases,
reflecting higher government revenues that are spent and higher private sector investment which requires
construction services.
Expenditure-switching effects also play a role. The real appreciation observed makes goods and services
that can be imported such as tradable goods relatively cheaper than non-tradables. This helps re-direct
demand for non-tradables to tradables; given that the demand for tradables can be met through imports
whereas demand for non-tradables has to be met through a domestic supply response, large expenditure-




12 In practice, different transmission channels are likely to cancel each other out or reinforce each other, in which case it is unlikely

that the individual effects are going to sum up to 100 percent.
                                                                   10
 switching effects lessen the
                                                       Figure 4: Scenario where mining uses only intermediate inputs
need for the economy to
generate domestic supply                   A.         Change in domestic demand,              B.        Change in domestic demand,
                                           procurement and import volumes for                 procurement and import volumes for non-
responses. Quantifying the                 tradable goods                                     tradable goods
effects    of   expenditure-               Difference to reference scenario, absolute terms   Difference to reference scenario, absolute
                                                                                              change
switching,    however,      is
difficult and has not been
attempted here.
The domestic production
response mostly follows
demand (Figure 3C), but not
always,     with     tradable
production falling sharply
even though demand has
                                 C.         Change in domestic production, D.                     Change in domestic production,
risen strongly. There are procurement and export volumes for tradable procurement and export volumes for non-
three avenues for meeting goods                                                       tradable goods
                                 Difference to reference scenario, absolute Difference to reference scenario, absolute
higher domestic demand: i) change                                                     change
raising domestic production;
ii) increasing imports; and
iii) freeing up production
capacity     for    domestic
demand by reducing exports.
Here, all three channels are
in operation, reinforcing
each other. Rising domestic
production is constrained by
the availability of factor Notes:       The reference scenario switches off all Dutch disease transmission channels while scaling up
                                 mineral output, so that the mining sector is a perfect enclave. The simulations here show scenarios
inputs, particularly labor in which mining remains an enclave using no inputs (and repatriating all profits), with the exception
                                 of domestic intermediate inputs which it utilizes in production.
which only grows in line
with the population (labor is in essence quasi-fixed). In contrast, the capital stock can be increased in the
simulation through savings and investment, although this takes time.
With both labor and capital being relatively fixed in the short run, the expanding sectors draw in labor and
capital from the other sectors – mainly agriculture and tradable sector that shrink correspondingly (Figure
3D). The increased demand for tradables is met through: (i) a large increase in imports of tradables notably
agriculture13 (Figure 4A and B) and; (ii) a reduction in exports by the traded sectors, which helps free up a
considerable part of domestic production for domestic use (Figures 4C and 4D).
Driving these changes are movements in relative price changes. First, wage rates for the production factors
increase. For labor, the wage increase is quasi permanent; for capital it is eventually reversed as the supply
of capital increases over time (Figure 5A). Second, output prices for export-oriented goods or close import
substitutes fall due to the appreciation of the currency (Figure 5B), making export production less attractive
and imports more price competitive. The combination of higher input costs and lower output prices reduces
profitability in export-oriented and import-competing sectors; this causes them to shrink, releasing the
production factors in demand in other sectors, especially non-tradables. In contrast, the output price for


13   Elasticities for these sectors were delineated precisely to capture this characteristic.
                                                                      11
 domestically-oriented         sectors,
                                                        Figure 5: Scenario where mining uses only intermediate inputs
including non-tradables, increases on
account of the rise in demand, which              A.         Wage rates: mining uses      B.         Domestic producer, sales and
                                                  only intermediate inputs                import/export prices
makes it possible for these sectors to            Difference to reference scenario in %   Average over all sectors except mining,
pay higher input prices without                                                           Difference to reference scenario in %
suffering reduced profitability.14
Key results
Dutch disease effects such as the real
appreciation and the shrinkage in the
tradable sector are equilibrium
outcomes of scaled-up mining
production that utilizes domestic
intermediate     production    inputs.            C.         Household income and         D.         Government revenues          and
Without this, it would be impossible              consumption                             expenditures
                                                  Difference to reference scenario in %   Difference to reference scenario in %
for the economy to meet the demand
for non-tradable intermediate inputs
by the mining sector.
The real exchange rate appreciation is
needed to achieve both external and
internal equilibrium. Higher mining
production and exports lead to rising
FX earnings; in the reference scenario
where the mining sector does not rely Notes: The reference scenario switches off all Dutch disease transmission channels
                                           while scaling up mineral output, so that the mining sector is a perfect enclave. The
on domestic production factors, these simulations here show the impact of an alternative scenario in which mining remains an
earnings are used to pay for imported enclave      for all intents and purposes, using no domestic input and repatriating all income
                                           overseas, except domestic intermediate inputs which it uses in production.
intermediate inputs and for higher
usage of the foreign-owned mining-specific production factor, with the result that all of the additional FX
earnings leave the domestic economy immediately.15 However, in the current scenario part of these earnings
are used to pay for these domestic inputs, thereby increasing the supply of FX that is domestically available,
leading to a balance of payment surplus. It is this surplus, and the ensuing attempt by domestic agents to
sell surplus foreign exchange, that leads to the initial appreciation.

Finally, households play a secondary role in the adjustment process, relative to government spending.
Higher wages increase household incomes, which are spent in part on goods and services, which requires a
corresponding supply response. But a substantial portion is saved, thus financing investment that builds up
the economy’s capital stock and facilitating an endogenous response to the demand for additional
production factors. The increase in income, and more importantly the rise in imports, also leads to an
increase in government revenue which is used mainly for additional government consumption; the
remainder is used for public investment in order to facilitate higher public consumption, e.g., additional
school or administrative buildings. Again, the economy will have to meet the resulting demand as well
(Figures 5C and 5D).


14 The output price for domestically-oriented sectors is represented by the domestic sales prices for domestically-produced
goods.
15 In a more conventional setup where the mining sector is essentially foreign owned, the payments for the foreign-owned mining

specific sector would be equivalent to profit remittances.
                                                                12
    b) Using only labor as domestic production factor

 Domestic labor accounts for about
                                         Figure 6: Real exchange rate                 Figure 7: Tradable sector production in
8 percent of total inputs in the         appreciation in response to scaled up        response to scaled up mining production
mining sector in the base-year for       mining production

the SAM, i.e., about half the value      Difference to BASE in %                      Difference to BASE in %
intermediate inputs did in the
preceding scenario. As before,
relative to the reference scenario the
amount of imported intermediate
inputs is adjusted downwards as
domestic labor takes its place.
Again, balancing the SAM requires
also lowering the amount of foreign
transfers households receive.            Notes: BASE is the business-as-usual scenario in which there is no resource windfall and
                                         the economy grows at a 5% pace over the long term. The baseline scenario assumes mining
Size of Dutch disease effects: The       output doubles by 2016, and that the mining sector is fully integrated into the economy.
                                         The additional simulations here show scenarios in which mining remains an enclave for all
impact on the real exchange rate is      intents and purposes, using no domestic input and repatriating all income overseas, except
slightly larger than that of domestic    domestic labor inputs (green line) or intermediate inputs (blue line).

intermediate inputs (Figure 6).
Despite its relatively smaller role in the mining sector compared to domestic intermediate inputs, domestic
labor causes a larger shrinkage of the tradable sector (Figure 7).
Transmission mechanism.
Labor: Increased labor demand by the mining sector needs to be met by reducing labor inputs elsewhere.
In the simulation, labor that migrates to the mining sector comes from (i) agriculture, (ii) the tradable sector,
(iii) government services and (iv) the non-tradable sector, in this order measured in absolute terms (Figure
8A). Note that high labor demand raises wage rates for labor, much more so than in the previous scenario
(Figure 8B). As a result, household income in this scenario also rises more than previously, enabling a
larger increase in savings and buildup of capital in this scenario (Figure 8C). Agriculture is the chief source
of labor for the mining sector both in absolute terms as well as in percentage terms (Figures 8A, 8D). In
contrast, the fall in demand for, and production of, agricultural goods is modest (Figures 8E,8F). In fact,
the last two are broadly comparable to the simulation results in the previous scenario.




                                                          13
Note at their peak, total
                                                         Figure 8: Scenario where mining uses only labor inputs
demand and domestic output
do not decline by much more              A. Change in labor allocation                       B.Change in labor wages
                                         Difference to reference scenario, absolute          Average over all sectors except mining,
than 1 percent, which is hard            change                                              Difference to reference scenario in %
to reconcile with a reduction in
labor input by the non-mining
sectors (Figures 8E,8F). In
agriculture, this is because the
sector is able to release
substantial amounts of labor
without having to scale down
production drastically since it
can substitute labor with                C.Change in capital allocation                      D.Change in labor allocation
capital. 16 This is the case for         Difference to reference scenario in %               Difference to reference scenario in %

government services as well.17
Government services and
construction            sectors
meanwhile also increase their
capital inputs in line with
rising output. Again, relative
prices play a key role for this
substitution of factors: wage            E. Change in domestic demand by sector              F.Change in domestic production by sector
rates     for    labor      rise         Difference to reference scenario in %               Difference to reference scenario in %
substantially while those for
capital actually decrease,
reflecting the impact of
increased saving on the supply
of capital. Hence, labor
becomes relatively more
expensive      while     capital
becomes       cheaper.     This
relative price change drives
                                         Notes: The reference scenario switches off all Dutch disease transmission channels while scaling
the substitution of factors              up mineral output, so that the mining sector is a perfect enclave. The simulations here show the
taking place in agriculture and          impact of an alternative scenario in which mining remains an enclave for all intents and purposes,
                                         using no domestic input and repatriating all income overseas, with one exception --- i.e. the usage
government services.                     of domestic labor inputs. In figure 8A due to the fact that in this simulation the labor input in the
                                         mining sector is increased in the steady state, the percentage comparison to the reference scenario
                                         does not show the increase in labor input as mining production is scaled up; hence, the absolute
                                         change is used here




16 At first glance, it may not be obvious how a 2 percent increase in the capital stock can compensate for a decline by more than

10 percent in the labor force, given that output declines by only about 1 percent. The answer is that capital plays a much larger
role in the production function than labor, i.e., the corresponding CES parameters for capital are higher than those for labor.
17 This is no coincidence: in the calibration of the elasticity of substitution between factors in the production function, both

elasticities were set to relatively high values (of 1.5 and 2.5 respectively). This reflects the situation during the 2005-08 boom
phase in Mongolia when agriculture’s share in labor shrank sharply while public employment did not increase by much despite
the fiscal expansion over this time. [

                                                                  14
Tradables: For tradables, reconciling a
                                                                Figure 9: Scenario where mining uses only labor inputs
sharp drop with labor inputs (and a
somewhat more moderate reduction in                     A.         Domestic          demand,     B.       Domestic       production,
                                                        procurement and import volumes:          procurement and export volumes
capital inputs) with above-average                      tradable goods
demand is straightforward: higher imports               Difference to reference scenario, in %   Average over all sectors except mining,
                                                                                                 Difference to reference scenario in %
(Figure 9A) can meet domestic demand
directly and lower exports (Figure 9B)
free up production capacity indirectly that
can be used to meet demand for
domestically-produced tradables, similar
to the scenario with domestic intermediate
inputs. On the production side, domestic
production falls by considerably more
                                                        C.         Domestic producer prices      D.         Domestic sales prices of
than      domestic     procurement       of             by sector                                domestically produced goods
domestically-produced goods, with the                   Difference to reference scenario in %    Difference to reference scenario in %

reduction in production for export
markets making up the difference.
As before, the real exchange appreciation
is the key driver for these changes, but the
increase in labor wage rates is higher than
in the case where the mining sector used
only intermediate inputs. Hence tradable
sector profitability falls by more, which Notes: The reference scenario switches off all Dutch disease transmission channels
                                              while scaling up mineral output, so that the mining sector is a perfect enclave, using
accounts for the fact that shrinkage of no domestic inputs and repatriating all profits. The simulations here show the
tradable sector production is more impact            of an alternative scenario in which mining remains an enclave for all intents
                                              and purposes, with the exception of domestic labor inputs, which it uses in
pronounced in this scenario even though production.
the extent of the real exchange rate appreciation is broadly similar in both scenarios.
Non-tradables: In this sector, the reductions in labor input, domestic production, and domestic demand are
all approximately in the range of 1-2 percent; only capital accumulation is less, declining at its peak by less
than 0.5%. This relative proportionality in the adjustment reflects two factors at work. First, by definition,
higher domestic demand for non-tradables cannot be met through imports or curtailment of exports. As a
result, when domestic production declines, domestic demand has to decline by approximately the same
amount, leading to the observed proportionality in the decline of domestic production and demand.
Second, unlike agricultural and government services, substituting between labor and capital in the non-
tradable sector is difficult. This is a feature of the calibration that reflects that during the 2005-08 boom
phase when employment surged in this sector. Some substitution between production factors does take
place in the simulation—the reduction in the non-tradable sector labor force is larger than the retrenchment
of capital—but only on a modest scale (see Khan et al. 2017).
Taken together, these characteristics imply that if the non-tradable sector sheds labor, domestic production
and demand have to decline as well. This is achieved as follows: first, when labor costs increase due to
rising demand from the mining sector, the non-tradable sector passes through some of the increase to prices
in contrast to the tradable sector. As a result, domestic producer prices increase, and so do domestic sales
prices in the non-tradable sector, which outpaces that of all other sectors (Figure 9C, D). This implies that
the relative price of non-tradables increases, which affects demand accordingly. With less demand,
production in the non-tradable sector contracts, releasing labor that migrates to the mining sector. Hence,
                                                                 15
the observed reduction in demand, production, and labor input are all equilibrium responses to the scaling
up of mining production and the ensuing higher demand for labor.
Key results
Domestic labor demand appears to be a more potent transmission mechanism of Dutch disease than demand
for domestic intermediate inputs. This is reflected in the larger shrinkage of the traded sector when the
mining sector uses labor inputs vs when it uses intermediate inputs, even as the size of the real exchange
rate appreciation remains broadly the same in both simulations. The substantial increase in labor costs
underpins these larger impacts. Namely, the shift in domestic demand for traded goods away from domestic
production towards imports, declining profitability in the traded sector, the substitution of capital for labor,
and declining production in the non-traded sector that all are necessary to release labor to mining.



    c) Using only capital as domestic input

The scenario introduces capital input into
                                                       Figure 10: Scenario where mining uses only domestic capital inputs
mining sector production while domestic
intermediate and labor inputs are set to               Real exchange rate appreciation     Tradable production
zero. Capital accounts for about 6 percent             Difference to BASE in %             Difference to BASE in %
of total inputs in the mining sector, about a
quarter less than labor input. Compared to
domestic intermediate inputs, capital
inputs are only about a third as large. The
other adjustments to balance out the SAM
proceed as before.
Size of Dutch disease effects: The
introduction of capital as a production Notes:           BASE is the business-as-usual scenario in which there is no resource
                                                windfall and the economy grows at a 5% pace over the long term. The baseline
factor in the mining sector has the smallest scenario assumes mining output doubles by 2016, and that the mining sector is
                                                fully integrated into the economy. The additional simulations here show scenarios
impact on the real exchange rate compared in which mining remains an enclave for all intents and purposes, using no
to domestic intermediate and labor inputs, domestic inputs and repatriating all income overseas, except domestic labor inputs
                                                (green line) or intermediate inputs (black line) or capital inputs (green line).
accounting for less than 10 percent of the
total real appreciation under the baseline
scaling-up scenario (Figure 10A). On part this reflects lesser usage of capital by the mining sector relative
to the other two factors. However, the result holds even after adjusting for different input shares. The impact
on tradable sector output is comparable to the role domestic intermediate inputs play for tradable sector
production, even though they have a much larger input share in mining sector production (Figure 10B).
Transmission mechanism and key results. The primary task for the transmission mechanism is to channel
domestic capital into the mining sector. In principal, the economy can generate capital endogenously—
unlike labor—through domestic savings and investments, but this takes time.




                                                               16
Hence, at least in the beginning,
                                                   Figure 11: Scenario where mining uses only domestic capital inputs
capital has to be diverted from other
sectors into the mining sector. In              A.Change in capital allocation           B.Change in labor allocation
                                               Difference to reference scenario, in %   Difference to reference scenario in %
absolute terms, it turns out that
agriculture and the tradable sector
are the most important ‘donors’; in
percentage terms, the sector
providing government services also
sheds capital (Figure 11A). Key
results and differences from the
transmission channels observed in
earlier simulations are as follows.
The substitution between capital and            C.Change in wage rates                   D.Wedge between capital and labor
                                                                                         wages
labor continues to play an important           Difference to reference scenario in %    Difference to reference scenario in %
role in the transmission mechanism.
Agriculture and government services
replace some of their capital through
additions to their labor stock (Figure
11B) as the cost of capital increases
relative to wages (Figure 11C, 11D).
However, the resulting wedge
between capital and labor incomes,
however, is relatively modest                   E.Change in import volumes of traded     F.Change in domestic production by
compared to that in previous                    goods:                                   sector
                                               Difference to reference scenario in %    Difference to reference scenario in %
scenarios. The higher capital needs
of the mining sector do not trigger
any reallocation in domestic demand
away from domestically produced
goods towards imports as in previous
scenarios (Figure 11E). This is to be
expected given the relatively modest
real appreciation in this scenario.
There is also a uniform decline in Notes: The reference scenario switches off all Dutch disease transmission channels while
output across all sectors (outside scaling up mineral output, so that the mining sector is a perfect enclave. The simulations
                                         here show the impact of an alternative scenario in which mining remains an enclave for
mining) that is instrumental in all intents and purposes, with the exception of domestic capital inputs, which it uses in
releasing capital towards mining in production.
contrast to earlier scenarios (Figure 11F). This reflects a fall in household income (Figure 12A, 12B) led
by falling labor wages that compresses overall demand rather than increasing it as in the labor and
intermediate input scenarios. With this additional factor present, relative prices like wage rates and the real
exchange rate have to work less, which explains why both of them change less compared to the domestic
labor scenario.
The reduction in government demand is another transmission channel that lowers overall demand that was
not present in the other two scenarios (Figure 12C). It follows from: (i) the lower level of imports which
reduces indirect tax collection, especially import tariffs, and; (ii) lower household incomes reducing direct

                                                               17
tax collection and thereby government expenditures. An increase in the relative sales price of non-tradables
remains a key transmission mechanism that helps non-tradable production decline. Focusing on


 agriculture and tradables, the two sectors
                                                Figure 12: Scenario where mining uses only domestic capital inputs
that release most of the capital migrating
to the mining sector in the scenario            A.     Change        in     household      B. Change in household income:
                                                expenditures and incomes                   Different scenarios
considered here, their sales prices for         Difference to reference scenario, in %     Difference to reference scenario in %
domestically-produced products rise more
than that of any other goods, implying that
their relative price increases. This tends to
reduce demand, leading to lower
production and the release of capital used
in their production.
Finally, building up capital through
savings is a transmission mechanism that        C. Change in government revenues:          D. Change in capital accumulations:
                                                differnct scenarios                        Different scenarios
is active in the other two scenarios but it     Difference to reference scenario in %      Difference to reference scenario in %
is not at work in the scenario considered
here (Figure 12D). This is a result of
declining overall absorption (i.e., private
and public consumption and investment
expenditures), because private investment
is programmed in the simulations to
remain constant as a share of overall
absorption, and with absorption declining,
so does private investment and thereby          Notes: The reference scenario switches off all Dutch disease transmission channels
                                                while scaling up mineral output, so that the mining sector is a perfect enclave. The
capital accumulation.                           simulation in figure 12A shows a scenario in which mining remains an enclave for
                                                all intents and purposes, using no domestic inputs and repatriating all income
                                                overseas, except domestic capital inputs. In figures 12B, C and D, this last scenario
                                                is compared with scenarios in which mining only uses labor inputs (blue line) or
                                                intermediate inputs (orange line).


    d) Combined effect of domestic inputs

This scenario switches on all domestic inputs simultaneously. These account for approximately a third of
total inputs into the mining sector, with the rest accounted for by imported intermediate inputs and the
foreign-owned mining-specific production factors.
Note that the size of Dutch disease effects accounted for by all domestic inputs used by the mining sector
can only be an approximate estimate: as noted in the previous simulations, the use of different inputs can
reinforce or cancel each other. However, the latter is easily determined by comparing the simulation results
for Dutch disease effects for the scenario where all domestic inputs are switched on, to the sum of the
individual effects generated in the previous simulations.
Size of Dutch disease effects. The use of domestic inputs by the mining sector seems to explain about two-
thirds of the total real appreciation, and 80 percent of the shrinkage of the tradable sector that occurs in the
baseline scenario. Does the total effect of domestic inputs correspond approximately to the sum of the
effects of the individual inputs? Approximately it would seem the answer is yes (Figure 13). This would

                                                         18
suggest that interaction effects between the different inputs are either relatively weak or they cancel each
other out.
Key lessons. A number of lessons also
                                                      Figure 13: Comparing scenarios using domestic inputs
emerge from the simulations so far.
First,    the    overall    transmission    A.Real exchange rate appreciation:           B.Tradable      sector  production:
                                            different scenarios                          different scenarios
mechanism is complex, and Dutch             Difference to BASE, in %                     Difference to BASE in %
disease is an equilibrium response to the
scaling up of mining production. There
are multiple channels at work that differ
in their relative importance for the
different domestic inputs, and their
interaction effects when several
domestic inputs are introduced
simultaneously are unknown. The usage
of labor by the mining sector appears to    C.Real exchange rate appreciation:           D.Tradable      sector  production:
                                            comparing sum of individual effects          comparing sum of individual effects
have the largest impact on the real         Difference to BASE in %                      Difference to BASE in %
exchange rate and the traded sector.
Second, real exchange rate appreciation
fulfills at a minimum two functions: on
the demand side it leads to expenditure
switching effects that redirect demand
from non-tradables to tradables. On the
supply side, it helps to meet tradables
demand through import, reducing
                                            Notes: BASE is the business-as-usual scenario in which there is no resource windfall
domestic tradables production in the        and the economy grows at a 5% pace over the long term. The baseline scenario
process, which helps free up production     assumes mining output doubles by 2016, and that the mining sector is fully integrated
                                            into the economy. The additional simulations here show scenarios in which mining
factors in demand in other sectors. The     remains an enclave for all intents and purposes, using no domestic inputs and
tradable sector is a major ‘donor’ of       repatriating all income overseas, except domestic labor inputs (blue line) or
                                            intermediate inputs (green line) or capital inputs (orange line) or all domestic inputs
these production factors.                   simultaneously (dotted black line).

In Mongolia, agriculture is typically the
other major ‘donor’ of production factors. The transmission mechanism is somewhat different, though,
from that in the tradable sector: the fall in output in agriculture tends to be less severe than that in the
tradable sector, because, at least in the Mongolia calibration, substitution between labor and capital in this
sector is more feasible. This means if agriculture sheds labor, part of the impact on overall production can
be compensated by accumulating more capital instead. Nevertheless, domestic agricultural production
declines in all scenarios considered above.
Besides real exchange rates, changes in wage rates and domestic producer/sales prices are the other relative
price changes that are driving the transmission mechanism. Changes in the relative price of labor and
capital, for example, drive the factor substitution taking place in agriculture. Increasing wages for scarce
production factors also reinforce the effect of the real appreciation on profitability in the tradable sector,
contributing to its shrinkage. Relative prices play a role in changing demand patterns in product markets.
This is not only important for agriculture and tradables but plays also a key role in the response of the non-
tradable sector to the scaling up of the mining sector. Given the multitude of relative price changes, all
sectors are affected, both on the demand and production sides.


                                                        19
Finally, household income effects can be positive or negative. Higher household incomes are partly spent
on goods and services (reinforcing Dutch disease), but are partly saved, thus helping to finance investment
and helping to increase the economy’s capital stock. On aggregate, though, it seems they are positive. Ditto
for the effect on government revenues.


The role of domestic spending of mining receipts in the scaling-up of mining
production
This section focuses on income effects of scaled up mining production. Of course, income effects such as
increases in household income and government revenues did already play a role in preceding simulations,
but these were indirect effects. In this section, (i) higher government revenue collection and (ii) a rise in
household incomes due to dividends from the mining sector will be the driving forces of the transmission
mechanism. Note that in contrast to the previous simulations, no domestic production factors are
employed in the mining sector in this set of simulations.

     a) Government spending of mining receipts

Beginning with a scenario where
                                                       Figure 14: Impact of rising government revenues as mining sector
government revenue increases on                                                  doubles in size
account of scaled up mining production,
                                                    Real exchange rate appreciation            Tradable production
this scenario reintroduces (i) import
taxes, (ii) export taxes, (iii) other indirect      Difference to BASE in %                    Difference to BASE in %

taxes, and (iv) dividend collection from
the mining sector that was removed from
the reference scenario in order to switch
off this transmission channel.18 In total,
in the baseline, these mining revenues
account for a bit more than 10 percent of
all government revenue collection.                  Notes: BASE is the business-as-usual scenario in which there is no resource windfall
                                                    and the economy grows at a 5% pace over the long term. The scenario assumes
Scaling up of mining production raises              mining output doubles by 2016, and that the mining sector does not utilize any
government revenue collection by just               domestic inputs but that mining revenues flow into the domestic economy and to the
                                                    government via taxes and dividends.
under 10 percent at its peak relative to
the business as usual scenario; over time, the revenue increase in percentage term decreases slightly,
reflecting the falling relative share of the mining sector once production plateaus (Figure 14). In percent of
GDP, the increase in revenue is more modest at about 2 percent, mostly driven by the increase in export
taxes, i.e., royalties, and payment of dividends by the mining sector.19



18Technically, dividend collection from the mining sector is modeled as factor payments from the mining-specific production
factor to the government. Under the reference scenario, all of these factor payments are sent to foreign owners, whereas in this
scenario approximately 10% of these factor payments accrue to the government, reflecting partial public ownership of the mining
sector. The absolute amount of dividends paid to the government in the baseline is calibrated on the basis of actual revenue
collection, mostly reflecting dividend payments from Erdenet, a partially-state owned copper mine.
19Higher revenue collection from the mining sector necessitates other changes relative to the reference scenario in order to

balance the SAM. First, higher domestic revenue collection is offset by lower budget support from the rest of the world to keep
overall revenues constant. Second, higher tax payments of the mining sector (but not dividend payments, which are made by the
mining-specific production factor employed in this sector) lower the income of this sector; to compensate, household purchases
are increased by the same amount. Third, higher household purchases of mining goods in the baseline create a deficit in the
                                                               20
A key issue in the transmission mechanism is how the government uses the additional revenues it receives
as mining sector production scales up: the simulations below will consider three alternatives, namely:
(i)       spending on consumption goods;
(ii)      spending on public investment;
(iii)     a reduction in direct taxes for households. Before turning to a detailed discussion of the individual
          scenarios, the following section reviews the aggregate Dutch disease effects for all three scenarios.
Size of Dutch disease effects. Beginning with the real exchange rate, at first glance the impact of domestic
spending by the government appears small compared to the baseline (Figure 15A). This however, is
misleading. The impact of government spending on Dutch disease effects depends critically on the amount
of government spending, which in turn is a function of the additional revenues the government receives as
the mining sector scales up production. 20
This is also borne out in the simulations.
                                                                  Figure 15: Government spending of mineral receipts
The peak increase in revenues is about 2
percent of GDP. When spent on public                     A. Real exchange rate appreciation:      B. Tradable sector          output:
                                                         different scenarios                      different scenarios
consumption or tax cuts, they lead to a                  Difference to BASE, in %                 Difference to BASE in %
roughly 2 percent appreciation of the real
exchange rate, suggesting a sizable (or
one-for-one) fiscal impact. When used for
public investment, the real appreciation is
minimal in the short run (due to the higher
import content of public investment). In
the long run, the real exchange rate
depreciates because higher public                        C. Real exchange rate appreciation:      D. Tradable sector output: baseline
investment raises productive capacity of                 baseline simulations                     simulation
                                                         Difference to BASE, in %                 Difference to BASE in %
the economy. 21 This illustrates that the
type of fiscal spending matters
significantly for Dutch disease effects.
Regarding the tradable sector, the results
are broadly similar to those for the real
exchange rate (Figure 15B). In the scenario
with public investment no Dutch disease
effects are visible because tradable sector
production increases. In the public                      Notes: BASE is the business-as-usual scenario in which there is no resource
                                                         windfall and the economy grows at a 5% pace over the long term. The baseline
consumption and tax cut scenarios, there is              scenario assumes mining output doubles by 2016, and that the mining sector is
                                                         fully integrated into the economy.




household sector which is ‘filled’ by higher transfers from the rest of the world. In addition, higher transfers from the rest of the
world also compensate for the foreign exchange deficit that arises when budget support grants were pared back in the first step.
20 These can vary substantially between countries (due to different tax regimes) and even between projects in the same country

because of different cost structures and project-specific fiscal terms. For Mongolia, the revenue effects of scaled-up mining
production assume that existing fiscal terms for the mining sector—at least as embedded in the SAM— are applied to a new
mining project. In the real world, fiscal terms for a new project are subject to negotiation and may well be much larger than those
simulated here. For the sake of simplicity, we avoid changing these terms.
21 Another way to see this is that meeting fiscally-induced demand means mobilizing domestic resources, just as was the case for

the scenarios with the mining industry using domestic inputs directly. Indeed, In the baseline, revenue collected from the mining
sector is about equal in absolute terms to the domestic inputs of labor, capital, and intermediate inputs after these have been
rescaled to account for the same input share into the mining sector.
                                                                 21
a modest contraction in output,
                                                    Figure 16: Government spending of mineral receipts on public
comparable to the scenario where the                                             consumption
mining sector uses only intermediate
                                             A. Change in domestic demand by sector       B. Change in domestic production by
inputs.                                                                                   sector.
                                             Difference to reference scenario in %        Difference to reference scenario in %
It is also worth looking at impacts of
different fiscal spending strategies in
the original baseline simulations.
These had assumed that higher
revenues were entirely spent on
government consumption and led to
large      real     exchange       rate
appreciations and shrinkage of the
tradable sector. As Figures 15C and          C. Change in labor allocation.               D. Change in capital allocation.
15D show, even                               Difference to reference scenario in %        Difference to reference scenario in %

if they had been spent on public
investment, the decline in the
tradable sector remains substantial,
i.e., government spending on public
investment alone is insufficient to
reverse Dutch disease.

Spending           additional
government revenues on public                E.     Change in domestic demand,            F. Change in aggregate sales price by
                                             procument and import volumes of              sector (domestically produced and
consumption                                  tradable goods                               imported goods)
                                             Difference to reference scenario, absolute   Difference to reference scenario in %
                                             change
The starting point for the
transmission mechanism in this
scenario is the increase in demand
for public consumption goods, met
through higher output in the sector,
and in construction. The higher
levels of labor and capital needed to
produce public consumption goods             G.     Change in domestic demand,            H. Change in aggregate sales price by
                                             procument and import volumes of              sector (domestically produced and
are “donated”, as in previous                tradable goods                               imported goods)
simulations, by mainly agriculture,          Difference to reference scenario, absolute   Difference to reference scenario in %
                                             change
and the tradable sectors (Figure 16,
A-D).
Domestic demand for tradables is
met through imports and exports
decline that helps free up more
domestic     production     capacity.
Relatively      buoyant      demand
conditions raise domestic sales Notes: The reference scenario switches off all Dutch disease transmission channels while
prices with the exception of scaling up mineral output, so that the mining sector is a perfect enclave.
tradables prices that are dominated by the real appreciation (Figure 16E,F)

                                                             22
This price differential leads to expenditure switching effects that allow a greater proportion of domestic
demand to be met by imports. This makes it possible to devote more domestic production capacity to the
demand for domestically-produced goods such as public consumption goods.
However, the changes in wages for labor and capital also lead to income effects that support the
transmission mechanism by raising savings and investment. Nevertheless, with investment needs outpacing
income gains, household expenditures decline in order to generate the required savings, a result that could
be characterized as a crowding out of private consumption by public consumption (Figure 18A, 18B).



Spending additional government revenues on tax reductions


In this scenario, all of the increase in
                                            Figure 17: Government spending of mineral receipts on direct tax cuts for
government revenues from the                                                       households
mining sector is transferred to
                                           A. Change in household incomes                B. Change in domestic demand by sector
households via a cut in direct taxes.      Difference to reference scenario in %         Difference to reference scenario in %
This is akin to a universal cash
transfer program funded by resource
revenues. It is a particularly
appropriate scenario to consider in
Mongolia, given use of such
programs in the past: in 2006,
Mongolia introduced resource-
financed payments for all children,
and in 2010 the scheme was                 C. Change in labor allocation                 D. Change in capital allocation
                                           Difference to reference scenario, absolute    Difference to reference scenario, absolute
expanded, with larger payments to          terms                                         terms
be provided to all citizens (Ying and
Howes, 2015). In 2012, the scheme
was narrowed to cover only children
as a result of severe fiscal pressures
due to a sharp drop in global
commodity prices following the
global economic crisis of 2009 and a
sharp slowdown in growth.
                                           E. Change in wages                            F.   Change in aggregate sales price
In the simulations, the resulting                                                        (domestically produced and imported
increase in disposable income due to                                                     goods
the tax cut boosts both household
consumption expenditures and
savings.      Higher     consumption
expenditures raise demand across
the board (Figure 17A,B), and the
remainder of the transmission
channel is very similar to the one
observed in other scenarios:
essentially production of tradables        Notes: The reference scenario switches off all Dutch disease transmission channels while
falls to free up production factors in     scaling up mineral output, so that the mining sector is a perfect enclave.
other sectors (Figure 17C,D).
                                                           23
Underpinning it is the impact of appreciation of the real exchange rate on the tradable sector, the effects of
which are reinforced by rising wage rates, especially for labor. In the longer term, the increase in savings
and investment builds up the capital stock and the resulting larger supply of capital leads to a decline in
relative cost of capital that underpins the substitution of labor with capital in the agricultural sector. Strong
demand leads to general price increases with the exception of tradables and government investment goods
for which prices are determined by the real appreciation. This price divergence leads once again to
expenditure switching effects. With capital becoming more plentiful in the long run and thereby cheaper,
prices for agricultural products decline, reflecting that agriculture is relatively capital intensive in the
Mongolia calibration, especially
                                                Figure 18: Government spending of mineral receipts on public investment
after the substation of labor with
capital in this sector.                        A.     Change in domestic demand,            B. Change in domestic production by
                                               procurement and import volumes of            sector
                                               tradable goods of public investment
Spending           additional                  goods.
government revenues on public                  Difference to reference scenario, absolute   Difference to reference scenario in %

investment

This scenario has been designed to
investigate whether it is possible to
counter Dutch disease effects
through fiscal policy. In short, the
answer is yes. However, note that
this scenario isolates the impact of
                                               C. Change in wages                           D. Change in domestic production,
public investment spending: when                                                            procurement and exports: tradable
other channels are also switched on,                                                        goods.
                                               Difference to reference scenario in %        Difference to reference scenario, absolute
the positive impacts associated with                                                        terms
higher     govt.     spending     are
considerably diluted (refer back to
Figures 16C,D).
The simulations have two key
features; firstly that demand for
public investment goods is met
easily through imports (Figure 18A).
As a result, the demand created by             E. Change in labor allocation                F. Change in capital allocation
higher fiscal spending does not                Difference to reference scenario, absolute   Difference to reference scenario, absolute
                                               terms                                        terms
create domestic demand per se and
thereby avoids the real appreciation
that otherwise would reallocate
domestic demand and production
factors to generate the necessary
domestic supply response.
The second is that public capital
accumulation increases total factor
productivity,     thereby     boosting Notes: The reference scenario switches off all Dutch disease transmission channels while
overall production capacity directly scaling up mineral output, so that the mining sector is a perfect enclave.
as well as indirectly, including in the
tradable sector (Figure 18B). The indirect effect stems from the increase in profitability as TFP rises, which
                                                               24
leads to increased demand for labor and capital. The latter in turn bids up wage rates for labor and capital
(Figure 18C) – with investment rising over time, the supply of capital increases in the long run, which
dampens the increase in the wage rate for capital. The increase in private investment itself is a result of the
surge in public investment, because the last increases economy-wide absorption and private investment is
programmed in the simulations to grow in line with absorption. With wage rates increasing, household
income rises, which leads to both higher savings and household consumption expenditures. The increase in
household income and the resulting rise in household consumption expenditures boosts overall demand,
broadly aligning demand with the rise in the production potential stemming from higher total factor
productivity.
The net effect is to boost tradable sector output – a key departure from previous scenarios. The challenge
for the tradable sector is to find outlets for its higher production. One outlet is higher domestic sales, driven
by the overall increase in demand; in contrast to the other scenarios, domestic tradables retain their
competitiveness because there is no substantial real appreciation in this scenario, allowing domestic
tradables to participate in the general increase in demand. The other outlet is an increase in exports; to
facilitate this, the real depreciation is critical to increase price competitiveness and to create export markets
for tradables (Figure 18D). Finally, just as in other scenarios imports for tradables increases as a result of
the general increase in domestic demand, notwithstanding the real depreciation.
Another effect is that higher private investment leads to higher demand for agricultural products and
construction services the two sectors with the strongest increase in both demand and production;
consequently, agriculture does not fulfill its customary role observed in previous scenarios of releasing
labor while stocking up on capital.
With the tradable sector for once unavailable to supply the rest of the economy with labor and capital, the
burden falls mainly on the sectors supplying non-tradables and public consumption goods. Demand for
these is relatively weak, so that TFP gains in these two sectors can be used for releasing production factors
instead of boosting production levels (Figures 18E,F). In addition, labor is substituted with capital in the
public consumption goods sector—the elasticity of substitution between factors is calibrated to be relatively
high in this sector, based on historical experience22—which explains why the release of labor from the
public consumption goods sector is relatively much larger than the release of capital. For non-tradables,
demand is also relatively weak, which means that part of the total factor productivity gains in this sector
can be used as well to release production factors.

       b) Private sector spending of dividends from the mining sector

In this scenario, the only transmission channel that is switched on is a rise in private sector household
income stemming from the receipt of dividends from the mining sector. 23 In the baseline calibration,
domestic private ownership of the mining sector has been set to about 30 percent, compared to 10 percent
for the government and 60 percent for foreigners. Household dividend collection exceeds total government
revenue collection from the mining sector by approximately 50 percent, which implies that dividends are a
very substantial income source for households.
A caveat is that typically households in natural resource rich economies are likely to own small scale mines
whereas large-scale new mining projects are likely to be owned mainly by foreign companies. Hence,
dividend payments to households from the new large-scale mining project simulated here are likely


22   See companion paper Khan et al (2017).
23   As before, payments from the mining-specific production factor to households are interpreted as dividend payments.
                                                               25
overstated, whereas revenue collection in the previous scenario was probably understated. However, in
Mongolia’s case, the distribution of the shares of Erdenes TT means that ownership of large scale mines is
(given share buybacks by the government during 2012), and will be, a substantial source of household
income once the mine is developed and listed. Accordingly, scenarios where Dutch disease effects are
transmitted to the economy through the household ownership of large scale mines are not unreasonable.
Dutch disease effects: At first
                                          Figure 19: Scenarios where mining sector revenues flow to only households
glance, the contribution of private                                      and are spent by them
sector spending of mining
dividends appears to make a A.Real exchange rate appreciation                           B. Real exchange rate appreciation:
                                                                                        responses scaled to simulate equal input
noticeable contribution to the                                                          shares, comparing scenarios
                                        Difference to reference scenario in %           Difference to reference scenario in %
overall real appreciation under
the baseline scenario (Figure
19A).     However,        as    with
government revenues, the real
appreciation needs to be set in
proportion to the mining revenues
received       by       households.
Rescaling dividend payments to
households to the same value as Notes: The baseline scenario assumes mining output doubles by 2016, and that the mining
domestic inputs into the mining sector is fully integrated into the economy. The reference scenario switches off all Dutch
                                        disease transmission channels while scaling up mineral output, so that the mining sector is a
sector on average shows that the perfect enclave.
impact on the real appreciation is
similar to that of the scenarios where the mining sector uses domestic intermediate and capital inputs (Figure
19B), but much less than the scenario where mining uses labor as an input only. For government revenues,
the results were similar to the two scenarios where the government spent its additional revenues on public
consumption or used it for tax reductions (not shown). This suggests that if mining receipts increase the
domestic demand for different goods and services (as well as capital) the impact on the real exchange rate
is broadly similar.
Furthermore, with results in hand
                                               Figure 20: Scenarios where mining sector revenues flow to only households
for all individual channels                                             and are spent by them
behind the real appreciation—
                                             A.Real Exchange Rate                               B. Tradable output: responses scaled to
i.e., domestic inputs into the                                                                  simulate equal input shares, comparing
mining industry, government                                                                     scenarios
                                             Difference to BASE in %                            Difference to reference scenario in %
spending of mining revenues,
and private sector spending of
mining dividends—it is possible
to check whether the individual
channels reinforce each other or
cancel out. Comparing the sum
of the individual results to the
baseline scaling-up simulation
that encompasses all of these                Notes: BASE is the business-as-usual scenario in which there is no resource windfall and the
channels simultaneously shows                economy grows at a 5% pace over the long term. The baseline scenario assumes mining output
                                             doubles. The baseline scenario assumes mining output doubles by 2016, and that the mining
only a small difference, which               sector is fully integrated into the economy. The reference scenario switches off all Dutch disease
                                             transmission channels while scaling up mineral output, so that the mining sector is a perfect
suggests there is little interaction         enclave.


                                                                   26
between the different channels as far as the real exchange rate is concerned (Figure 20A).
For the tradable sector, the impacts are similar to that on the real exchange rate. However, once mining
dividends are rescaled to match the average domestic inputs into the mining sector the effect is similar to
that of using domestic intermediate inputs in the mining sector (Figure 20B); a similar result was obtained
for government spending on public consumption and tax reductions indicating that increasing spending on
goods and services has approximately the same impact on tradable sector production, irrespective of the
source of spending. If demand for capital inputs increases, however, the impact on tradables production is
much larger compared to that of higher demand for goods and services; this result differs from Figure 19B
where the impact on the real exchange rate of higher demand for capital inputs and goods and services was
comparable.
For both the real exchange rate and tradable sector production,
                                                                        Figure 21: Tradable output: comparing
variations in the demand for labor have by far the biggest effect,    factor input and private sector spending of
especially in the long run (Figures 19B, 20B). The last result                mining dividends scenarios.
could reflect that labor supply in the model simulations is fixed     Difference to reference scenario in %

whereas in the real world it is likely to respond to demand—for
example, an increase in wages for skills in high demand would
draw students into these professions, thereby raising the supply
over time; this implies that the actual long-run effect of changes
in the demand for labor could be smaller than that indicated by
the simulations.
Turning to interaction effects, in contrast to the real exchange
rate these are present for the tradable sector because the sum of
the individual effects is by about a quarter larger than the effect   Notes: The reference scenario switches off all Dutch
                                                                      disease transmission channels while scaling up
in the baseline scaling-up simulation where all transmission          mineral output, so that the mining sector is a perfect
channels are present simultaneously (Figure 21). This suggests        enclave.

that some of the individual effects cancel out in the aggregate
transmission mechanism.
Transmission mechanism: The transmission mechanism is very similar to that of the tax reductions
scenario. Central to both is the increase in household income and the resulting surge in household
consumption expenditures (Figure 22A). The increase in household consumption expenditures increases
demand across the board, including for public consumption goods (Figure 22B). In addition, rising
household incomes lead to higher income taxes whereas higher consumption expenditures raise indirect tax
collection (Figure 22C); in contrast to the tax reduction scenario, the gains in government revenue collection
are not passed on to households via tax reductions but instead are used for increasing public consumption
expenditures.
Rising demand is met by a reduction in tradables production which, helped by a real exchange rate
appreciation, releases labor and capital inputs to other sectors. Other transmission mechanisms at work, as
in previous scenarios, are the substitution of labor with capital in the agricultural sector, which increases
the labor supply for other sectors, and expenditure switching effects that redirect demand towards tradables
and hence imports. Besides the real appreciation, this transmission mechanism is supported by rising labor
wage rates whereas capital wage rates remain broadly unchanged, reflecting the effect of increased
investment on capital supply (Figure 22D,E,F).




                                                       27
Figure 22: Scenario where mining sector revenues flow to only households
                               and are spent by them

A. Change in household incomes and           B. Change in domestic demand by sector
consumption
Difference to reference scenario, in %       Difference to reference scenario in %




C. Change in governement expenditures        D. Change in labor allocation
and revenues
Difference to reference scenario, in %       Difference to reference scenario, in %




E. Change in wages                           F. Change in aggregate sales price
Difference to reference scenario, in %       Difference to reference scenario, absolute
                                             terms




Notes: The reference scenario switches off all Dutch disease transmission channels while
scaling up mineral output, so that the mining sector is a perfect enclave.




                                          28
    IV.     Lessons

This section briefly summarizes the three main lessons that emerged from the simulations in this paper.

Complexity of the transmission channels

The economic effects of scaled-up mining production are complex. Dutch-disease effects, which typically
focus on the real exchange rate and tradable sector response, capture only part of the transmission
mechanism. Arguably, all sectors of the economy are affected by a scaling up of mining production—and
not only the tradable sector—and many relative prices change, not only the real exchange rate.
Having said that, the focus on the tradable sector in the discussion of Dutch disease effects is not misplaced
because in most of the scenarios considered here it does play a special role: the shrinkage in the tradable
sector releases production factors that are in demand elsewhere in the economy. Unwrapping this a bit more
leads to the core of the transmission mechanism: scaling up mining production raises the demand for
domestic production factors, be it directly through the mining sector requiring additional domestic labor
and capital inputs as it scales up production or indirectly through higher demand for domestically-produced
goods and services by the mining, government, and household sectors as their incomes rise.
At least in the short term, the supply of domestic production factors can be considered as more-or-less fixed;
the only sector where domestic production can easily be replaced through imports is the tradable sector,
and doing so makes it possible to shrink the sector while still meeting the demand for tradables, which in
turn releases the production factors that are in demand in other sectors. In this sense the shrinkage of the
tradable sector plays a crucial role in facilitating the short-run supply response of the economy to meet the
demand for non-tradable goods and services. In the absence of a central planner who decrees the shrinkage
of the tradable sector, it is the real appreciation that makes this happen.
But there are also other processes at work. For example, the rise in labor wage rates that took place in many
scenarios reinforces the effect of the real appreciation on profitability of the tradable sector, thereby
contributing to its shrinkage. Changes in relative prices on product markets—especially price increases of
non-tradables relative to tradables—lead to expenditure-switching effects that ultimately channel demand
towards imports. Looking beyond the tradable sector, in many scenarios agriculture substituted labor with
capital, thereby increasing the labor supply available for other sectors.
The strength of these different channels depends on structural characteristics of the economy such as factor
input requirements of the mining sector, elasticities of substitution, revenue take of the government from
scaled-up mining production, etc. As a result, this paper can sketch the main transmission channels at work
but it cannot yield universally applicable rules of how scaling-up of mining production will affect individual
sectors and relative prices; the process is too complex for this to be feasible.

Equilibrium outcomes

Dutch disease effects such as the real appreciation and shrinkage of the tradable sector are equilibrium
outcomes. In a sense, this result was predetermined because all the simulations in this paper took place in a
Computable General Equilibrium (CGE) model, which means any real appreciation and tradable sector
                                                     29
response generated in this model has to be an equilibrium outcome. Hence, the extent to which this captures
Mongolia’s reality depends on the deeper question to what extent a CGE model is relevant for Mongolia.
To this end, the companion paper has shown that the CGE model used here can reproduce many of the
salient features of the boom-and-bust cycle Mongolia experienced in the second half of the 2000 (Khan et
al., 2017). With this background, the finding that the scaling-up simulations yield sizeable real appreciations
and shrinkages of the tradable sector as equilibrium outcomes should be taken seriously.
If the real appreciation and shrinkage of tradable sector production are equilibrium outcomes, the question
arises why they should be considered as a disease. Arguably, simulation results showed substantial
reallocations of demand, factor allocations, and production across different sectors, but none of these
seemed to make the economy at large worse off. In fact, scenarios such as tax reductions and household
spending of mining dividends included large income gains of households and increases in household
consumption, features that usually would be considered as positive. As noted at the outset of this paper, to
introduce disease it is necessary to add additional features that give the tradable sector a special role for
economic development; for example, it might be the source of TFP growth, which implies that shrinkage
of the sector would have a permanent negative effect on the growth outlook of the economy that outweighs
any short-term income gains from the mining sector. This is a separate question that has not been addressed
in this paper. The answer to this question, which should be considered on a country-by-country basis,
determines whether the real appreciation and shrinkage of the tradable sector is indeed a problem.
A related issue is the development strategy for a country: if this strategy is predicated on building up an
export-oriented manufacturing industry following the example of many Asian countries, then the real
appreciation and shrinkage of the tradable sector are clearly harmful to that strategy, regardless whether
these are equilibrium outcomes or not. This leads to the final question of how to avoid Dutch disease effects.
This issue is taken up in the final lesson.

Policy implications

If avoidance of Dutch disease effects is a policy objective, for example because the country is committed to
an export-led, manufacturing-oriented development strategy, this can only be achieved through trade-offs
that relinquish aspects of scaling-up mining production that typically would be considered as beneficial:
First, if avoiding Dutch disease effects is the overriding policy objective, an assumption that will be made
for the remainder of the discussion in this section, the most certain way of accomplishing this is to leave
the minerals in the ground. While radical, this proposition captures the notion that an export-led,
manufacturing-oriented development strategy is fundamentally at odds with scaling up of mining
production because the last is bound to lead to some Dutch disease effects that will undermine the first.
After all, as argued above, Dutch disease effects are equilibrium outcomes that are embedded into the very
structure of the economy and cannot be simply switched off through policy choices or clever management
of the scaling-up process. The last two can have some impact, at a cost to other policy objectives, but are
unlikely to avoid Dutch disease effects entirely.
Second, limiting Dutch disease effects from the production side means minimizing domestic inputs into the
mining sector as it scales up production. If the goal is to build an export-oriented manufacturing industry,
production factors have to be steered into this direction and not into mining. The trade-off here is that policy
makers view jobs that are directly generated by the scaling up of the mining sector as a benefit—this job
creation can take place either directly through increased employment in the mining industry (which leads
to particularly strong Dutch disease effects) or indirectly through the demand for goods and services by this
sector. But heralding jobs created by the scaling up of mining industry while simultaneously professing

                                                      30
adherence to an export-led, manufacturing oriented development strategy is internally inconsistent.
Something has to give: either the scaling up of the mining sector has to be structured as much as possible
as an enclave sector with minimal linkages to the rest of the economy, or the development strategy has to
move away from the focus on exports and manufacturing, which in any event is not suitable for all countries.
Policy makers may also consider increasing domestic labor force participation rates – one possibility for
Mongolia where female labor force participation, although not low, is concentrated in the
informal/unremunerated part of the economy and is particularly limited in the mining sector (Khan, 2013
et al., 2013, a,b). Immigration may also be an option for relaxing supply constraints. Such policies have
been employed in GCC countries, with evidence indicating that large inflows of foreign migrants and the
associated extremely large remittance outflows have helped to dampen real exchange rate pressures
associated with commodity booms (Espinoza et al. 2013). However there too tensions/trade-offs may exist,
in the form of social (e.g., migrants substantially outnumbering locals as in Qatar) or long term economic
consequences (low skill base of migrants that affects productivity and diversification efforts) and it is not
clear to what degree these can be sustained.
Limiting Dutch disease effects from the spending of mining receipts means saving these receipts or focusing
spending on areas that minimize Dutch disease effects. The use of mining receipts and the associated policy
options differ for the public and private sectors, as we explain below.
Beginning with the public sector, the simulations above suggest that using additional government revenues
for boosting government consumption or lowering taxes should be minimized if avoiding Dutch disease
effects is the overriding policy objective. Again, achieving this objective entails a real trade-off because it
means that worthwhile alternative policy objectives such as raising the level of public service delivery or
sharing the mineral wealth with the (current) population cannot be achieved. In fact, experience in countries
like Mongolia and Timor-Leste makes it doubtful that a strategy of full saving/deferred benefits of the
mining boom is politically sustainable. Yet another alternative is to focus spending on activities that (i)
have a high import content and (ii) that boost the overall supply potential of the economy, especially that
of the tradable sector. This likely means focusing spending on public investment. The simulations above
have shown that this can avoid Dutch disease effects, even though this spending strategy was not sufficient
to offset Dutch disease effects from other transmission channels. In practice, it will also be necessary to
consider the sustainability of ramped up public investment spending, given that this will entail permanently
higher maintenance costs that can become fiscally challenging once the new mining projects have been
exhausted and mining production recedes.
Turning to the private sector, to the extent that there are large income effects, and it is not possible to direct
these resources through structural policies to areas that benefit the export-led, manufacturing-oriented
development strategy, a tight monetary stance could constrain private consumption and investment and
thereby counteract the increase in household expenditures that is at the heart of this Dutch disease
transmission channel. The drawback is that this policy has distributive implications: not all households will
benefit equally from mining sector dividends, but a tight monetary stance will affect all households,
including those that do not benefit from the mining sector boom.
The bottom line is that the transmission channels behind the real appreciation and the decline in tradable
sector production are complex and represent equilibrium outcomes; as such, they are not necessarily a
disease. However, these effects do pose a challenge for the development strategy of a country, especially if
this strategy aims for export-led, manufacturing-oriented growth. In this case, it will either be necessary to
forfeit (or postpone) many of the benefits that are normally associated with a booming mining sector in
order to avoid Dutch disease effects, or the growth strategy will have to be changed to allow for a real
appreciation and shrinkage of the tradable sector to take place.
                                                       31
References

Auty, R.M. 2001. Resource Abundance and Economic Development (Oxford: Oxford University
Press).

Acosta, P., Lartey, E. K. K. & F.S. Mandelman. 2009. Remittances and the Dutch disease. Journal of
International Economics.

Adams, C. S. & D. L. Bevan 2003. Aid, Public Expenditure and Dutch disease. CSAE WPS/2003-02.

Barnett, S., and R. Ossowski. 2002. Operational Aspects of Fiscal Policy in Oil-Producing Countries. IMF
Working Paper WP/02/177, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
Corden, W. 1984. Booming Sector and Dutch disease Economics: Survey and Consolidation. Oxford
Economic Papers
Corden, W, and PJ Neary. 1982. Booming Sector and Deindustrialization in a Small Open Economy,
Economic Journal 92
Davis, J., R. Ossowski, J. Daniel, and S. Barnett. 2001. Stabilization and Savings Funds for Nonrenewable
Resources: Experience and Fiscal Policy Implications. Occasional Paper 205,m International Monetary
Fund, Washington, DC.
Espinoza, R., Fayed, G. and Prasad, A. 2013. The Macroeconomic Impact of Migration. In The
Macroeconomics of the Arab States of the Gulf edited by R. Espinoza, G. Fayad and A. Prasad. OUP
Khan T., and J. Gottschalk. 2017. Simulating the 2006-09 Commodity Boom-Bust Cycle in Mongolia: How
do Simulations with a CGE MAMS Model Compare with Actual Developments? Unpublished background
paper. Available upon request.
IMF, 2011. Mongolia: Ex Post Evaluation of Exceptional Access Under the 2009 Stand-By Arrangement,
s.l.: IMF Country Report no.11/77.
IMF, 2015. Mongolia: 2015 Article IV Consultation-Staff Report, Washington DC: IMF.
Khan, T.; Van Den Brink, R, Aslam, M.. 2013. Mongolia - Gender disparities in labor markets and policy
suggestions. Washington DC ; World Bank.
Khan, T.; Van Den Brink, R, Baasanjav, O. . 2013. Mongolia - Raising female participation in the large
scale mining sector. Washington DC ; World Bank
Lofgren, H., M. Cicowiez, and C. Diaz-Bonilla, 2013. “MAMS – A Computable General Equilibrium
Model for Developing Country Strategy Analysis”. pp. 159–276 in Dixon, Peter B. and Dale W. Jorgenson
(Eds.), Handbook of Computable General Equilibrium Modeling. Volume 1A. North Holland, Elsevier
B.V.
Magud, N and S Sosa (2010), “When and Why Worry About Real Exchange Rate Appreciation? The
Missing Link between Dutch disease and Growth”, IMF Working Paper 10/271, December.
van Wijnbergen, S., 1984. The 'Dutch disease': A Disease after All?, Economic Journal, 94
van der Ploeg, F, and T. Venables, A. 2012. "Natural Resource Wealth: The Challenge of Managing a
Windfall," Annual Review of Economics, Annual Reviews, vol. 4(1)
                                                   32
van der Ploeg, F. 2012. "Bottlenecks in Ramping Up Public Investment," OxCarre Working Papers 066,
Oxford Centre for the Analysis of Resource Rich Economies, University of Oxford
van der Ploeg, F., Venables, A., 2010. "Absorbing A Windfall of Foreign Exchange: Dutch disease
dynamics," CEPR Discussion Papers 8086, C.E.P.R. Discussion Papers.
van den Brink, Rogier; Sayed, A. ; Barnett, Steve; A., Eduardo; P., Eric; Hasnain, Z.; and Khan, T.. 2012.
South-South cooperation : how Mongolia learned from Chile on managing a mineral-rich economy.
Economic Premise no. 90. Washington, DC: World Bank
Yeung, Ying and Howes, Stephen, Resources-to-Cash: A Cautionary Tale from Mongolia (September 16,
2015). Development Policy Centre Discussion Paper No. 42.




                                                   33
Appendix A: Mongolia Social Accounting Matrix

               a-agr    a-    a-     a-     a-min a-ogov a-oinf c-agr        c-const c-     c-     c-min c-ogov c-oinf c-    c-    f-lab     f-     f-min hhd      gov         row     tax-       tax-dir tax-     tax-        tax-     int-       int-        cap-       cap-     cap-        inv-        inv-        inv-prv dstk       total
                        const prv_tr prv_no                                          prv_tr prv_no                     ncimp intmi           capprv                                    hdf                imp      exp         oind     dom        row         hhd        gov      row         ogov        oinf
                              d      ntrd                                            d      ntrd                             mp
a-agr                                                               680                 80            1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        761
a-const                                                                         330      0      1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              332
a-prv_trd                                                                1       25   1364     23     2      8                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1424
a-prv_nontrd                                                             0        1      4   1291     1      8                                                                                                                                                                                                                                1303
a-min                                                                             2      0      3   949                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        954
a-ogov                                                                                   0      0          719                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 719
a-oinf                                                                                                              5                                                                                                                                                                                                                            5
c-agr              80        3   196      18     1      4      0                                                                                             164                  36                                                                                                              14              10      257                  782
c-const             0        5    30      15    10      7      0                                                                                               4                   1                                                                                                              15              11      265                  363
c-prv_trd          45      181   415     238    78     96      1                                                                                            1032                 649                                                                                                              20              15      352                 3123
c-prv_nontrd       36       47   252     292    56     55      1                                                                                             465                  75                                                                                                               6               4       95                 1382
c-min               1        6    10      38     3      1      0                                                                                              53                 819                                                                                                               4               3       61                  999
c-ogov              5        0     3      17     2    328      4                                                                                                         416       7                                                                                                                                                           782
c-oinf                                                                                                                                                                     5                                                                                                                                                                     5
c-ncimp                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           64                            64
c-intmimp                                      185                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             185
f-lab             149       55   251     316    73    177      2                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1022
f-capprv          445       35   266     370    54     43      1                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              1214
f-min                                          489                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             489
hhd                                                                                                                                   1022     1154   153                174     258                                                           2                                                                                              2763
gov                                                                                                                                                    43                         11          0      270     169          31      157                                                                                                          681
row                                                                     78        4   1429     37     4     51      6     59    175              61   293                                                                                                 24                                                                                  2220
tax-hdf                                                                                                                                                        0
tax-dir                                                                                                                                                      270                                                                                                                                                                               270
tax-imp                                                                  8        0    138      4     0      5      1      5      9                                                                                                                                                                                                            169
tax-exp                                                                                              31                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         31
tax-oind                                                                10        1    109     22    12      3      0                                                                                                                                                                                                                          157
int-dom                                                                                                                                                                    2                                                                                                                                                                     2
int-row                                                                                                                                                        6          18                                                                                                                                                                    24
cap-hhd                                                                                                                                                      769                                                                                                                           5                                                   774
cap-gov                                                                                                                                                                   65                                                                                          1                   99                                                   165
cap-row                                                                                                                                                                          365                                                                                                                                                           365
inv-ogov                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      58                                                                58
inv-oinf                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     106                                                               106
inv-prv                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           769                 261                                                     1030
dstk                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0
total             761      332   1424   1303   950    712      9    777         363   3123   1382   999    794     12     64    185   1022     1214   489   2761         681    2220                 270     169          31      157          2          24      770        165      365             58      106        1030         0




                                                                                                                                  34
Appendix B: Macro Indicators in the BASE (Business-As-Usual) case.
Macro indicators for selected years (% of nominal GDP)

                                2005               2009            2013           2017          2021          2025            2026
 Absorption                     108.3              105.4         104.2        103.3         102.8           102.6             102.6
 Consumption - private           55.6               54.7           54.7           54.8          55.0            55.4           55.6
 Consumption - government        13.9               13.0           12.2           11.5          10.9            10.4           10.3
 Investment - private            33.4               32.5           32.1           31.8          31.7            31.6           31.6
 Investment - government             5.4             5.2            5.2            5.2           5.1             5.1            5.1
 Stock change                  Eps          Eps              Eps            Eps           Eps           Eps             Eps

 Exports                         51.4               53.8           54.7           55.5          56.0            56.2           56.2
 Imports                         -59.6             -59.2           -59.0          -58.8         -58.8          -58.8          -58.8
 GDP at market prices           100.0              100.0         100.0        100.0         100.0           100.0             100.0
 Net indirect taxes              11.7               11.6           11.6           11.6          11.6            11.7           11.7
 GDP at factor cost              88.3               88.4           88.4           88.4          88.4            88.3           88.3
 Foreign savings                 11.8               12.2           12.5           12.8          13.0            13.3           13.4
 Gross national savings          26.9               25.5           24.8           24.3          23.8            23.5           23.4
 Gross domestic savings          30.5               32.3           33.1           33.7          34.0            34.2           34.1
 Foreign government debt         40.0               45.4           47.6           47.1          45.1            42.1           41.3
 Foreign private debt            13.0               11.7           10.4            9.0           7.7             6.6            6.3
 Domestic government debt            3.2             2.7            2.3            2.0           1.7             1.4            1.3


Real macro indicators by simulation and year (% growth)
                              2005*        2006       2009          2013      2017        2021          2025       2026         Average annual
                                                                                                                                growth rate
 Absorption                   333.9         3.8            4.3        4.6          4.8      4.9          5.0           5.0            4.7
 Consumption - private        171.5         4.2            4.6        4.9          5.0      5.1          5.1           5.1            4.9
 Consumption - govt           42.9          2.4            2.6        2.8          3.2      3.6          3.8           3.9            3.2
 Fixed investment - private   102.9         3.8            4.4        4.8          4.9      5.1          5.1           5.2            4.8
 Fixed investment - govt      16.6          3.2            4.1        4.8          4.9      4.9          5.1           5.2            4.7
 Stock change                  Eps          Eps            Eps        Eps         Eps       Eps          Eps           Eps
 Exports                      158.4         5.2            5.5        5.2          5.3      5.2          5.2           5.2            5.1
 Imports                      183.9         3.3            4.2        4.6          4.9      5.1          5.2           5.2            4.6
 GDP at market prices         308.4         4.9            4.9        4.9          5.0      5.0          5.0           5.0            5.0
 GDP at factor cost           272.3         5.0            5.0        5.0          5.0      5.0          5.0           5.0            5.0
 Total factor employment
 (index)                                    5.8            4.6        4.0          3.8      3.7          3.6           3.6            4.0
 Total factor productivity
 (index)                                    -0.8           0.4        1.0          1.2      1.3          1.4           1.4            1.0
 Real exchange rate (index)                 1.9            0.7        0.3          0.0      -0.2         -0.3          -0.4           0.3
 Wages- labor                               2.9            4.7        4.7          4.8      4.9          5.0           5.0            4.7
 Wages- private capital                     -7.6       -4.8          -3.0         -2.7      -1.9         -1.8          -1.8           -3.1
Note: *Base-year column (2005) shows data in LCU.
Appendix C: Macro indicators in the baseline (mining sector doubles in size)
Macro indicators for selected years (% of nominal GDP)

                                   2005         2009         2013           2017        2021          2025         2026
 Absorption                        108.3        105.8        101.8            96.6        97.5          98.7         99.0
 Consumption - private               55.6         55.0         53.0           49.7        50.9          52.1         52.5
 Consumption - government            13.9         13.1         12.0           11.7        11.9          11.5         11.4
 Investment - private                33.4         32.6         31.4           29.8        30.1          30.4         30.5
 Investment - government              5.4          5.1          5.4            5.3         4.7           4.6          4.6
 Stock change                   Eps          Eps          Eps            Eps         Eps           Eps          Eps
 Exports                             51.4         53.4         56.6           60.5        59.7          59.0         58.7
 Imports                            -59.6        -59.2        -58.4          -57.1       -57.3         -57.6        -57.7
 GDP at market prices              100.0        100.0        100.0          100.0       100.0         100.0        100.0
 Net indirect taxes                  11.7         11.7         11.6           11.4        11.4          11.5         11.5
 GDP at factor cost                  88.3         88.3         88.4           88.6        88.6          88.5         88.5
 Foreign savings                     11.8         12.3         11.7            9.7        10.1          10.6         10.8
 Gross national savings              26.9         25.4         25.1           25.4        24.6          24.4         24.4
 Gross domestic savings              30.5         31.9         35.0           38.5        37.2          36.4         36.2
 Foreign government debt             40.0         45.9         44.3           36.0        35.1          33.6         33.1
 Foreign private debt                13.0         11.8          9.6            6.8         6.0           5.2          5.1
 Domestic government debt             3.2          2.8          2.2            1.7         1.4           1.2          1.2




Real macro indicators by simulation and year (% growth)
                              2005*          2006        2009    2013      2017      2021    2025       2026       Average
                                                                                                                    annual
                                                                                                                    growth
                                                                                                                       rate
 Absorption                   171.5            4.2        4.5      6.4        5.4      5.2       5.1      5.1           5.3
 Consumption - private         42.9            2.4        2.4      5.7        5.6      4.6       3.9      3.9           4.3
 Consumption - government     102.9            3.8        4.2      7.2        5.4      5.1       5.1      5.1           5.4
 Fixed investment - private    16.6            3.2        2.9     16.5        1.0      2.8       4.9      5.0           5.1
 Fixed investment -
 government                   Eps      Eps           Eps         Eps       Eps       Eps     Eps        Eps
 Stock change                  158.4           5.2      4.5       17.5       4.3       4.1     4.1        4.1               6.5
 Exports                       183.9           3.3      3.7       11.6       4.6       4.6     4.7        4.7               5.7
 Imports                       308.4           4.9      4.5        9.9       4.9       4.7     4.6        4.6               5.7
 GDP at market prices          272.3           5.0      4.6        9.5       5.0       4.7     4.6        4.6               5.7
 GDP at factor cost                            5.8      4.2        9.1       3.9       3.6     3.4        3.4               4.7
 Total factor employment
 (index)                                      -0.8        0.4      0.5        1.0      1.1       1.2      1.2               1.0
 Total factor productivity
 (index)                                       1.9         1.0    -3.8        0.5      0.3        0.0     0.0               -0.3
 Real exchange rate (index)                    3.8         4.1     7.1        5.9      5.6        5.6     5.6                5.6
 Wages- labor                                  2.9         4.4     7.8        5.2      4.9        4.9     4.9                5.5
 Wages-private capital                        -7.4        -4.9    -2.2       -2.9     -2.5       -2.4    -2.4               -3.2
Note: *Base-year column (2005) shows data in LCU.




                                                         36
