                                                      WPS8193


Policy Research Working Paper                        8193




    Why Secondary Towns Can Be Important
            for Poverty Reduction
                         A Migrant’s Perspective

                                   Bert Ingelaere
                                 Luc Christiaensen
                                Joachim De Weerdt
                                   Ravi Kanbur




Social Protection and Labor Global Practice Group
  &
Jobs Cross Cutting Solution Area
September 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 8193


  Abstract
  This paper develops the concept of “action space” as the                           and familiar and what is much further away and unknown.
  range of possible destinations to which a migrant can realis-                      By opening the horizons of the (poorer) rural population
  tically move at a given point in time and, intimately linked                       and facilitating navigation of the nonfarm economy, sec-
  to this, the set of possible livelihoods at destination. It shows                  ondary towns allow a broader base of the poor population
  how this space expands and contracts over time through                             to become physically, economically, and socially mobile.
 “cumulative causation.” Such a dynamic framework allows                             Secondary towns therefore have great potential as vehicles
  for appreciating the role of secondary towns in rural-urban                        for inclusive growth and poverty reduction in urbanizing
  migration and poverty reduction. Secondary towns occupy                            developing countries. These are the insights emerging from
  a unique middle ground between semi-subsistence agri-                              the in-depth life history accounts of 75 purposively selected
  culture and the capitalistic city, between what is close by                        rural-urban migrants from rural Kagera, in Tanzania.




  This paper is a product of the Social Protection and Labor Global Practice Group and the Jobs Cross Cutting Solution
  Area. It is part of a larger effort by the World Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to
  development policy discussions around the world. Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://
  econ.worldbank.org. The authors may be contacted at lchristiaensen@worldbank.org.




          The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
          issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
          names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
          of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
          its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                        Produced by the Research Support Team
    Why Secondary Towns Can Be Important for Poverty Reduction
                                  – A Migrant’s Perspective

         Bert Ingelaere, Luc Christiaensen, Joachim De Weerdt, and Ravi Kanbur1




JEL:D15, E24, J61, O15, R23, R58

Key Words: migration, urbanization, poverty, jobs, secondary towns, Tanzania, life history




1
 Bert Ingelaere (corresponding author, bert.ingelaere@uantwerpen.be) is Lecturer at the University of Antwerp;
Luc Christiaensen (lchristiaensen@worldbank.org) is Lead Economist at the Jobs Group of the World Bank
Group, Joachim De Weerdt (joachim.deweerdt@uantwerpen.be) is Senior Lecturer at the University of Antwerp
and Senior Research Fellow at the Catholic University of Leuven, Ravi Kanbur (sk145@cornell.edu) is
Professor of Economics at Cornell University. The authors would very much like to thank the migrant survey
participants for sharing their life histories. Financial support from the Strategic Research Program of the World
Bank Group and the International Growth Center of the Department of International Development, UK is further
gratefully acknowledged. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and
Development/World Bank and its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank
or the governments they represent.
1    Introduction

Urbanization and development go hand in hand (World Bank, 2009). Yet, the debate about
urbanization and development is usually held in the aggregate, focused on economic growth as
opposed to poverty reduction, and without differentiation of the urban space. Incipient evidence
from Africa (Dorosh and Thurlow, 2013, 2014; Christiaensen and Todo, 2014) and South Asia
(Gibson et al., 2017; Emran and Shilpi, 2017) suggests however that secondary town
development may be more conducive to poverty reduction than advancement of cities.

Given the concentration of the poor in rural areas—80 percent of the world’s extreme poor live
in rural areas (World Bank, 2016)—this may not surprise. Secondary towns offer off-farm
employment opportunities nearby, thereby facilitating rural livelihood diversification, which
has long been proven to be an important vehicle out of poverty (Ellis, 1998). Yet, cities hold
the potential of larger economies of agglomeration and thus faster economic growth and off-
farm job creation (World Bank, 2009).2

Taking an economic perspective, Christiaensen and Kanbur (2017) provide an initial review of
the incipient theoretical and empirical literature on the reasons why secondary town
development3 may be more poverty reducing than city development. Yet, many puzzling facts
remain and the mechanisms behind them are still poorly understood. This is well illustrated by
the findings from the Kagera Health and Development Survey (KHDS). This is a rather unique
long running panel, which first interviewed a representative sample of about 915 households
from rural Kagera, Tanzania in 1991. All household members, including those who moved to
settle elsewhere, in other rural areas, secondary towns or cities, were subsequently interviewed
again in 2010.4

As shown by Beegle, Dercon and De Weerdt (2011), those who left their baseline locations
clearly fared much better than similar individuals who did not move. Christiaensen, De Weerdt,
and Kanbur (2015) further find that moves to cities (in this case Dar es Salaam and Mwanza,
the two largest cities in Tanzania) were substantially more lucrative than moves to secondary

2
  Henderson and Becker (2000), however, argue that urban primacy—a predominance of the largest city in the
urban system—is often also driven by political motivations, not just economic forces, with the resulting
congestion hampering their growth prospects and those of their surrounding hinterlands.
3
  The channels through which small towns contribute to growth and poverty reduction include rural-urban
(circular) migration and the diversification of livelihoods, the provision of services, the localized development of
markets, as well as the increase of agricultural production of nearby rural populations (Baker 1990; Lanjouw et
al 2001; Sattherwaite & Tacoli, 2003; Owusu 2008; Taccoli & Mabala 2010; Bryceson 2011).
4
  See De Weerdt et al. (2012) for a detailed description of the data and data collection process.

                                                                                                                  2
towns. Yet, despite the larger gains from moves to the city, more than twice as many people
moved to towns. As a result, migration to secondary towns contributed much more to overall
income growth and poverty reduction in Kagera during the period under study (43 and 38
percent respectively) than migration to the cities (28 and 21 percent), at least in an accounting
sense.5

It begs the question why and how many more migrants ended up in secondary towns despite
more modest income gains. With the majority of the poor concentrated in rural areas, addressing
this question also helps understand why development of secondary towns may hold greater
poverty reducing potential than development of cities. So, what induces rural-urban migration,
in general, and migration to secondary towns compared to large cities, in particular? Do these
different urban environments attract different migrants, as emphasized by Young (2013)? Or,
do they attract migrants with similar characteristics for different reasons or through different
processes?

To address these questions, a qualitative, life history approach is pursued. This helps obtain a
more contextualized and path dependent understanding of the factors shaping migration and
location decisions.6 In particular, in 2015, the study revisited 75 purposively sampled, young
adult migrants from the original KHDS and recorded their life histories with a focus on their
migration trajectories and the factors motivating them. While all migrants originated from the
same region, with similar rural socioeconomic backgrounds, they literally followed quite
different paths in life: some made only one move, while others moved up to nine times; some
migrated to secondary towns, some ended up in mega-cities, like Dar es Salaam, while still
others eventually returned to their village after migrating. This richness in experiences provides
a good setting to uncover migration patterns and the factors shaping them.

Through the analysis of the migrant narratives two important concepts emerge: 1) the notion
of a migrant’s action space; and 2) the notion of cumulative causation. The first refers to the set
of plausible destinations and livelihoods a prospective migrant can each time reach (in a single
move). It relates to both physical as well as socioeconomic mobility. The second concept,
cumulative causation, refers to the path-dependent, sequential nature of migration, during



5
  The results abstract from feedback effects between cities and towns.
6
  The literature probing migration processes is longstanding, both through quantitative and qualitative inquiry.
Yet, much of it has focused on international migration and the studies examining internal migration often
conceptualize the urban space as unitary and monolithic. A notable exception in the quantitative tradition is
Fafchamps and Shilpi (2012), who, building on insights from economic theory, apply econometric techniques to
study the determinants of the choice of migration destination in Nepal (conditional on migration).

                                                                                                               3
which factors that enable or hinder mobility – such as financial resources, networks, aspirations
and norms – are each time gradually reshaped thereby altering the migrant’s action space.
Migration emerges as a cumulative process through which each migration decision (and
destination) taken affects the basis for taking the next decision (destination). This contrasts with
a more common conceptualization of migration as one-shot event, in economic modeling and
policy making.

It also bears on the importance of secondary towns in facilitating migration. While the capital
city is widely considered to offer most opportunities by far, it is, originally, within the action
space of few. The first move is therefore also special. Then the focus is on getting out of
agriculture and the village (which migrants often consider not to provide much perspective), to
shake things up and open doors, including to more desirable migration outcomes later on. As a
result, the first move is more often towards a secondary town, which, given its proximity, is
more likely to fall within the original action space. For many it also turns out to be where they
end up, as the window of opportunity for further migration usually also narrows when families
are started and people settle down in their jobs.

In sum, most people migrating out of agriculture end up in secondary towns because they can,
and remain or return to secondary towns because they have to, due to the binding nature of life
and livelihood choices and events. While the outcome of migration and location decisions as a
deliberation process weighing opportunities and costs in the broadest sense is not new (Lall,
Selod, Shalizi, 2006), its dynamic, iterative nature and the powerful role secondary towns can
play in the process, as important entry points to livelihood diversification and poverty reduction,
has remained underappreciated.

The role of secondary towns in facilitating migration is also better understood when considered
within migrants’ own conception of the urban space. A first defining feature of urban, revealed
through the conversations, is ‘mzunguko wa pesa’. It literally translates from Swahili as ‘the
circulation of money’, but is often invoked to convey the broader notion of vibrancy, in terms
of circulation of money, goods, people, ideas and so forth. Respondents set urban areas apart
from rural ones in terms of this metric, with bigger cities (e.g. Dar, Mwanza) considered more
vibrant, and thus more attractive, and secondary towns holding the middle ground between the
village and the city. A second distinguishing feature is the monetary nature of exchange in urban
areas, which contrasts with the more reciprocal nature of life in the village and is often
considered a challenge, especially the first time around. Finally, urban areas are characterized
as anonymous, providing opportunities to escape from the more stifling village environment.

                                                                                                  4
Yet, the lack of tight social networks is also considered an obstacle, as one now needs to learn
how to operate within that anonymity, with limited safety nets. In sum, while cities speak most
to the imagination, secondary towns are mentioned to be “far enough, but not too far”. They
occupy a more manageable position in between the more reciprocal livelihood of the village
and the capitalist economy of big cities.

The paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 briefly discusses the life history approach and reviews
the key features of the data collection. This is followed by a recount of the history of Raymond,
one of the study participants, bringing the deep dynamic nature and complexity of migration to
life (Section 3). Section 4 develops the notions of action space and cumulative causation.
Section 5 lays out how migrants consider different locations along the rural-urban spectrum,
followed by an in-depth analysis of the factors that shape a migrant’s action space in section 6.
Section 7 then revisits the motivating question of the paper, i.e. why many more migrants of
Kagera end up in secondary towns, despite larger gains from moves to the city? Section 8
concludes.



2    The Life History Approach in Practice

As a dynamic process that connects several locations over time as well as important ‘turning
points’ in people’s lives (Bakewell & Bonfiglio 2013: 5), migration is best understood through
a life course approach. Life history interviewing is a commonly used technique in qualitative
inquiry to do so (Massey 1990: 19; Halfacree and Boyle 1993).7 Life histories have both a
retrospective and prospective component. They are told with a constant reference to change
(Thompson 1982: 289-306) and “the life history reveals, like nothing else can, the subjective
realm” (Plummer 2001: 20). They provide a detailed bottom-up perspective on the world. The
life history approach thus enabled us to identify and obtain detailed migrant trajectories, the
experiences of these pathways as well as the “potentiality of the present, projected in the future”
(Bjarnesen 2009), all from the migrant’s perspective.

In particular, life history interviews were conducted in 2015 with 75 purposively selected
migrants from the Kagera Health and Development Survey (KHDS). The baseline KHDS,
conducted over several rounds during 1991-94, contains data on 6,353 individuals, living in a


7
 One of the oldest and most known life histories in social science research precisely deals with the topic of
migration, namely the story of a man migrating from a rural village in Poland to the city of Chicago in the
United States (Thomas and Znanieki, 1918; 1958).

                                                                                                                5
representative sample of 915 households in 52 villages in rural Kagera, a province in north-
western Tanzania. After their first interview, the households were resurveyed in 2004 and again
in 2010. A unique feature of the survey is that it also tracks all individuals who had left their
baseline locations to migrate to other rural areas, smaller secondary towns or larger cities. The
availability of this long-running panel data is exploited to maximize the diversity in migration
experiences in our sample, while minimizing the diversity in characteristics at the outset.

To do so, the 2010 survey data were first used to map migration patterns of all 52 villages. Out
of these, six villages with similar livelihood systems and socioeconomic profiles, but different
migration intensity and destinations, were purposively selected. All six were also pairwise,
geographically close. In August 2015, they were visited to update the whereabouts of all
respondents originating from them. From this updated list, we identified all KHDS respondents
who were approximately 15-25 years old during the 1991-94 baseline and had moved to (1)
Dar es Salaam, a mega-city of 4.5m people, 1,650 km away on the Indian Ocean; (2) Mwanza,
Tanzania’s second largest city with a population of about 700,000, located on the southern
shores of Lake Victoria, about 450 km away; (3) Bukoba, Kagera’s regional capital, with a
population of about 100,000 and close by for most; (4) a range of much smaller rural towns in
the Kagera region8 and (5) those who migrated to towns and/or cities at some point in our 23
year study window, but were found residing back home by 2015 (return migrants).9 This yielded
a total of 87 individuals, 75 of which were interviewed. The remaining 12 could either not be
traced or declined to be part of the study.10

The destinations of the migrants originating from the different villages are in Table 1. With
villages A and B, C and D, E and F each geographically close to each other and very similar in
terms of livelihood systems and socioeconomic profiles at the baseline in 1991-94, it becomes
clear how quite different migration patterns can emerge from rather comparable initial settings.
While village A saw several of its youngsters migrate to the city, neighboring village B barely


8
  These are Mutukula, Bunazi and Katoro. Mutukula, is an official border post town with a population of about
5,000, where many of the cross-border traffic stops to clear custom and immigration. Bunazi, with a population of
5,000 at the last census, was nothing more than a village till it recently got designated as regional capital, which
triggered growth. Katoro, only has a population of 2,500, according to the 2012 census, but is a vibrant rural
trading town, many shops and traders. The early origins and urban growth dynamics of one of these towns, Katoro,
is examined in-depth by Bryceson (2011). A similar examination of the interdependency of rural villages and a
small town in the Kagera region is Jonathan Baker’s (1995) case study on Biharamulo.
9
  Return migration in the KHDS sample is described in detail in Hirvonen and Bie-Lilleor (2015).
10
   This is a high rate of success in tracking, made possible by the judicious efforts and experience of the KDHS
team to track migrants in the previous survey rounds. Migrants were traced through the use of addresses, cell
phone numbers, and detailed instructions on how to reach them at destination. Where this information could not
be obtained at the baseline village, it was sought in other places, for example with relatives of the migrant whose
contact details were known.

                                                                                                                  6
experienced any outmigration at all. Likewise, while the intensity of outmigration was similar
in in village E and F (18 and 14 of the interviewees were respectively residing outside the
village), migrants of village E were more likely to be found in the larger urban areas (city and
Bukoba), while migration out of village F had been oriented more to destinations nearby
(neighboring towns and Bukoba).

Table 1: Number of respondents by origin and final destination in 2015
  Origin                                                        Small
                       Dar         Mwanza         Bukoba                  Return   TOTAL
 village                                                        Town*
         A             10             12             5               1      1       29
         B              2              0             0               1      0        3
         C              1              2             0               1      0        4
         D              0              0             4               1      2        7
         E              3              4            10               0      1       18
         F              2              0             4               7      1       14
     TOTAL             18             18            23               11     5       75
* Mutukula, Bunazi and Katoro

Twelve focus group discussions, were further conducted in the villages of origin, each time
with men and women separately, typically with about eight participants per focus group.
Twelve interviews were also conducted with prospective migrants, identified by others in the
village as considering migration.

Semi-structured interview guides with broad open-ended questions were used to gather
demographic information as well as detailed information on all acts of migration and
occupations over the past two decades and a half. In addition, respondents were asked to
evaluate their lives over time, related to the places where they lived and the activities they
undertook to make a living. The interviews also inquired about their (changing) links with the
places of origin over time, their perceptions of the places where they resided and their projects
for the future, in general and with respect to migration and ways of making a living.
Importantly, the interview procedure systematically probed for the factors that informed their
choices (to migrate) and options they considered but did not pursue. In doing so, we followed
approaches that aim to engage migrants into deliberate reflection on their intentions and choices
to migrate in a changing environment (Findlay and Li, 1997: 37).

All interviews were recorded in the local language and translated in English. The interviews
were examined through a narrative analysis and a causation coding approach.11 For the analysis,


11
     For this we used Nvivo, a qualitative data analysis software.

                                                                                               7
we systematically considered: (1) the actual migration patterns; (2) the self-reported reasons
determining the choice of destination; (3) the reasons whether and why other locations where
considered but not chosen; (4) alternative destination locations considered but not taken and
why not; (5) assessment of ‘quality of life’ in case one would be migrating to other locations
(cities or secondary towns), why such an assessment is made and, in case of a better ‘quality of
life’ in other destinations, why one does not migrate to that location; (6) the changing
relationship with the village of origin over time; and, in general, (7) prospects for the future.



3       A Migrant’s Tale

To better appreciate the dynamic nature and complexity of the migration process, and thus the
importance of considering the full migration trajectory for understanding the migration and
location choices as they unfold, we begin by recounting the life history of Raymond as it was
related to us.12 It also helps bring migration to life, giving a flavor of the nature and richness of
information and insights obtained through our life histories.

Raymond was 15 years old when his father died. In his will his father had instructed the house
and half of the family farm to go to Raymond, once he would have grown old enough to take
proper care of them. But, like many local boys, Raymond was attracted by life outside his home
village. Dar es Salaam, Tanzania’s commercial capital with 4.5m inhabitants and 1,650 km
away from Raymond’s village, stood out for him as a destination: “People say Arusha is a city,
but Dar is something else. There used to be video shows in our village and all the famous
football players, like Runyamila, seemed to live in Dar. We were childish at the time and we
thought that if we went to Dar we’d see all these people.”

Raymond was not sure that he was street smart enough to survive in Dar. Having spent all his
life in his home village, speaking mainly Haya, he worried about how his knowledge of the
national language (Swahili), about his level of education and about his lack of exposure.
Besides, he would never be able to afford the fare to Dar, USD 50 one-way at the time, a huge
amount given the limited opportunities to earn cash in the village, especially for a youngster
like himself, and he did not have anyone who could host him temporarily upon arrival.

Dar being outside of his league, some of the other obvious urban options for Raymond were
Mwanza (700,000 people, 435km away, one-way fare of USD 12) or Bukoba (100,000 people,


12
     Interview Kazinga, rural village, 29 September 2015. For confidentiality purposes, fictive names are used.

                                                                                                                  8
50km away, one-way fare USD 2). Bukoba was not only physically a much closer location, but
also more familiar. Even though Bukoba had a mix of people from all over Tanzania, many of
them had backgrounds Raymond could more easily relate to. And while Swahili was the lingua
franca, Haya could be heard everywhere on the street.

By the time he was 19 years old he had saved up USD 10, earned primarily through farming
tomatoes and fishing in a small lake close to his village. This was enough to cover the fare to
reach Bukoba and he also knew a person who could host him for a while. He also had a goal.
He had always been fascinated by cars and had heard that the Lake Zone Driving School taught
young men how to drive. So, he set off to Bukoba with the aim of becoming a driver.

But driving school cost money, so his first priority upon arrival was to get some form of
employment. He went into shops asking whether there was any work to be done and got an
interesting proposition from one shopkeeper whose shop had a veranda adjacent to the bus
stand. He would receive wholesale quantities of sugar, soap, rice, sweets, chewing gum and
other goods on loan and sell them on in smaller retail quantities outside the shop, with a small
mark-up. Many of his customers were locals traveling to and from the nearby villages. The deal
was that after he finished selling a batch he would pay the wholesale price to the shopkeeper
and pocket the difference. It took him a month to get set up in his own place and a year to save
up enough money to go to driving school.

Not long after completing driving school, the local authorities started cracking down on
hawking and street trade. Villagers who were considered to be loitering about, were sent home
heavy-handedly. With his obvious rural origins, Raymond did not feel secure anymore in
Bukoba and his income, which derived from an activity upon which the government now
frowned, became unstable. He wanted to get out of Bukoba quickly and going back home,
“where you can always eat bananas for free”, was his best option. Returning back after a month,
he tried to pick up his business but found that other players had moved in and the prices he
needed to sell at were being undercut by bigger players with more capital.

He was then 20 years old, but much had changed in the past year and a half. The job he did
metaphorically describes the conduit he had been between his rural customers and the urban
goods he sold them. Raymond had been in a familiar environment in Bukoba, but he had also
been exposed to people from all over Tanzania and now spoke Swahili with confidence. All the
while the free bananas from the village had only been 50km away, a distance he could cover by
bus for USD 2, or, for a young man like Raymond, even on foot if he had really hit rock-bottom.

                                                                                              9
He had also built up contacts with people who had ventured further out, travelers who had been
to Kampala (capital of neighboring Uganda), Mwanza and Dar es Salaam.

One of those people had told him about an employment opportunity off-loading trucks and
boats in a fish exporting factory on the shores of Lake Victoria. Raymond decided to take up
the invitation, partly because his friend had told him he could host him for a while. He sold off
his belongings in Bukoba for USD 35 and with that money bought a USD 12 one-way ferry
ticket to Mwanza.

From there Raymond’s life story continued. It was narrated to us in 3:15 hours of taped
interview and transcribed onto 75 pages of text. Between 1997 and 2015 he made 8 moves in
total and with every move his finances, networks, urban savviness and professional skills all
shift and slide; and with them also the set of future opportunities he can plausibly take advantage
of. In sum, through every move he made Raymond gradually expanded his action space, i.e.
the range of possible destinations he could travel to as well as the different ways of making a
living at his disposal. Secondary towns like Bukoba played a crucial role in this process. It is
the urban environment where his aspirations and resources were built and adjusted.

While he never became a driver, he did fulfill his dream of going to Dar. He never found anyone
to host him there, but having gathered (just) enough money for the fare, he felt confident enough
to simply head out there and try his luck. He spent 8 years in Dar sorting scrap metal, running
errands on a tricycle for a restaurant, supervising workers on a construction site, feeding lions
and tigers at a zoo and, finally, as a security guard and invigilator at a school.

We meet him in 2015 in his home village, where he now farms and rents out fishing equipment.
In 2014, he returned home to secure his claims on the land his father left him. During his
absence his mother had allocated it to Raymond’s younger half-brother, whom she had with
another man after Raymond’s father had passed away. Having been away for so long, Raymond
had to put up a fight, but things are settled now. He has two children, but they do not live with
him. Perhaps the lack of such ties is why he says he could leave again if an interesting
opportunity arises.



4   Action Space and Cumulative Causation

The story of Raymond illustrates the critical notion of an action space and how it changes over
time, through a process of cumulative causation. The notions of action space and cumulative

                                                                                                10
causation also resonate throughout our respondents’ life histories and migration trajectories.
They prove powerful concepts in helping interpret and organize the insights from the migration
narratives. At any point in time, each migrant is considered to have a certain action space.13 It
defines the maneuvering room open to the migrant and is largely shaped by a person’s
aspirations, the resources available to him, as well as the reigning social norms (as explained in
detail in section 6). The action space defines the range of possible destinations a migrant can
realistically move to and, intimately linked to this, the set of possible livelihoods at destination.

But, a person’s action space is not static, and the very act of migrating alters (and at times also
deliberately serves to alter) the action space itself, inducing a process of cumulative causation.
The importance of cumulative causation in understanding migration is not new. It was
introduced as early as 1957 by Myrdal and later built upon by Massey (1990) and others in the
context of migration. In Myrdal’s words (1957):

      “Not only are individual decisions dependent upon contextual factors, but decisions taken
      at one point in time have profound impacts on the context for decisions made at later
      dates. Migrants make choices based on their personal characteristics, preferences, and
      constraints imposed by the immediate socioeconomic environment; but over time these
      decisions feedback on structures within the environment (i.e., social networks) to change
      them in ways that encourage further migration, inducing others to migrate, whose
      departure, in turn, affects structural conditions further, resulting in a complex process of
      “circular and cumulative causation […].”

Beyond cumulative causation and feedback loops on the structures affecting migration, such as
the development of migration networks or changing reigning norms and habits, there is also a
cumulative effect of migrating on the agentive side. As migrants migrate, they can update their
aspirations, resources, personal networks, thereby each time also changing their action space.

The importance of the notion of action space, the different forms of cumulative causation and
their interplay in understanding the migration process will be further illustrated through our
migrants’ narratives in the sections below. They also prove critical in appreciating the role of
secondary towns. To set the stage, we first explore the concept of rural and urban from the
migrant’s perspective.



13
     We develop our own meaning of the notion of ‘action space’, originally coined in Wolpert (1965).



                                                                                                        11
5      Urban from the Migrant Perspective

Whereas experts define urban locations based on the size and density of the population or on
administrative divisions determined by government officials (Christiaensen and Kanbur, 2017),
it is insightful to take a migrant’s perspective – such as Raymond’s –on the definition of what
is urban and what distinguishes different urban locations from each other. Three main
characteristics emerge that typify the urban environment for migrants: vibrancy, monetary
exchange and anonymity.

The first identifying element, vibrancy, was most frequently expressed by the Swahili notion
of “mzunguko wa pesa”, which literally means the circulation of money and the abundance of
transactions between buyers and sellers. In the broadest sense, it refers to the vibrancy of a
particular place in terms of the circulation of goods, people and ideas. Migrants are initially
attracted by a general sense that some potential destination has a high mzunguko wa pesa, not
so much by concrete information on jobs or price differences. When we asked Sediki, who is
currently living in a small urban center in Kagera, why his life would be better in Mwanza he
told us: “honestly, Mwanza is also a good place, because on TV you can clearly see that
everyone is busy working there”.14 The higher the perceived movement, circulation, energy or
density; the higher the expectation to be able to make a living irrespective of concrete
information and connections.

A second identifying element is the monetized nature of transactions. Money mediates most
transactions and, compared to village life, much less is obtained for free or through reciprocity
or barter. Raymond returned to his village when things turned ugly in town, because that was
where he “could eat bananas for free”. Another example comes from Thaddeus, who migrated
to four different places: a small town, two cities (Musoma and Mwanza) and eventually the
capital Dar, where he currently lives. He recounts his experience of moving into an urban
environment as follows: “It was difficult life. I was used to free cassava and fruits in the village
but in town everything was for sale. At first, this kind of life was hard, but now I’m used to it
and find it normal.”15

Like many other respondents, both Thaddeus and Raymond touch on an important element of
urban life: migrants need to learn how to operate in a much more monetized environment. The

14
     Interview Bunazi, secondary town, 9 October 2015.
15
     Interview Bukoba, secondary town, 6 October 2015.

                                                                                                 12
inability, or fear of being unable to navigate the cash economy is one of the barriers to
migration. It also explains the importance of having relatives at destination. Secondary towns
have a facilitating role to play here, especially during the first move. Not only is it more likely
to have relatives near to secondary towns to help navigate the cash economy, they also hold the
middle ground between the reciprocal village economy and monetized city life, reducing the
imperative for cash.

The third identifying element is anonymity. Perhaps surprisingly, anonymity is often seen as a
good thing. Take our conversation with Hector, for example:

      (Interviewer) So you could make a good living for yourself in Dar es Salaam?
      (Respondent) In Dar es Salaam any kind of business will flourish.
      (Interviewer) Why does it thrive in Dar es Salaam and not here in Bukoba?
      (Respondent) Take selling drinking water in the street, for example. Who would you sell water to
      in Bukoba? But in Dar es Salaam people do this kind of business without shame. They do what
      they came for.
      (Interviewer) So you would feel ashamed doing this near home?
      (Respondent) Yes, and even if you were to start selling it no one will buy here, because we have
      a lot of free water.
      (Interviewer) So you don’t feel ashamed to do anything because it is far from home?
      (Respondent) Yes.
      (Interviewer) Meaning you can do anything to earn you a living?
      (Respondent) Yes.16


The lack of anonymity in the village environment is a two-edged sword, however. On the one
hand, exactly because of the more intense personal relationships, the home village often
provides an important safety net and refuge for those who are down on their luck during a move.
On the other hand, it is often experienced as a suffocating and stifling environment. Beate’s life
story is a case in point.17 In the year 2000, she moved from a village into Bukoba, where she
got married in 2007. She and her husband were making a living off a small kiosk. But when her
husband fell sick three years later, they had to sell off the shop. Stripped of their income source
and without any assets, they returned to the village on foot. There they worked on the family
farm for five years. By 2015, her husband’s health had gotten better and the family returned to
Bukoba – a place they had become familiar with in the meantime. It was especially the



16
     Interview Bukoba, secondary town, 10 October 2015.
17
     Systematic quantitative analysis by De Weerdt and Hirvonen (2015) points in the same direction.

                                                                                                         13
relationship with her family-in-law that pushed them to return to town. Her in-laws were tying
Beate down. In her own words:

       “Any time I left the village my father-in-law would harvest bananas from my farm. He’d
       be continually back-biting me, telling everyone that I don’t give him anything. He tells
       his [other] son that I steal beans from him and sell them. In my eyes life in the village is
       very low. But in town you can set yourself up like you want to and live your own life.
       And then life can be good. You could do your own thing in the village too, but even if
       you are given money to set up a business it will never thrive. People won’t buy anything
       and there is so much hypocrisy in the village. But in town everyone is on their own and
       no one cares about anyone else’s life.”

The most vibrant, monetized and anonymous location in Tanzania is, by far, Dar es Salaam,
which with a population of 4.5 million dwarfs the second biggest city Mwanza of 700,000
inhabitants. Dar es Salaam is also a brand and young boys like Raymond associate it with the
glamorous life of football and movie stars. But only very few respondents have a clear plan on
how to reach its bright city lights.




6   Components Shaping a Migrant’s Action Space

Together the 75 migrants we interviewed made 208 moves in total over the past two decades,
with the first destination also being the final destination for only 36 percent, while almost half
of them stayed in three or more places during 1991-2015 (Figure 1). Clearly, for many,
migrating is not a one-time act, but rather a dynamic, cumulative process.

Figure 1: Most migrants make several moves.




                                                                                                14
                                     40

                                     35

                                     30



             share (%) of migrants
                                     25

                                     20

                                     15

                                     10

                                      5

                                      0
                                          1   2   3      4       5      6      7    8   9
                                                  Number of moves made, 1991-2015




To help organize the factors shaping action space over time, as recounted to us through the
migrant narratives, we draw on the notion of human agency (Emirbayer & Mische 1998). The
different components of human agency, although closely entangled empirically, can be grouped
into a projective, a practical-evaluative and iterative component. In this view, the act of
migrating thus consists of an aspirational component that is forward looking (imagination),
which finds concrete operationalization through a practical-evaluative component (individual
judgement) that is further shaped by habits and social norms often inducing people to follow
established routines (iteration). This broadly resonates with the patterns observed in the life
histories.

6.1     The projective component: Aspirations
A principal component of human agency is the projective component, which constitutes “the
imaginative generation by actors of possible future trajectories of action, in which received
structures of thought and action may be creatively reconfigured in relation to actors' hopes,
fears, and desires for the future” (Emirbayer & Mische 1998: 971). This aspect of human agency
is closely related to what Appadurai (2004) has called the ‘capacity to aspire’. Aspiration allows
people to travel paths that, if one only takes their resources into account, they would normally
not take.

The importance of aspirations in understanding migration and location decisions is an important
undercurrent throughout the different life histories, as exemplified by the histories of Hector




                                                                                               15
and Sophie.18 Both originate from the same village and have similar socioeconomic
backgrounds. Both also experienced urban life in smaller towns around their village and were
savvy enough to navigate these local urban environments. Both had the means and networks to
move to Dar es Salaam, the country’s economic capital, more than 1,000 km away. But, while
Sophie went to Dar es Salaam, Hector took up residence in Bukoba. Why?

When asked about their dreams for the future, Hector responds: “Which dreams?” Sophie, by
contrast, has very concrete dreams of starting her own business, being her own boss and
providing a good education for her children. When asked whether she will be able to achieve
those dreams, the answer was an emphatic “yes”. When asked how, she said: “My plan is to
have my own business in two or three years. I am sure that if I work hard in my own business,
I will achieve my dreams. What matters is perseverance and working very hard.” Hector, on
the other hand, is much more fatalistic about the contribution of his own efforts in shaping his
future.

God is universally invoked by respondents describing future plans. But it ranges from the more
fatalistic and conditional “if God wishes”, to stressing how, through their own hard work, they
will realize their goals “by the grace of God”. The projective component of human agency fuels
migration and results in the resolve needed to overcome constraints and to challenge or
circumvent social norms. It is a first explanation why the horizon of some migrants stretches
towards far-away cities, whereas others never aspire to move beyond an urban environment that
is close-by.

6.2       The practical-evaluative component: Gathering resources and adapting to the
          cash economy


In addition to the projective component of human agency, Emirbayer & Mische (1998: 971)
further distinguish the practical-evaluative element, i.e. “the capacity of actors to make practical
and normative judgements among alternative possible trajectories of action, in response to the
demands, dilemmas, and ambiguities of presently evolving situations". This dimension entails
the actual decision-making to achieve the broader goal of migrating.19 Throughout the


18
   Hector: interview Bukoba, secondary town, 10 October 2015; Sophie: interview Dar, capital city, 31 October
2015.
19
   In some instances, the deliberation is systematic and optimizing, but it does not have to be, as is often the case
with the first move, which is more about satisficing (Simon, 1952). It typically also depends on personal pre-
dispositions, such as his disposition to risk and entrepreneurship.

                                                                                                                  16
migration histories, the focus herein was mainly on the type of resources and other capacities
needed to migrate, as such, but also in relation to particular places, nearby towns or faraway
cities.

Overall, the need for money for the fare, a network at the destination to get set up, the ability
to function in a cash economy and the professional skills needed to obtain meaningful
employment are most frequently mentioned by the migrants. They affect the financial ability to
cover the cost of migration and settle safely in the destination as well as the likelihood of success
in finding a job and developing a livelihood once there.

Having the money to pay the fare and having a host to support you upon arrival are the two
most commonly mentioned resources that define whether you can enter an urban environment
and what kind of urban environment you can enter. Take Eric. He explained how he only
considered Dar es Salaam as an option because “I had my relatives in Dar es Salaam, so I could
be helped in case of any problem.”20 Christopher indicated: “No, I did not think of going to any
other place apart from going where I knew that my relatives were and that I was not going to
suffer.” Similarly, Layla, also currently in Dar es Salaam, would not consider a move to
Mwanza, but does not exclude setting up in smaller towns in Kagera: “[In Mwanza] I would be
new in the city and have nowhere to start from. I have no friends or relatives there. Despite the
opportunities for employment and businesses I have no one to guide and support me. […] I
have many friends and relatives [in Bukoba and other small towns in the Kagera region] who
could assist me in finding a job or starting a business”.21

The critical importance of pre-existing migration networks in determining the act and
destination of migration is confirmed here and has been well established, especially with respect
to international migration (Boyd, 1989; Gurak and Caces, 1992; McKenzie and Rapoport,
2007). Equally salient in our life histories, however, and arguably less appreciated, is the
importance of liquidity or cash constraints, especially to cover the cost of migration, i.e. to pay
the fare. Time and time again people talked about how they are “still gathering the fare” or
about money more generally “how can I move to Dar es Salaam without money?”22 Against
this background, the finding from a recent randomized experiment in Bangladesh where a US$
8.5 incentive (covering round-trip travel costs) induced a noticeable increase in seasonal



20
   Interview Dar, capital city, 21 October 2015.
21
   Interview Dar, capital city, 1 November 2015.
22
   Interview Bukoba, secondary town, 7 October 2015.

                                                                                                  17
migration to off-farm jobs in nearby towns, does not surprise (Bryan, Chowdhury, Mobarak,
2014).

Thirdly, most migrants decide to build up their skills while migrating and building up the
professional skills is a key first step at destination. Physical and socioeconomic mobility are
closely connected. At times, it happens through formal learning, but mostly through learning
on the job. A first step towards learning about masonry, for example, is to carry bricks around
on a construction site and to seize the opportunities it provides to learn about other house
building skills. Or take the example of Raymond again. As a young man, he used to fish in a
small lake near his home village. When he pushed on to Mwanza from Bukoba, he took up a
job in a fish factory. Here, he further developed his knowledge of and networks in the fish
sector, which shaped his future employment trajectory: (i) working on a boat that transports
fish, (ii) being a middleman buying from fishermen and selling to a small factory and (iii)
working on a boat ferrying passengers around the fishing islands of Lake Victoria.

Many life histories share this pattern in which the migrant’s professional skills (and his/her
sector specific networks), and thus the action space, are formed and expanded through
migration and cumulative causation.23 But, as explained above, finding one’s way in the
anonymous and money driven urban environment is not straightforward. This makes the first
move and destination choice, when resources are limited and knowledge and familiarity with
the outside world still uncertain, also peculiar. Getting out becomes important in itself. It
provides opportunities to expand one’s action space. It helps shake things up and break the
vicious circle of not having the necessary resources, networks or skills to move and/or find
employment, while the acquisition of these is in fact facilitated by moving itself, even if it only
entails one move.

Secondary towns prove instrumental in initiating such first moves for several reasons. As they
are nearby, less cash is needed to finance the move (or to return in case of failure). This
increases the likelihood of other villagers having trodden the path and thus the likelihood of
pre-existing networks, which in turn lowers the barriers to a first move and success at
destination. With exchange relations in secondary towns holding a middle ground between



23
  Less frequently migrants go searching for demand for their skills. An example is Andy, who we interviewed in
Bukoba on 6 October 2015. He had studied welding at school, but there was no demand for welders in his own
region. He moved to Tabora, a secondary town in the center of the country, where he got a job with a construction
company for four years.

                                                                                                              18
subsistence agriculture in the village and the anonymous monetary relations in the big city, they
are also easier to navigate.

6.3     The iterative component: Norms, habits and path dependency
The iterative element of human agency refers to “the selective reactivation by actors of past
patterns of thought and action, as routinely incorporated in practical activity, thereby giving
stability and order to social universes and helping to sustain identities, interactions, and
institutions over time” (Emirbayer & Mische 1998: 971). This dimension of human agency
relates physical mobility to custom, habit, established ideas, norms and socially sanctioned
ways of acting.

Age and gender are important here. Migrating out of the village in order ‘to look for life’
(kutafuta maisha in Swahili) seems to be a socially sanctioned practice for many young boys
coming of age. But our histories also show that as families are formed, people age, and habits
set in, the appetite for adventure and the propensity to migrate usually declines, thereby defining
the window of opportunity for migration which is closely linked to the lifecycle. Available
studies on internal migration in Tanzania also show that most migrants are young (Msigwa &
Mbongo 2013: 32).

When it comes to gender, women in Kagera were in fact found to migrate more than men24,
though they often travel differently and for different reasons. First, they migrate more because
of marriage, especially when moving in rural areas. Marriage is patrilocal, so women will move
to the village of the husband or to another location. It is unheard of that the man would live in
the woman’s village. When they move for economic reasons, which is also not uncommon, the
destination specificity and awareness of the circumstances in the place of destination are also
much more accurate. Whereas (young) men tend to migrate out of agriculture based on general
stories of opportunity in certain places, (young) women have a more precise view of their
trajectory and the conditions upon arrival. Namwezi, for instance, was much more guided by
family members in her decisions on why and where to migrate when she first traveled from her
village to Mwanza in 2003 and, later on, to Dar es Salaam in 2009. She knew that she was going
to be able to attend a tailoring course and live with her aunt before she left the farm. Her




24
   According to KHDS, by 2010, 59% of interviewed men were found in the same village compared with 46 %
of women.

                                                                                                      19
subsequent move towards Dar was facilitated and supervised by her uncle.25 Men and women’s
action space is shaped differently through gendered norms.

The specific place where one grows up is also important. Although our study villages are all
similar and close to each other, micro-cultures of migration seem to have taken root. They shape
ideas on the value of mobility and the trajectories taken. For example, village A has many more
migrants moving into urban areas, while migrants in the neighboring village, village B, tend to
travel to other agricultural areas or fishing villages. A boy coming of age in village A is likely
to aspire to the urban lifestyle, whereas a similar boy in village B will have a much more rural
outlook, even though both villages are socioeconomically very similar and physically close.

Probing for the reason behind this localized path dependency in focus group discussions in
villages A and B, participants pointed to the lasting effects of pioneer migrants. During colonial
times and with the help of missionaries, a few people in village A achieved quite high education
levels and made careers for themselves in urban areas, outside agriculture. This set in motion a
series of feedback loops with the village, which changed the structural conditions under which
mobility takes place. The pioneer migrants were the beginning of a network that connected
village A with the city of Dar es Salaam. At the same time, they influenced how people started
to think about what constitutes a good life, how to reach it and who the relevant role models
were to which life should be compared. This dynamic also exists in a place like village B but
has taken a different form with mobility patterns that are not geared towards urban
environments.



7       Why Do More Migrants End Up in Secondary Towns?

What do these rich contextual insights about the conception of the urban space and the drivers
of migration tell us about the role of secondary towns in migration and poverty reduction (at
least in an accounting sense)? On the one hand, the city clearly has the greatest appeal. Seen
from the village, it is the most vibrant, offering the most opportunities. It is where the money
really circulates. This holds in our case study, and resonates with what has been observed in the
rest of the world. It is also consistent with the observed income gradient declining from city
over town to village and thus the larger income gap between Dar es Salaam and rural Kagera
compared with secondary towns.


25
     Interview Dar, capital city, 22 October 2015.

                                                                                               20
Yet, for the rural population in Kagera, the city also proved much harder to reach, especially in
the absence of any pre-existing migration network, to help with the bus fare, settling costs and
job search. Secondary towns are more likely to find themselves within the migrants’ action
space for several reasons, initially, at the moment of the first move, but also later on, as the
migration trajectory unfolds. The life histories show how initial migration out of rural areas is
primarily motivated by the desire “to look for life” outside of agriculture. Yet, few have the
practical means to move from a tightly-knit, traditional rural community straight to the
anonymous cash-based city.

Secondary towns emerge as the more feasible urban destinations, as they are both physically
and culturally more accessible. They occupy a unique space between rural livelihoods, based
on home production and reciprocity, and the capitalist city economy based on monetary
exchange. They are also less costly to reach and, as a result, migration networks are also more
likely to have been established, further reducing the cost of migration and settling. Their
proximity also facilitates information flows about employment opportunities. According to the
KHDS, one in three town migrants, for example, already had information about a job prior to
moving, compared with only one in six among city migrants, with the job information more
frequently obtained through relatives and friends among town migrants.26 Lack of information
about employment opportunities and familiarity with the destination tends to pose an even
larger barrier for households close to subsistence, for whom experimenting with a new activity
imposes a bigger risk (Bryan, Chowhury, Mobarak, 2014; De Weerdt and Hirvonen, 2015).27

By facilitating the first move, secondary towns can further expand the migrant’s action space,
and induce a process of cumulative causation and a virtuous circle of migration and livelihood
diversification. The very act of migrating changes the conditions that were previously so
constraining. The migrant’s financial situation changes, s/he obtains skills, forges new
connections and the exposure to life outside the village changes the life they aspire to lead and,
for some, builds confidence to move on further. Secondary towns, in short, can expand the
horizons of rural dwellers, both for those who transit through them as well as for those who end
up living there. In the longer run they also alter the social and economic structures of the villages

26
   From the KDHS data, secondary town migrants with information about a job obtained it mostly from the
employer personally (34 percent), relatives and friends (27 percent), and word of mouth (15 percent). City
migrants relied more on the employer (44 percent) and word of mouth (20 percent), with only 12 percent of them
obtaining info from relatives and friends.
27
   As such, households less likely to have pre-existing network connections at the destination were found to be
more responsive to the seasonal migration incentive (free return bus ticket) (Bryan, Chowdury, and Mobarak,
2014). They also exhibited greater learning about migration opportunities and destinations in their subsequent
choices on whether and were to re-migrate.

                                                                                                            21
these migrants originate from, as emphasized by de Haas (2010). Gradually, links between these
rural locations and the urban areas can become stronger, lifting villages out of isolation. And
future migrants are not only inspired by local examples, they now also have the necessary
networks to make the move happen in practice.

To be sure, as the histories make clear, not all moves are immediately (or eventually) successful.
This also holds for moves to towns. Many migrants undertake multiple moves and with every
move the migrant’s set of future opportunities – her action space – changes, either expanding,
remaining unchanged, and at times also contracting. As such we distinguished one-directional
moves (to the city or town), ladder migration (from village to town to city), churning (a
continuing quest to search one’s luck across destinations) and return movement to the area of
origin.28 As highlighted above, the migration process does also not go on forever. It happens
within a lifecycle-related window of opportunity within which most migration and location
decisions are taken.

An exercise conducted with all respondents was to rank alternative destinations over their
current location in terms of having a good life (expressed on a ladder of life). If some other
destination was ranked above where they are now, we probed why they were not moving there.
Hanani, who currently lives in Dar es Salaam believes that his life would be better in Mwanza
and when asked why he does not move there, answers “It is impossible because right now I live
in Dar es Salaam. Going to Mwanza means that I will begin from square one.”29 Jameson, who
currently lives in a secondary town in Kagera, believes he would be better off in Dar es Salaam.
When asked, what is preventing him from moving, he says:

     (Respondent) I now have a big family. I cannot neglect them; it is not like before.

     (Interviewer) Why did you not go there when you had no family?

     (Respondent) I didn’t think of it.

     (Interviewer) You never thought of it?

     (Respondent) Well, let’s say I didn’t have the fare to get there.30

As migrants become increasingly invested in work, set up families and develop social ties, they
eventually settle down. For many this happens after the first move, others do so later in the
process. Whereas proximity explains why secondary towns are part of the early action space of

28
   A detailed analysis of the determinants of the trajectory prospects at the outset falls beyond the scope of this
paper.
29
   Interview Dar, capital city, 19 October 2015.
30
   Interview Mutukula, secondary town, 8 October 2015.

                                                                                                                      22
many rural dwellers, it is the process of gradually increasing inertia as migrants proceed in their
life cycle, which explains why many more also settle in towns, because that is where they often
find themselves.



8   Concluding Remarks

This paper analyzed the recorded narratives of the life histories of 75 purposively sampled
migrants from rural Kagera, a remote region in northwestern Tanzania to better understand why
so many more migrants end up in secondary towns, despite objectively larger welfare gains
among those who end up in the cities. The following insights emerge.

First, migration emerges as a highly dynamic process, best understood through the notion of an
evolving action space, which at each time determines the range of destinations and livelihood
opportunities, and cumulative causation, whereby the migration process itself alters the action
space over time as migrants move from one place to the other. This stands in contrast to the
more prevalent static view of migration as a one-shot event that governs economic modeling
and policy making. A more dynamic and path dependent approach and longitudinal data
collection efforts and analysis are called for in the study of migration and policy design. It is
migration movies that are needed, not snapshots.

Second, the first move is distinctly different. It is primarily motivated by the desire to leave the
village and to leave agriculture, come-what-may, “to look for life” (kutafuta maisha), a
dominant theme when migrants discussed their first move. It shakes thing up, changing
seemingly inalterable conditions and creating openings and opportunities where there were
none before. Finding the ‘good life’ continues to animate the migration process also in
subsequent migration instances, but now with the benefit of the experience and learning gained
through the first move.

Third, proximity continues to matter in non-trivial and underappreciated ways. This was
emphasized early in the study of migration by Sjaastadt (1962) and Schwartz (1973), but the
appreciation of the importance of distance in shaping migration and destination decisions has
gradually faded into the background since. With secondary towns more accessible (financially)
and easier to navigate, and meeting aspirations less important for the first move, they prove
instrumental in opening and expanding the action space of prospective migrants, especially for
those lacking pre-existing networks in the cities. This remains the reality for many, precisely
because cities have been harder to reach and navigate successfully for previous migrants,

                                                                                                 23
reinforcing the importance of secondary towns to open up space for off-farm employment and
income diversification.

Fourth, as illustrated by migrants’ and villagers’ conception of ‘urban’, an important part of the
practical appeal of secondary towns also lies in their intermediate position between the
reciprocal village economy, which villagers are familiar with, and the more capitalist,
monetized city life, where everything costs money. This renders them easier to navigate, while
still providing a degree of anonymity to advance and sufficiently close to the home village in
case things do not work out. This is despite the fact that the city undoubtedly speaks most to
the imagination.

Fifth, migrants operate within a finite age-related window of opportunity for migration. As they
start families and their life cycle proceeds, inertia sets in and they start to settle down. In
absolute numbers, this happens mostly in secondary towns, where they often find themselves
as the window of opportunity for migration starts to close.

Together these findings help contextualize the emerging body of quantitative evidence and add
credence to the notion that secondary town development may be more conducive to poverty
reduction than investment in big cities. With more than half of the world’s extreme poor living
in Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA) (World Bank, 2016) and 82 percent of Africa’s poor living in
rural areas (Beegle et al., 2016), the findings also bear on Africa’s urbanization and poverty
reduction agenda. Even though the population of our case study region, Kagera, lives arguably
particularly far from the economic capital, greater proximity to secondary towns than to cities
is a common feature of the rural population across SSA (Food and Agriculture Organization,
2017).31     While distances can be shrunk by lowering transport costs and increasing
(employment) information flows, making cities more accessible, the life histories also suggest
that the challenge of moving and operating successfully in the city, especially the first time
around and in the absence of a strong social network, goes well beyond the cost of the bus fare.

At 38 percent, SSA’s rate of urbanization is also still relatively low. This leaves much scope
for growth, which the UN projects to proceed at 1-1.3 percentage point a year over the coming
two decades.32 Through the spatial allocation of investment (across towns and cities) and policy
design, governments will have the opportunity to steer these new migration streams and thus

31
   It is calculated that 22 percent of its population live within 1-3 hours from a secondary town compared with 9
percent within 1-3 hours from a city. About 1/3 of the rural population lives in the rural hinterland at more than 3
hours from an urban center.
32
   UN World Urbanization Prospects, 2014, revision. Consulted 5 July 2017
(https://esa.un.org/unpd/wup/DataQuery/ ).

                                                                                                                 24
arguably, also the rate of poverty reduction. By giving a broader base of the population the
ability to become physically, economically and socially mobile and access new income
opportunities, secondary town development may hold a powerful policy tool for inclusive
growth and poverty reduction. Nonetheless, further research is needed, both to further develop
the theoretical and empirical evidence base on the role of secondary towns in poverty reduction
as well as to examine the effectiveness of different policies and investments to develop these
areas into vibrant and attractive centers with high “mzunguko wa pesa”.




                                                                                            25
References

Appadurai, Arjun. 2004. “The Capacity to Aspire: Culture and the Terms of Recognition”, in
        Vijayendro Rao and Michael Walton. eds. Culture and Public Action, Stanford:
        Stanford University Press: 59-84.
Bakewell, Oliver. 2010. “Some Reflections on Structure and Agency in Migration Theory.”
        Journal of Ethnic and Migration Studies. 36 (10): 1689-1708.
Bakewell, Oliver and Ayla Bonfiglio, 2013. “Moving Beyond Conflict. Re-framing Mobility
        in the African Great Lakes Region”, Working Paper 71, International Migration
        Institute, University of Oxford.
Baker, Jonathan, ed. 1990. Small Town Africa. Studies in Rural-Urban Interaction. Uppsala:
        The Scandinavian Institute of African Studies.
Baker, Jonathan, 1995. “Survival and Accumulation Strategies at the Rural-Urban Interface in
        North-West Tanzania”, Environment and Urbanization, 7 (1): 117-132.
Bjarnesen, Jesper. 2009. “A Mobile Life Story. Tracing Hopefulness in the Life and Dreams of
        a Young Ivorian Migrant”, Migration Letters. 6 (2): 119-129.
Beegle, Kathleen; Joachim De Weerdt and Stefan Dercon. 2011. “Migration and Economic
        Mobility in Tanzania: Evidence From a Tracking Survey”, Review of Economics and
        Statistics, 8 (1): 1010-1033.
Boyd, M., 1989, Family and Personal Networks in International Migration : Recent
        Developments and Agendas, International Migration Review, 23-3: 638-670.
Bryan, Gharad, Shyamal, Chowdhury, and Ahmed Mushfiq, Mobarak, 2014.
        “Underinvestment in a Profitable Technology: The Case of Seasonal Migration in
        Bangladesh.” Econometrica, 82-5: 1671-1748.
Bryceson, Deborah Fahy. 2011. “Birth of a Market Town in Tanzania: Towards Narrative
        Studies of Urban Africa”, Journal of Eastern African Studies, 5(2): 274-293.
Christiaensen, Luc and Ravi Kanbur. 2017. “Secondary towns and poverty reduction:
        refocusing the urbanization agenda”. Annual Review of Resource Economics 9
        (forthcoming).
Christiaensen, Luc and Yasuyuki Todo. 2014. “Poverty reduction during the rural–urban
        transformation–the role of the missing middle”. World Development, 63, 43-58.
Christiaensen, Luc, Joachim De Weerdt and Ravi Kanbur. 2015. “Urbanization and Poverty
        Reduction: The Role of Secondary towns in Tanzania”, Analysis and Policy Brief No.
        18, Institute of Development Policy and Management, University of Antwerp.
Christiaensen, Luc, Joachim De Weerdt, and Yasuyuki Todo. 2013. "Urbanization and
        Poverty Reduction–The Role of Rural Diversification and Secondary Towns."
        Agricultural Economics, 44 (4-5): 435–447.
de Haas, Hein. 2010. “The Internal Dynamics of Migration Processes: A Theoretical Inquiry”,
        Journal of Ethnic and Migration Studies, 36 (10): 1587-1617.
De Weerdt, Joachim, Kathleen Beegle, Helene Bie Lilleør, Stefan Dercon, Kalle Hirvonen,
        Martina Kirchberger, and Sofya Krutikova. 2012. "Kagera Health and Development
        Survey 2010: Basic Information Document." Rockwool Foundation Working Paper
        Series no. 46.
De Weerdt, Joachim and Kalle Hirvonen. 2015. “Risk Sharing and Internal Migration”,
        Economic        development    and    cultural   change,     2015.     Available at:
        https://repository.uantwerpen.be/desktop/irua/core/index.phtml?language=&euser=&s
        ession=&service=opacirua&robot=&deskservice=desktop&desktop=irua&workstation
        =&extra=loi=c:irua:137199


                                                                                         26
Dorosh, Paul and James Thurlow. 2013. “Agriculture and Small Towns in Africa”. Agricultural
        Economics. 44 (4-5): 449-459.
Dorosh, Paul and James Thurlow. 2014. “Can cities or towns drive African development?
        Economy wide analysis for Ethiopia and Uganda”. World Development. 63: 113-123.
Ellis, Frank, 1998. “Household Strategies and Rural Livelihood Diversification.” Journal of
        Development Studies, 35-1: 1-38.
Emirbayer. Mustafa and Ann Mische. 1998. “What is Agency?”, The American Journal of
        Sociology, 103 (4): 962-1023.
Emran, M. Shahe and Forhad Shilpi. 2017. “Beyond Dualism: Agricultural Productivity, Small
        Towns and Structural Change in Bangladesh.” World Bank Policy Research Working
        Paper 8087, World Bank Group: Washington D.C.
Fafchamps, Marcel and Forhad Shilpi. 2013. "Determinants of the Choice of Migration
        Destination," Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics. 75(3): 388-409.Food and
        Agriculture Organization, 2017. “State of Food and Agriculture 2017.” Food and
        Agriculture Organization: Rome, forthcoming.
Findlay, Allan M. and F.L.N. Li. 1999. “Methodological Issues in Researching Migration”. The
        Professional Geographer. 51 (1): 50-59.
Food and Agriculture Organization. 2017. “State of Food and Agriculture 2017.” Food and
        Agriculture Organization: Rome, forthcoming.
Gibson, John, Gaurav, Datt, Rinku Murgai and Martin Ravallion, 2017. “For India’s Rural
        Poor, Growing Towns Matter More than Growing Cities.” i, forthcoming.
Gurak, Douglas T., and F.E. Caces, 1992, Migration Networks and the Shaping of Migration
        Systems in Kritz, M.M., L.L. Lim and H. Zlotnik, eds. International Migration Systems:
        A Global Approach. Oxford: Oxford University Press, Clarendon Press.
Halfacree Keith and Paul Boyle. 1993. “The Challenge Facing Migration Research: The Case
        for a Biographical Approach”, Progress in Human Geography, 17 (3): 333-348.
Henderson, Vernon and Randy Becker, 2000. “Political Economy of City Sizes and
        Formation”, Journal of Urban Economics, 48 (3), 543-484.
Hirvonen, Kalle and Lilleor, Helene Bie. 2015. “Going Back Home: Internal Return Migration
        in Rural Tanzania”, World Development, 70: 186-202.
Lall, Somik, V., Harris, Selod, and Zmarak, Shalizi. 2006. “Rural-Urban Migration in
        Developing Countries: A Survey of Theoretical Predictions and Empirical Findings.”
        Policy Research Working Paper 3915, World Bank: Washington D.C.
Lanjouw, Peter; Jaime Quizon and Robert Sparrow. 2001. “Non-agricultural earnings in peri-
        urban areas of Tanzania: evidence from household survey data.” Food Policy, 26 (4):
        385-403.
Massey, Douglas S. 1990. “Social Structure, Household Strategies, and The Cumulative
        Causation of Migration”. Population Index. 56 (1): 3-26.
McKenzie, D., and H., Rapoport. 2007. “Network Effects and the Dynamics of Migration and
        Inequality: Theory and Evidence From Mexico,” Journal of Development Economics,
        84 (1), 1–24. [1672]
Msigwa, Robert Ebihart and James Ezekiel Mbongo. 2013. “Determinants of internal migration
        in Tanzania”. Journal of Economics and Sustainable Development, 4 (9), 28-35.
Myrdal, Gunnar. 1957. Rich Lands and Poor. New York: Harper and Row.
Owusu, George. 2008. “The Role of Small Towns in Regional Development and Poverty
        Reduction in Ghana” International Journal of Urban and Regional Research, 32 (2):
        453-472.
Plummer, Ken. 2001. Documents of life 2. London: Sage.
Satterthwaite, David and Cecilia Tacoli. 2003. The urban part of rural development: the role
        of small and intermediate urban centres in rural and regional development and poverty

                                                                                           27
        reduction. Human Settlements Working Paper Series Rural-Urban Interactions and
        Livelihood Strategies No. 9. IIED, London.
Schwartz, Aba. 1973. “Interpreting the Effect of Distance on Migration.” Journal of Political
        Economy, 81-5: 1153-1169.
Simon, Herbert, A., 1956. “Rational Choice and the Structure of the Environment.”
        Psychological Review, 63-2: 129-138. doi:10.1037/h0042769.
Sjaastad, Larry A., 1962. “The Costs and Returns to Human Migration.” Journal of Political
        Economy, 70-5: 80-93.
Tacoli, Cecilia and Richard Mabala. 2010. “Exploring mobility and migration in the context of
        rural—urban linkages: why gender and generation matter.” Environment and
        Urbanization, 22 (2): 389-395.
Thomas, William I. and Florian Znaniecki. (1918) 1958. The Polish Peasant in Europe and
        America. New York: Dover.
Thompson, Paul. 1982. “Life histories and the analysis of social change”. In: Daniel Berteaux,
        ed. 1982. Biography and society. The life-history approach in the social sciences.
        London: Sage: 289-306.
Wolpert, Julian. 1965. "Behavioral Aspects of the Decision to Migrate." Papers of the Regional
        Science Association, 15 (1): 159-169.
World Bank, 2016. “Poverty and Shared Prosperity 2016. Taking on Inequality.” World
        Bank: Washington D.C.
Young, Alwyn. 2013. “Inequality, the Urban-Rural Gap and Migration.” Quarterly Journal of
        Economics, 128-4: 1727-1785.




                                                                                           28
