                                                       WPS8029


Policy Research Working Paper                         8029




Arithmetics and Politics of Domestic Resource
                Mobilization
                                 Kimberly B. Bolch
                                   Lidia Ceriani
                                Luis F. Lopez-Calva




Development Economics
2017 World Development Report Team
  &
Poverty and Equity Global Practice Group
April 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 8029


  Abstract
 The 2015 United Nations resolution on Financing for                                 effective fiscal policies (from the revenue side and the social
 Development stresses the importance of effective resource                           spending side) to reduce poverty. The paper provides a new
 mobilization and use of domestic resources to pursue sus-                           tool to assess the capacity of countries to eliminate poverty
 tainable development. The first Sustainable Development                             through redistribution, and a new tool to approximate
 Goal is to eradicate extreme poverty for all people every-                          the concentration of political influence in a country. The
 where by 2030. This paper proposes an accounting exercise                           new methodologies are applied to the most recent surveys
 to assess whether it is feasible for countries to eliminate                         available for more than 120 developing countries. The
 poverty using only domestic resources, in other words, by                           findings show that countries with the same fiscal capacity
 mere redistribution. Moreover, the paper argues that the                            to mobilize resources for poverty eradication differ widely
 concentration of resources in the hands of fewer individuals                        in the political feasibility of such redistribution policies.
 in the society may hinder the feasibility of implementing




  This paper is a joint product of the 2017 World Development Report Team, Development Economics; and the Poverty
  and Equity Global Practice Group. It is part of a larger effort by the World Bank to provide open access to its research and
  make a contribution to development policy discussions around the world. Policy Research Working Papers are also posted
  on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The authors may be contacted at lceriani@worldbank.org.




          The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
          issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
          names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
          of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
          its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                        Produced by the Research Support Team
Arithmetics and Politics of Domestic Resource Mobilization
                                               † and Luis F. Lopez-Calva‡
                                ∗ Lidia Ceriani,
               Kimberly B. Bolch,

                                       The World Bank




Keywords: domestic resource mobilization; poverty gap; ﬁscal capacity; taxation; politi-
cal inﬂuence
JEL Codes: D63; I32; P16



  ∗
    e-mail: kbolch@worldbank.org
  †
    e-mail: lceriani@worldbank.org; Corresponding Author
  ‡
    e-mail: lflopezcalva@worldbank.org
1    Introduction
Throughout history, taxation has been the backbone of the structure of the state. It is
the channel through which citizens provide those to whom authority is delegated with the
resources to look after the public good. Around the time when ancient Greece became
the ideal model of the modern state in the West, in South Asia, Kautilya wrote in the
Arthasashtra –the ancient Indian treatise on the state and the economy– that:


     When there was no order in society and only the law of the jungle prevailed,
     people [were unhappy and being desirous of order] made Manu, the son of
     Vivasvat, their king; and they assigned to the king one-sixth part of the grains
     grown by them, one-tenth of other commodities and money. The king then
     used these to safeguard the welfare of his subjects. Those who do not pay ﬁnes
     and taxes take on themselves the sins of kings, while kings who do not look
     after the welfare of the people take on themselves the sins of their subjects [...]
     (Kautilya, 4th Century BC, IV century BC, 1.13.5-10)

    Indeed, throughout history and across space, taxation has been seen as the link be-
tween the government and the governed, a fundamental pillar of the social contract. Yet,
the heterogeneity in terms of tax collection among countries is astounding (Besley and
Persson, 2014; Gaspar, Jaramillo, and Wingender, 2016). The policy dialogue has stressed
the importance of increasing tax collection in order to ﬁnance speciﬁc development goals,
but also as a means to strengthen accountability of the government to its citizens. The
UN resolution on Financing for Development stresses the importance of eﬀective resource
mobilization and use of domestic resources to pursue sustainable development (United Na-
tions, 2015). With cost projections in the trillions, domestic resource mobilization (DRM)
in developing countries will be a critical source of funding to achieve the Sustainable De-
velopment Goals (Development Committee, 2015).

    In order to raise the ﬁnancial resources needed to invest in public spending, govern-
ments must rely on taxation. While the desirable and feasible level of taxation may diﬀer
greatly across countries, depending on factors such as the country’s existing endowments
or society’s normative beliefs about the appropriate levels of taxation, increasing evidence
suggests that tax revenues of at least 15 percent of GDP may be necessary in order to
execute basic state functions and to sustain development progress (Gaspar, Jaramillo, and
Wingender, 2016). However, currently, more than half of the low-income countries are
below this threshold (IMF, OECD, UN, and WBG, 2016).

    What are the key constraints that countries face in increasing their mobilization of
resources? Answers to this question typically focus on the domestic capacity to mobilize
resources, with less emphasis on the fact that low ﬁscal revenues are themselves the result

                                             1
of a political equilibrium, and that the incentives for policy makers may not be in favor
of ﬁscal reform. It is thus important to disentangle elements related strictly to capacity
in terms of existing resources and those related to potential political constraints. This
paper proposes a simple exercise to distinguish how these factors inﬂuence the ability of
countries to achieve the ﬁrst Sustainable Development Goal of eradicating extreme poverty
by 2030. In this paper we propose, ﬁrst, an accounting exercise to assess whether it is fea-
sible for countries to eliminate poverty using only domestic resources, implementing simple
re-distribution rules (which this papers calls the arithmetics of DRM). We then argue that
the concentration of resources in the hands of fewer individuals in the society may hinder
the ability to eﬀectively implement such redistribution rules –both from the revenue side
and from the social spending side. We propose a new way to approximate the concentra-
tion of political inﬂuence in a country linked to the unequal control over resources– which
may thwart the eﬀorts to eliminate poverty solely through domestic resource mobilization
(which this papers calls the politics of DRM). We apply the new methodologies to the most
recent surveys available for over 120 developing countries.

    The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides a brief review of the
literature on merits of DRM as well as the constraints to increasing DRM in terms of both
the taxable capacity and the political equilibrium. Section 3 proposes a framework for
measuring the arithmetics and the politics of DRM. Section 4 describes the data utilized
in the exercise. Section 5 presents the results of the analysis. Section 6 concludes.



2    Beyond capacity: Unpacking the constraints to increasing
     domestic resource mobilization
While domestic resource mobilization (DRM) has recently garnered attention in the in-
ternational dialogue, its importance for both economic and state development has long
been acknowledged. As Schumpeter asserted almost a century ago, “the ﬁscal history of a
people is above all an essential part of its general history” (Schumpeter, 1918). In addition
to serving as an essential source of funding for governments to invest in delivering public
goods and services, DRM can also reduce dependency on aid donors, thereby enabling
countries to pursue long term national priorities, and it can strengthen the responsiveness
of institutions by enhancing the accountability of governments to their citizens (see, for
instance, Bhushan and Samy, 2015).

   The ﬁscal capacity of countries to pursue development objectives is often analyzed in
terms of the dichotomy between domestic resource mobilization versus foreign develop-
ment assistance. This dichotomy or complementarity– has been studied, mainly, from the
perspective of the potential shift of accountability from citizens in recipient countries to


                                             2
donors’ constituencies (Prichard, Brun, and Morrissey, 2012; Bra¨    utigam, Fjeldstad, and
Moore, 2008). According to this argument, reliance on external ﬁnancing to ﬁll revenue
gaps can have negative consequences on the ability of countries to maintain ownership of
their development trajectories. Indeed, the deﬁnition of policy priorities may be inﬂuenced
by donors’ political preferences as opposed to domestic needs (distorting ex-ante account-
ability). Ultimately, a core function of institutions is to enable commitment to long term
national objectives (World Bank, 2017). However, if a country is dependent on external
funding cycles, it may be unable to pursue such objectives if commitments are truncated
in the face of changing donor priorities.

    Relying on foreign aid in place of DRM can also potentially reduce the answerability
of politicians to society, as implementation becomes a donor-recipient negotiation rather
than a state-citizen agreement (distorting ex-post accountability). When states rely on
their domestic tax base for funding, political leaders have more incentives to be respon-
sive to the needs of their consistencies and may be more likely to include them in policy
discussions. Over time, by broadening the bargaining space and reliably delivering public
goods and services, states can build trust with citizens and strengthen their legitimacy in
society. The feedback eﬀect of improving taxation is thus also fundamental for improving
the eﬀectiveness of state institutions (Levi, 1988).

    Mobilizing domestic resources is thus critical for achieving social and political progress
in addition to economic progress; however low-income countries systematically collect fewer
taxes. Even though they have made signiﬁcant progress in improving tax collection over the
past two decades, low-income countries still only collect taxes of between 10 to 20 percent
of GDP (compared to 40 percent of GDP in high-income countries, see Besley and Persson,
2014). This paper relates to two key strands of the literature identifying the constraints
countries face in mobilizing more revenue which look at: the taxable capacity of the state
(including the ability of the tax base to contribute as well as the administrative ability of
the state to collect that revenue), and the political equilibrium that underlies the adoption
and implementation of tax policies (including the ability of diﬀerent powerful groups to
inﬂuence policy decisions).


2.1   Taxable capacity
The structure of the economy –including the degree of informality, level of urbanization,
geography, and openness to international trade– is a key factor which inﬂuences the ability
of governments to collect taxes (Gupta, 2007). For example, in many low income countries
the share of informality in the economy is especially high –with estimates suggesting that
it accounts for 30-40 percent of GDP in the poorest countries (Besley and Persson, 2014).
As the lack of formal records makes collecting taxes from these businesses challenging to


                                              3
implement, the missing tax revenue due to informality can be quite high (La Porta and
Shleifer, 2014). As Keen (2012) ﬁnds, compared to developing countries, tax evasion in
developing countries due to informality is almost twice as high. Moreover, other structural
factors outside the national economy, in particular global tax competition and other oppor-
tunities for capital ﬂight, have weakened the ability of states to mobilize domestic resources.

    These types of characteristics narrow the tax base and make it diﬃcult for countries
to depend on taxes such as personal income taxes. In fact, most low-income countries col-
lect less than 10 percent of tax revenue from personal income taxes, compared to over 25
percent in OECD countries (Keen, 2012). This in turn increases dependence on other less
stable sources of taxation such as foreign trade taxes or resource extraction taxes, which
evidence suggests lead to lower levels of tax collection overall (Di John, 2006; Jensen, 2011).
According to Jensen (2011), as the share of natural resource rents in total government rev-
enues increases, the share of taxation in GDP decreases at an even faster rate. Similarly, in
countries where the potential for capital ﬂight or tax evasion is high, consumption taxes are
most likely to be eﬀective – however, they are also more likely to be regressive. Recently,
studies have warned about the potential eﬀect of increased taxation on poverty, particularly
in countries where most new taxes will be based on consumption (Higgins and Lustig, 2016).

     The capacity to tax depends not only on the resources available to tax, but also on
the ability of the government to collect those taxes. Typical approaches to tax reform in
the development community –such as public ﬁnancial management reforms– have thus em-
phasized the importance of capacity-building for better tax administration. The literature
identiﬁes two key elements of administrative capacity which matter for DRM: the eﬃciency
of the system (related to the costs of tax collection and enforcement) and the eﬀective-
ness of the system (related to the transparency and accountability of tax collection and
enforcement). Administrative factors such as low wages for public sector employees, lack
of skilled staﬀ, poor equipment and facilities, and complicated tax policy can all adversely
aﬀect eﬃciency of revenue collection (Kaldor, 1955; Bird, 2014). However, tax collection is
not just a simple interaction between the taxpayer and the tax collector. Indeed, as Moore
(2013) explains, “revenue agencies are highly ‘networked’ organizations.” They require the
cooperation of tax collectors, tax intermediates, politicians, and taxpayers –and they in-
volve stakeholders from many agencies ranging from the ministry of ﬁnance to the police to
the border security forces (Vazquez-Caro and Bird, 2011). With so many actors, it becomes
diﬃcult to monitor individual behavior and corruption can become embedded in network
interactions. Thus, even with high administrative capacity, tax systems may be ineﬀective
if they lack suﬃcient oversight and information mechanisms to enforce a rules-based system.




                                              4
2.2   Political equilibrium
While the capacity to tax is a necessary condition for collecting revenue, it cannot fully
explain the diﬀerences in tax collection across countries. Ultimately, the stock of adminis-
trative capacity in a country can be thought of as the result of past decisions to invest in
that capacity. As Di John (2006) describes, “the institutional capacity of states to mobilise
resources had to be created.” These decisions are the result of the governance environment,
or political equilibrium, which depends on the balance of power between diﬀerent actors
with diﬀerent interests and incentives (World Bank, 2017). This can help to explain why
even countries with similar economic structures have very diﬀerent rates of tax collection
(Mkandawire, 2010).

    The actors with more bargaining power to directly inﬂuence policy decisions tend to be
actors with higher income levels (as the distribution of wealth and resources is an important
source of de facto power). Thus, it would be unsurprising to ﬁnd that in places with low
contestability of power (high concentration of political inﬂuence) ﬁscal policy is also less
progressive and tax laws are more easily evaded by the wealthy (Besley and Persson, 2014).
Moreover, as C´  ardenas (2010) proposes, if those who are currently in power may beneﬁt
from future tax avoidance, they are likely to under-invest in ﬁscal capacity –particularly so
if there is a high likelihood that a more progressive opposition government may be elected
in the next term. However, more research is needed to understand the speciﬁc institu-
tional channels which facilitate this process –for example, Ardanaz and Scartascini, 2011
look at how legislative malapportionment may have enabled this outcome in Latin America.

    Conversely, as contestability of power increases –and elites face greater social and eco-
nomic pressures from below– the elites’ tax contributions tend to increase (Boix, 2003).
Moreover, these dynamics can be self-reinforcing, with greater economic equality giving
way to more democratic systems. As Boix (2003) argues, “since the tax [that the holders
of the most productive assets] will pay in a democratic regime ﬁnally becomes smaller than
the costs of repression that they would have to bear to exclude the majority of the citizens,
they accept the introduction of a system of universal suﬀrage” (Boix, 2003, p.10).



3     Arithmetics and politics of redistribution rules:
      A framework
To develop a method to measure the potential DRM constraints related to taxable ca-
pacity, this paper looks at the arithmetics of DRM from the perspective of the income of
the potential tax base. It seeks to measure if that income would be suﬃcient to elimi-
nate poverty using simple income redistribution rules and proposes a Poverty Eradication
Capacity Index. It builds in particular on three recent eﬀorts to quantity this capacity.

                                             5
Ravallion (2010) measures the extent to which the existing distribution of income would
constrain the redistribution needed to eliminate poverty in 90 countries, using a measure
of the marginal tax rate on the rich. Lind and Moene (2011) develop a miser index to mea-
sure the extent to which there is poverty in the midst of aﬄuence, by comparing absolute
poverty to the total amount of resources available. Finally, Ceriani and Verme (2014) de-
velop an income lever index to measure of the monetary capacity of countries to eliminate
poverty by implementing diﬀerent distribution rules.

    Similarly, to develop a method to measure the potential DRM constraints related to
the political equilibrium of countries, this paper looks at the politics of DRM from the
perspective of the concentration of resources in the hands of few individuals. It seeks to
measure how that concentration may impact tax policy decisions and proposes a Political
Inﬂuence Concentration Index. It builds in particular on three recent eﬀorts to measure
such inﬂuence. Gilens and Page (2014) use data from the United States to quantify the dif-
ferences in policy inﬂuence between average citizens, economic elites, and business interests.
Karabarbounis (2011) measures the relationship between inequality and redistribution and
ﬁnds a one dollar-one vote political characterization in which income is associated with
political inﬂuence. Finally, Igan and Mishra (2011) construct a database of political con-
nections and contributions and ﬁnd that they are positively associated with the likelihood
that legislators change their position on ﬁnancial deregulation.

   Consider a population N made of i = 1, 2, . . . , n individuals, n ∈ N. Each individual is
endowed with a level of welfare yi ∈ R+ , which is the monetary value according to which
poverty is measured (it can either be income or consumption according to the prevailing
methodology in the country). Without loss of generality, let us assume that incomes are
ordered, such that y1 ≤ y2 ≤ y3 ≤ · · · ≤ yn .

    Population N can be divided into two subgroups: poor and non-poor individuals. The
set of poor individuals in the population Qp is deﬁned as the set of individuals whose
welfare level is smaller than the poverty line z : Qp = {i : yi < z }. The set of non-poor
individuals in the population, Q∼p is deﬁned as the set of individuals whose welfare is
greater or equal to the poverty line: Q∼p = {i : yi ≥ z }. Non-poor individuals, in turn,
may belong to two distinct welfare groups: the middle class and the rich, deﬁned as follows.
The set of middle class individuals, Qm is deﬁned as the set of non-poor individuals whose
welfare level is below the aﬄuence line z r : Qm : {i : z ≤ yi < z r }. Finally, the set of rich
individuals, Qr is the set of those non-poor individuals whose welfare is above the aﬄuence
line: Qr : {i : yi ≥ z r }. Summarizing: N = Qp ∪ Q∼p = Qp ∪ Qm ∪ Qr . The poverty line z
and the aﬄuence line z r are considered as given.




                                               6
3.1    Arithmetics
In a static setting, where we allow only redistribution to happen, and there is no growth,
the domestic resources to eradicate poverty are to be found among individuals above the
poverty line.1 The redistribution rules to be implemented depend on a normative deci-
sion which, in turn, depends on the preferences of policy makers, as underlined in Ceriani
and Verme (2014). In this paper, we consider two possible alternatives: (i) each non-
poor individual should transfer the same proportion of her welfare in excess of the poverty
line to the poor and (ii) each rich individual should transfer the same proportion of her
welfare in excess of the aﬄuence line to the poor.2 In this setting, therefore, a poverty
eradication policy is a set of transfers from those above the poverty (or aﬄuence) line to
those below the poverty line, aimed at narrowing (and possibly ﬁlling up) the shortfalls
of individuals belonging to Qp , without making anybody else poor and avoiding re-ranking.

    The poverty eradication policy is hence deﬁned by a marginal tax rate τ ∈ [0, 1] and
by the normative statement on whether the middle class should be accountable or not for
redistribution. In the ﬁrst case, under redistribution rule (i), the marginal tax rate will
be levied on the sum of the welfare levels in excess of the poverty line, G∼p , deﬁned as
G∼p = i∈Q∼p (yi − z ). In the second case, under redistribution rule (ii), the marginal
tax rate will be levied on the sum of the welfare levels in excess of the aﬄuence line, Gr ,
deﬁned as Gr = i∈Qr (yi − z r ). The set (τ , Gδ ) deﬁnes therefore the poverty eradication
policy and the total transfer amount T δ : T δ (τ, Gδ ), where δ = ∼p under rule (i) and δ = r
under rule (ii). By construction, for a given marginal tax rate τ , T ∼p ≥ T r , since the tax
base Qr is a subset of Q∼p .

    The optimal poverty eradication policy, (ˆ τ , Gδ ), is deﬁned by the marginal tax rate τ
                                                                                            ˆ
such that, according to the redistribution rule followed by the policy maker (δ = ∼p or
δ = r), the total transfer equals the sum of the poverty gaps of all poor individuals (Gp ):
ˆGδ = Gp , where Gp = i∈Qp (z − yi ), and δ = (∼p, r). Notice that the optimal eradication
τ
policy might not be achievable in a country, as the sum of the poverty gaps might exceed the
pool of available resources for any feasible level of the marginal tax rate. More generally,
to each marginal tax rate τ , given the redistribution rule, corresponds a transfer level T δ
which is some share of the sum of the poverty gaps in the society. This information can be
summarized in a Poverty Eradication Capacity Curve, deﬁned as follows.

Deﬁnition 3.1 (Poverty Eradication Capacity Curve). The Poverty Eradication Capacity
Curve, P δ : [0, 1] → [0, 1], plots the share of poverty gap the country is able to compensate,
   1
     The assumption of no growth is justiﬁed because the paper does not look at eﬃciency implications of
taxation, which is not necessary for our argument.
   2
     Ceriani and Verme (2014) deﬁne the ﬁrst approach Proportional Income Lever and the second Progres-
sive Income Lever. Ravallion (2010) refers to the ﬁrst approach as marginal tax rate on incomes above the
poverty line and to the second as marginal tax rate on the rich.


                                                   7
        T δ
min 1, G  p , for each level of the marginal tax rate τ , given the redistribution rule δ =

{∼p, r} elected by the society.


                       Figure 1: Poverty Eradication Capacity Curve



                                                1
                       .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9
                         as a share of the sum of poverty gaps
                                     Total Transfer




                                                                                                ~p
                                                                                              P
                                                                                                r
                                                                                              P
                                                0




                                                                 0   .1   .2   .3     .4 .5 .6 .7       .8   .9   1
                                                                                    Marginal Tax Rate




     Figure 1, which illustrates the case of urban India in 2011, draws the Poverty Eradica-
tion Capacity Curve under the alternative normative principles that assign responsibility
for poverty eradication to all non-poor individuals (P ∼p ) and to only rich individuals (P r ).
It shows that the optimal poverty eradication policy corresponds to a marginal tax rate of
about 20 percent levied on the excess-poverty gaps of the non-poor, which is suﬃcient to
compensate the sum of poverty gaps in the population. On the other hand, taxing away
all the aﬄuence gaps of the rich individuals (τ = 1, δ = r), the society can at most collects
enough revenue to compensate 60 percent of the total sum of poverty gaps, and therefore
no optimal policy exists under redistribution rule (ii).

    A country enjoys the highest possible capacity of poverty eradication when the Poverty
Eradication Capacity curve is Γ-shape: even with a marginal tax rate close to zero on the
individuals responsible for poverty eradication, the society is able to close 100 percent of
the poverty gaps. Conversely, if the country cannot compensate the sum of poverty gaps
even when the marginal tax rate approaches 1, hence the Poverty Eradication Capacity
curve coincides with the x-axis, we would say that the capacity of the country to mobilize
resources for poverty eradication is minimum. Figure 2 shows that a generic Poverty

                                                                                       8
                      Figure 2: Poverty Eradication Capacity Curve




                                               1
                      .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9
                        as a share of the sum of poverty gaps
                                                                                A

                                    Total Transfer




                                                                                                             B
                                               0




                                                                0   .1     .2   .3     .4 .5 .6 .7               .8   .9   1
                                                                                     Marginal Tax Rate




Eradication Capacity curve divides the space of analysis in two areas A, above the curve,
and B , below the curve. In a country where the poverty eradication capacity is maximum,
A will be zero (see Figure 2). On the other hand, in a country where the poverty eradication
capacity is minimum, B will be zero. Using this intuition, and the fact that A + B = 1, we
summarize the information of the Poverty Eradication Capacity Curve in a single index,
the Poverty Eradication Capacity Index, deﬁned below in equation (1).

Deﬁnition 3.2. Poverty Eradication Capacity Index. For each δ ∈ ∼p, r:
                                                                                            1
                                                                         I (P δ ) =             P δ (x)dx.                     (1)
                                                                                        0

   The index of poverty eradication capacity will therefore tend to 1, indicating maximum
capacity, when the sum of poverty gaps in the country is zero, while it will be equal to 0
when the sum of excess poverty (or aﬄuence) gaps is zero.

3.2   Politics
The arithmetics of domestic resource mobilization describes the accounting capacity of a
country to eradicate poverty solely through DRM, but it does not deﬁne the political fea-
sibility of mobilizing such resources. Note that even in a perfectly functioning democratic


                                                                                        9
setting, where the policy makers are elected on a platform favoring a redistribution agenda,
political elites tend to express a diﬀerent attitude towards redistribution (i.e. less progres-
sive) than the general population, as Fisman, Jakiela, Kariv, and Markovits (2015) prove
in a lab setting.

    By design, a redistributive policy clearly deﬁnes (at least in the short term) winners
and losers. In this simple exercise, poor individuals receiving the transfer are the winners,
non-poor individuals who provide the resources for the transfers are the losers. The relative
political power of winners and losers of the reforms is crucial in determining whether the
redistributive policy will be designed and then implemented with the expected results.

    In proposing a new tool to assess the political capacity of a country to collect domes-
tic resources for redistribution, we follow two streams of political science and economics
literature: on one hand, the contributions assessing that economic inequality is essentially
political inequality (Atkinson, PIketty, and Saez, 2011; Gilens, 2012); on the other, the lit-
erature on collective action, assessing that concentrated minority interests tends to trump
diﬀuse majority interest, due to increasing diﬃculties of inducing coordination and foster-
ing cooperation as a group becomes larger (Olson, 1965 World Bank, 2017).

    A disproportionate concentration of income and wealth, particularly at the very top of
the distribution, may result in disproportionate power to inﬂuence the institutional design,
making it diﬃcult to implement pro-poor reforms. This undue political inﬂuence is the
direct expression of income inequality when implemented policies are chosen because of
the money used to inﬂuence the political process. This is particularly evident in countries
where lobbying is a diﬀuse and regulated system, as Igan and Mishra (2011) show for the
case of the United States during the years 1999-2006, when lobbying expenditure from the
ﬁnancial sector is found to be positively associated to the probability that legislators switch
their position in favor of deregulation of that industry. Also in the United States, Gilens
and Page (2014) are able to show that economic and business elites are much more eﬀective
in having preferred policies passed (or unfavored policies blocked) than mass-based interest
groups. Finally, Karabarbounis (2011) proves that more money is associated with more
political power using a panel of OECD countries over the period 1975-2001, supporting the
argument that political inﬂuence is not uniformly distributed across voters, but that richer
individuals’ votes weigh more. But inequality trumps the political voice of the poorer also
indirectly. In particular, Solt (2008) shows for the case of Europe that inequality depresses
political interest and participation of everyone except the very aﬄuent in the society. In
fact, as argued in World Bank (2017), citizens experiencing a persistent status of depriva-
tion and the unresponsiveness of the state with respect to issues of importance to them
may decide to opt out from the political process, therefore lowering further the probability
that redistributive policies are passed.



                                              10
    Moreover, following well-known collective action results, we know that the concentra-
tion of political power in the hands of a rich elite may not be easily counterweighted by
the diﬀuse political power of the potential winners as it might be diﬃcult to organize their
collective action (Olson, 1965). Therefore, political inﬂuence is positively associated with
the amount of economic resources a group of individuals controls and negatively associated
with the number of individuals in that group. The same amount of income buys more
political inﬂuence if it is concentrated in the hands of one or few individuals, as opposed to
belonging to a larger set of individuals, as cooperation and coordination are more diﬃcult
to achieve in larger groups.

    Given this well established relationship between the unequal distribution of economic
resources and the unequal distribution of inﬂuence in the political process, we propose an
indicator to assess the concentration of political inﬂuence starting from the distribution of
income in the society. Our new approach relies on two hypotheses. The ﬁrst one is that the
capacity to inﬂuence the political agenda is linear in the income levels of individuals (in
line with the one dollar, one vote theory empirically tested by Karabarbounis, 2011, cited
above). The second one is that individuals may form coalitions to support implementation
of a policy, and that the political inﬂuence of these coalitions is linear in the total income
of the members of the coalition.

    Let us deﬁne Q(q u ) as the set of individuals belonging to the upper q-th quantile of
more aﬄuent individuals in the society, and Q(q b ) as the set of individuals belonging to the
bottom q-th quantile of poorer individuals in the society, where q u , q b ∈ [0, 1]. Moreover, let
Y (q u ) be the sum of incomes belonging to the top q -th quantile of more aﬄuent individuals
in the society:
                                      Y (q u ) =        yi                                    (2)
                                                 i∈Q(q u )

Symmetrically, let Y (q b ) be the sum of incomes belonging to the q -th quantile of poorer
individuals in the society:
                                      Y (q b ) =    yi                                  (3)
                                                 i∈Q(q b )

    Recall that in our setting, richer individuals, being losers of redistributive reforms, op-
pose to their implementation, and the strength of their political opposition is proportional
to their income. To outweigh this opposition from the top, poorer individuals (the winners
of the redistributive policy) need to form a coalition. For each rich individual at the top,
the coalition of individuals at the bottom needs to be at least large enough for the sum
of poor individuals’ incomes to equalize the income of the rich individual. The larger the
coalition that needs to be created, the more diﬃcult it is for the poor to successfully co-
ordinate their eﬀorts, due to the collective action problem, and the redistribution policy is
less likely to be implemented.

                                               11
    In a society with perfect equality in income distribution, nobody’s political inﬂuence
can outweigh others’. A society has a higher concentration of political inﬂuence when, for
each rich individual at the top, a larger coalition of poor individuals at the bottom needs
to be created in order to successfully implement a poverty eradication policy by mobilizing
resources to devote it to redistribution. As a tool to evaluate the concentration of political
inﬂuence in the society, we introduce the following Political Inﬂuence Concentration Curve.


Deﬁnition 3.3 (Political Inﬂuence Concentration Curve). The Political Inﬂuence Con-
centration Curve, Π : [0, 1] → [0, 1], plots the share of individuals at the bottom of the
distribution needed to equalize the income levels of each q u quantile of individuals at the
top of the welfare distribution in the society, with q u = [0, 1].

    In other words, for each share of individuals at the top of the distribution (q u ∈ [0, 1]),
with sum of incomes Y (q u ), Π plots the share of population from the bottom (q b ) such that
Y (q b ) = Y (q u ).3 In case of perfect equality in the distribution of welfare, each individual
has the same political inﬂuence, and Π would corresponds with the 45 degree line. In case
of perfect inequality, a single individual in the society has so much political inﬂuence that it
cannot be counterweighted by any set of individuals in the society, and Π will be Γ-shaped.
As shown in Figure 3, Π line divides the space above the 45 degree line in two areas, A
and B . In a country where the political inﬂuence is all concentrated in the hands of one
individuals, A will be zero. On the other hand, in a country where the political inﬂuence
is equally shared by all individuals, B will be zero.

   Similarly to the deﬁnition of the Poverty Eradication Capacity Index, and noticing that
A + B = 0.5, we can summarize the information embedded in Π in a single index, the
Political Inﬂuence Concentration Index, deﬁned as follows in equation (4).

Deﬁnition 3.4. Political Inﬂuence Concentration Index.
                                                       1
                                    I (Π) =    2           Π(x)dx − 1.                                 (4)
                                                   0

    The index is bounded between zero (when B is zero) and one (when A is zero). In
particular, the index is zero when no coalition needs to be formed: if incomes are equally
distributed, political inﬂuence is diﬀused across the society. On the other hand, the index
is one, when no coalition, for as large as it can be, equalizes the political inﬂuence of the
single individual in the society who owns all income.

   3
     Note that, although the deﬁnition is similar to the Lorenz curve, using our notation, the Lorenz curve
plots instead for each q b ∈ (0, 1] the corresponding Y (q b ) as a share of Y (1).



                                                    12
                        Figure 3: Political Inﬂuence Concentration Curve




                                           1
                                                                          A




                           .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9
                          Share of individuals from the bottom                            B
                                           .1
                                           0




                                                                 0   .1       .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8                .9   1
                                                                              Share of individuals from the top




   The capacity of a state to mobilize domestic resources for the eradication of poverty,
therefore, is positively associated with the resource-based capacity of the state, as mea-
sured by I (P δ ), but negatively associated with the concentration of political inﬂuence, as
measured by I (Π). Given the same taxable capacity, in fact, any pro-poor redistribution
scheme will be more diﬃcult to be voted and implemented in a country where the political
equilibrium is unbalanced in favor of rich elites.



4       Data
In this paper, we use the World Bank PovcalNet database, in the form put together by
Dykstra, Dykstra, and Sandefur (2014). PovcalNet is a computational tool developed by
the World Bank to allow researchers to replicate the oﬃcial poverty estimates, as well
as develop new estimates under diﬀerent assumptions, namely, diﬀerent poverty lines and
diﬀerent grouping of countries.4

    4
     The tool is accessible online, where the user selects the country, the year for the analysis (among the
available years for each country) and a poverty line. PovcalNet then returns the headcount index for the
selected poverty line.



                                                                                         13
    Dykstra, Dykstra, and Sandefur (2014), by automatizing the sourcing of results from
the World Bank website, collected 10,000 points from the underlying distribution of income
or consumption for each country and each year in the PovcalNet database. The resulting
data set is, using the words of the authors, a data set of distributions, not the original
micro survey data (Dykstra, Dykstra, and Sandefur, 2014, p.1).5

    We use data from the most recent year available for 129 countries featured in the
database. Only for 10 countries in the data set is the available survey older than 2000,
while for 44 countries it is from 2010 or more recent. The countries represented in the data
set cover all income groups and regions in the word. Appendix A summarizes the list of
countries and corresponding years.


5       Is poverty reduction feasible through DRM? The facts
5.1     Arithmetics
The interaction between poverty level, optimal marginal tax rate required to eliminate
poverty, and the political feasibility is not straightforward. The empirical relation between
headcount poverty and the optimal marginal tax rate on the non-poor to eradicate poverty
is positive and increasing: the higher the share of population below the poverty line, the
higher the marginal tax rate that needs to be levied on the excess-poverty gaps of the non-
poor in order to eradicate poverty. Nevertheless, the same poverty rate may correspond
with very diﬀerent patterns in the Poverty Eradication Capacity Curve. Take, for example,
the cases of Namibia and Senegal (Figure 4).

The two countries have about the same share of individuals living below the poverty line of
2 dollars per day in 2005 purchasing power parities (51 percent in Namibia and 55 percent
in Senegal). On the other hand, they diﬀer very much with respect to the arithmetics
of their redistribution capacity. Namibia’s poverty eradication capacity curve lays above
Senegal’s regardless of the redistribution rule (whether the non poor, left panel, or the rich,
right panel, are taxed), which means that for any possible marginal tax rate on excess-
poverty (or excess-aﬄuence) gaps, Namibia will be able to compensate a larger share of
poverty gaps than Senegal. When the society considers all non-poor individuals responsible
for poverty eradication, the optimal marginal tax rate is about 16 percent in Namibia and
    5
     We are aware of the disclaimer posted on PovcalNet which advises against using the tool for tracing
out the entire distribution of income or consumption. We are also aware of issues related to the use of
secondary databases for distributional analysis (Atkinson and Brandolini, 2001). Nevertheless, the data set
made available from the eﬀort of Dykstra, Dykstra, and Sandefur (2014) is an incredible asset to researchers,
as it provides an approximation of the welfare distribution for all available countries and available years, in
a relatively computationally lean form. We are aware that any results here reported, should be validated
by using the underlying microdata, whenever available for the analysis.



                                                      14
                                                     Figure 4: Poverty Eradication Capacity Curve, examples
   0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9 1




                                                                                                 0 .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9 1
    as a share of the sum of poverty gaps




                                                                                                  as a share of the sum of poverty gaps
  ~p




                                                                                                 r
                                                                                                            Total Transfer T
              Total Transfer T




                                                                  Namibia (2004)                                                                                Namibia (2004)
                                                                  Senegal (2011)                                                                                Senegal (2011)



                                            0   .1   .2   .3 .4 .5 .6 .7      .8   .9   1                                                 0   .1   .2   .3 .4 .5 .6 .7      .8   .9   1
                                                          Marginal Tax Rate                                                                             Marginal Tax Rate




50 percent in Senegal (Figure 4, left panel). When only the rich are subject to taxation
to collect resources to be transferred to the poor, Namibia’s optimal marginal tax rate is
about 55 percent, while Senegal would be able to transfer less than 10 percent of the total
poverty gap by levying a marginal tax rate of 100 percent on the excess aﬄuence gaps of
the rich individuals.

    The Poverty Eradication Capacity Index I (P ∼p ) shows a clear non-linear negative re-
lationship with the level of poverty in the countries (see Figure 5, left panel), while the
relationship is less evident in the case of I (P r ) (Figure 5, right panel). Recall that the
index equals zero when there is no capacity to eradicate poverty by transferring resources
from non-poor (or rich) to poor individuals; it tends to one when poverty is solved with
a marginal tax rate on responsible individuals which tends to zero. At the extreme, it is
equal to one when poverty is zero.

    Our results show that for poverty levels lower than 30 percent, I (P ∼p ) is very close to
one, indicating that countries can easily collect enough resources to eradicate poverty levy-
ing a small marginal tax rate on non-poor individuals. When poverty levels range from 40
to 60 percent, the relationship between poverty and I (P ∼p ) seems convex, to ﬁnally become
concave for higher poverty levels. Note that the tipping point around a poverty headcount
of 60 percent corresponds to about I (P ∼p ) = 0.5, which corresponds to a Poverty Eradica-
tion Capacity Curve coincident to the diagonal, or to an optimal marginal tax rate equal
to 1. In other words, countries with an I (P ∼p ) below 0.5, are not able to eradicate poverty
by taxing away the excess-poverty gaps of non-poor individuals, and the transfer covers

                                                                                            15
                                                 Figure 5: Poverty Eradication capacity Index and Poverty Headcount Index
                                             1




                                                                                                                                           1
   Poverty Eradication Capacity Index, I(P )




                                                                                                 Poverty Eradication Capacity Index, I(P )
  ~p




                                                                                               r
                                   .8




                                                                                                                                 .8
                          .6




                                                                                                                       .6
                                                        EAS
                                                        ECS
                  .4




                                                                                                               .4
                                                        LCN
                                                        MEA
                                                        SAS
         .2




                                                                                                      .2
                                                        SSF
                        0




                                                                                               0
                                                  0     .2       .4     .6       .8   1                                                        0   .2       .4     .6       .8   1
                                                          Poverty Headcount Index                                                                    Poverty Headcount Index




a smaller share of poverty gaps as the index approaches zero. Of the 27 countries in our
sample having an I (P ∼p ) below 0.5, 22 are in Sub-Saharan Africa.

    Figure 5, right panel, shows a fuzzier relationship between level of headcount poverty
and the Poverty Eradication Capacity Index computed following distribution rule (ii), when
the rich are considered responsible for poverty eradication, I (P r ). Our results show that
for poverty levels higher than 30 percent (62 countries in our sample), only four countries
(Cape Verde, Namibia, Nicaragua and South Africa) have an I (P r ) greater than 0.5 (re-
spectively, 0.64, 0.72, 0.78 and 0.96), which means that no marginal tax rate levied on the
excess-aﬄuence gaps of the rich generates enough revenue to close the poverty gaps.

    Figure 6 shows the relation between the two diﬀerent Poverty Eradication Capacity
Indices obtained by applying the underlying two diﬀerent redistributive rules: I (P ∼p ) and
I (P r ). Given the sample of our countries, it seems that countries with I (P r ) ≥ 0.2 are also
those with an I (P ∼p ) ≥ 0.9: countries which are able to eradicate (at least some) poverty,
by sourcing resources from the aﬄuence gaps of their rich individuals, usually can solve
almost all their poverty by sourcing resources from the excess-poverty gaps of non-poor
individuals. Contrarily, wherever I (P ∼p ) ≤ 0.7, hardly any country is able to raise any
resources from those above the aﬄuence line.




                                                                                          16
                     Figure 6: Poverty Eradication Capacity Indices




                                          1
                                                                       EAS




                       Povery Eradication Capacity Index, I(P )
                      r
                                                                       ECS




                                                        .8
                                                                       LCN
                                                                       MEA
                                                                       SAS

                                             .6
                                                                       SSF
                          .2        .4    0




                                                                  0      .2        .4        .6         .8       1
                                                                                                            ~p
                                                                      Povery Eradication Capacity Index, I(P )




5.2   Politics
Even if a country has the arithmetic capacity to eradicate poverty using domestic resources,
it may not be possible to implement redistributive policies because political power is con-
centrated in the hands of a few, rich individuals whose interests contrasts with those of the
poor. Countries with a higher concentration of political inﬂuence need to mobilize larger
coalitions of individuals to counter-weight the political inﬂuence in the hands of the few.

    Take the above example of Namibia and Senegal: the two countries have similar poverty
rates and we showed that the optimal marginal tax rate on the non-poor is about 16 per-
cent in Namibia and 50 percent in Senegal. From the point of view of the arithmetics of
domestic resource mobilization, therefore, Namibia seems better oﬀ than Senegal, since the
tax eﬀort on the non-poor is smaller. Nevertheless, Figure 7 shows that the Political Inﬂu-
ence Concentration Curve of Namibia always lies above that of Senegal: to counterweight
each rich individual in their own countries, poor individuals in Namibia need to coordi-
nate larger coalitions than poor individuals in Senegal. Therefore, although mobilizing
resources in Namibia is easier than in Senegal considering a mere accounting exercise, it is
exactly the opposite when taking into account the political equilibrium in the two countries.

   Figure 8 shows the political inﬂuence concentration index and the poverty headcount


                                                                                     17
                Figure 7: Political Inﬂuence Concentration Curve, example




                                        1
                        .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9
                       Share of individuals from the bottom
                                        .1




                                                                                                Namibia (2004)
                                                                                                Senegal (2011)
                                        0




                                                              0   .1   .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8                .9    1
                                                                       Share of individuals from the top




index for all countries in our sample. There is no clear pattern among the two indices:
political concentration may be very high or very low for each level of poverty. Neverthe-
less, we can see some regional patterns. Almost all countries in Europe and Central Asia
and North Africa and the Middle East are found in the bottom left quadrant: these are
countries where both the poverty level and the political inﬂuence concentration indices are
relatively low with respect to their averages (represented, respectively, by the vertical line
at about 0.35 and the horizontal line right above 0.7 in Figure 8). The largest share of
countries in Sub-Saharan Africa are instead mostly positioned in the upper-right quadrant,
where both the political inﬂuence concentration index and the headcount poverty index
are higher than average. Furthermore, almost all countries in Latin America have lower
poverty rates than average, but higher political inﬂuence concentration.

    One piece of empirical evidence is worth noticing. Although theory deﬁnes the lower
bound for I Π being zero when the political power is equally shared among all individuals
in the society, the data show that almost all countries have a level of Political Inﬂuence
Concentration Index higher than 0.5 (the only two exceptions are and the Czech Republic,
with 0.498 and Ukraine with 0.493).




                                                                                  18
      Figure 8: Political Inﬂuence Concentration Index and Poverty Headcount Index




                                             1
                      Political Influence Concentration Index, I(Π)
                             .6         .7      .8         .9




                                                                                               EAS    ECS      LCN
                                                                                               MEA    SAS      SSF
                                             .5




                                                                      0   .1   .2    .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8        .9   1
                                                                                    Poverty Headcount Index




5.3    Linking Arithmetics with Politics
Figure 9 shows the relationship between the Arithmetics of DRM, as measured by I (P δ )
(with δ = ∼p in the left panel and δ = r in the right panel), and the Politics of DMR,
as measured by I (Π). In particular, the vertical and horizontal lines correspond to the
average value of the two indices among the analyzed countries, dividing the space in four
quadrants. The West quadrants in each ﬁgure correspond to the set of countries where
there is lower capacity to mobilize resources for poverty eradication. The South quadrants
in both ﬁgures, on the other hand, deﬁne the set of countries which are more likely to enact
some redistribution, thanks to a lower concentration of political inﬂuence.

    Among those countries with a poverty eradication capacity close to one, where a small
transfer from the non-poor or the rich would be enough to solve poverty, we expect those
in the South-East quadrant to have more diﬃculties in actually mobilizing resources than
those in the North-East quadrant, due to the higher concentration of political power. This
should be even more striking when, under redistribution rule (ii), only the rich are re-
sponsible for eradicating poverty, since the optimal marginal tax rate would be higher,
and this would foment stronger opposition. When we check the ﬁscal eﬀort of countries in
our sample, we ﬁnd evidence supporting our theoretical hypothesis. Figure 10 shows the
share of tax revenue on GDP for countries in our sample, which we group according to the


                                                                                          19
                                                                             Figure 9: Arithmetics and Politics
                                                1




                                                                                                                                                     1
    Political Influence Concentration Index, I(Π)




                                                                                                         Political Influence Concentration Index, I(Π)
                                       .9




                                                                                                                                            .9
                              .8




                                                                                                                                   .8
                      .7




                                                                                                                           .7
              .6




                                                                                                                   .6
                                                         EAS        ECS        LCN
                                                         MEA        SAS        SSF
   .5




                                                                                                        .5
                                                    0    .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9 1                                                                    0    .1 .2 .3 .4 .5 .6 .7 .8 .9 1
                                                                                              ~p                                                                                                   r
                                                        Povery Eradication Capacity Index, I(P )                                                             Povery Eradication Capacity Index, I(P )




quadrant they belong to in Figure 9. The ﬁgures show that countries with higher capac-
ity (higher poverty eradication capacity index, quadrants ne and se ) are also those where
tax revenue is a larger share of GDP. Moreover, among countries with higher arithmetical
capacity to mobilize resources, countries with lower concentration of political inﬂuence (se
quadrant), have a higher probability of collecting higher taxes than countries with a higher
concentration of political power (ne quadrant), particularly when the arithmetic capacity
of DRM of a country is measured starting from the normative statement that only the rich
are responsible to transfer resources to the poor (Figure 10, right panel).




                                                                                                   20
                       Figure 10: Arithmetics and Politics and Fiscal Eﬀort

    nw                                                         nw




    ne                                                          ne




    se                                                          se




    sw                                                         sw



         0   .05    .1     .15    .2   .25     .3                    0    .05    .1     .15    .2    .25    .3
                   Tax Revenue, %GDP                                            Tax Revenue, %GDP


Note: nw, ne, se, sw refer to the quadrants deﬁned above in Figure 9. Namely, nw and ne refers to
those countries where political inﬂuence concentration (I (Π)) is above average, and the poverty eradication
capacity (I (P ∼p ) in the left panel, I (P r ) in the right panel) is, respectively, below and above average.
Categories sw and se refers instead to those countries where political inﬂuence concentration (I (Π)) is
below average, and the poverty eradication capacity (I (P ∼p ) in the left panel, I (P r ) in the right panel) is,
respectively, below and above average. The ﬁgure shows a box and whiskers plot. The box ranges from the
25th percentile to the 75th percentile. The line in the middle of the box shows the median. The two lines
on either side of the box extend to minimum and maximum values, excluding outliers. The dots indicate
outliers.


6        Conclusion
While the importance of domestic resource mobilization in achieving sustainable develop-
ment is well-established, attention to the subject has been growing in recent years. Indeed,
the focus in international policy-making circles has been shifting towards strengthening the
capacity of governments to mobilize their own resources, and increasingly moving further
away from reliance on foreign aid.

    A country’s ability to mobilize its own resources–expanding the ﬂow of taxes and other
income into the government’s treasuries–has advantages in terms of ownership and ac-
countability. Being able to raise resources to invest in public spending without external
ﬁnancing can increase ex-ante accountability. For example, it encourages countries’ de-
velopment path to reﬂect domestic needs and long-term goals rather than donors’ (often
changing) preferences and priorities. It can also strengthen ex-post accountability and le-
gitimacy. As citizens contribute with taxes, they demand better governments; endowing
governments with more incentives to be responsive to their constituencies, which can con-
tribute to more trusted and eﬀective institutions in a virtuous cycle.

                                                       21
    Countries face two types of constraints to mobilize revenues. One is the actual ability
to raise taxes, which includes both whether resources are available to tax–the arithmetics
of resource mobilization–as well as the capacity to collect those taxes. The second type of
constraint refers to the notion that low ﬁscal revenues are often the result of a political
equilibrium, where the incentives for stakeholders are aligned in such a way that there is a
tendency to revert to such equilibrium. We refer to this as the politics of domestic resource
mobilization. In this way, some countries may not have the resources to ﬁnance their own
development; while the political equilibria in others may be such that, even though re-
sources exist, it is unlikely that reforms will be passed to mobilize them towards reducing
poverty.

    This paper puts forth an accounting exercise to evaluate the feasibility to eradicate
poverty using domestic resources–the arithmetic capacity–by mere redistribution. To as-
sess the capacity of countries to eliminate poverty through redistribution we propose a new
tool: an index of poverty eradication capacity. Our poverty eradication policy considers a
set of transfers from those above the poverty (or aﬄuence) line to those below the poverty
line, aimed at ﬁlling up the shortfalls of poor individuals, without making anybody else
poor and avoiding re-ranking.

    Additionally, we propose a tool to estimate the concentration of political inﬂuence
starting from the distribution of income in the society. The paper argues that the concen-
tration of resources among few individuals can limit the feasibility of eﬀective ﬁscal policies
to eradicate poverty, both in terms of obtaining revenues as well as regarding social spend-
ing. We consider that richer individuals, who would lose out from redistributive reforms,
would oppose their implementation; and that the strength of their political opposition is
proportional to their income. To outweigh this opposition from the top, poorer individuals
(the potential winners from redistributive policies) would need to form a coalition. Coun-
tries where political inﬂuence is more concentrated would need to mobilize larger coalitions
of individuals to counter-balance the political inﬂuence in the hands of the few.

    We apply this methodology, using the most recent data from the World Bank PovcalNet
database for over 120 developing countries. Our results show that many countries do
not have the resources to ﬁnance their own development out of poverty. Moreover, the
countries that have the arithmetic capacity to do so would likely face great resistance
to implement redistributive policies as political power is concentrated among a few rich
individuals whose interests diverge from those of the poor. These results suggest that
domestic resource mobilization, beyond an issue of political will, implies a challenge related
to the concentration of resources among powerful groups and their ability to inﬂuence policy
decisions.



                                              22
References
Ardanaz, M., and C. Scartascini (2011): “Why Don’t We Tax the Rich? Inequality,
 Legislative Malapportionment, and Personal Income Taxation around the World,” IDB
 Working Paper Series IDB-WP-282, Inter-American Development Bank.

Atkinson, A., and A. Brandolini (2001): “Promise and pitfalls in the use of ‘secondary’
 data-sets: income inequality in OECD countries as a case study,” Journal of Economic
 Literature, 39, 771–799.

Atkinson, A., T. PIketty, and E. Saez (2011): “Top Incomes in the Long Run of
 History,” Journal of Economic Literature, 49(1), 3–71.

Besley, T., and T. Persson (2014): “Why Do Developing Countries Tax So Little?,”
 Journal of Economic Perspectives, 28(4), 99–120.

Bhushan, A., and Y. Samy (2015): “Fiscal Capacity and Aid Allocation: Domestic
 Resource Mobilization and Foreign Aid in Low-Income Countries,” Road to addis and
 beyond series, UNRISD Research Note.

Bird, R. M. (2014): “Administrative Dimensions of Tax Reform,” Annals of Economics
  and Finance, 15(2), 269–304.

Boix, C. (2003): Democracy and Redistribution. Cambridge University Press.
   ¨ tigam, D., O. H. Fjeldstad, and M. Moore (eds.) (2008): Taxation and state
Brau
 building in developing countries: Capacity and Consent. Cambridge University Press.
 ´ rdenas, M. (2010): “State Capacity in Latin America,” Economia, 10(2), 1–45.
Ca

Ceriani, L., and P. Verme (2014): “The Income Lever and the Allocation of Aid,” The
 Journal of Development Studies, 50(11), 1510–1522.

Development Committee (2015): “From billions to trillions: transforming development
 ﬁnance post-2015 ﬁnancing for development: multilateral development ﬁnance,” Discus-
 sion paper, prepared jointly by the African Development Bank, the Asian Development
 Bank, the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, the European Invest-
 ment Bank, the Inter-American Development Bank, the International Monetary Fund,
 and the World Bank Group.

Di John, J. (2006): “The Political Economy of Taxation and Tax Reform in Developing
  Countries,” Working Paper Series RP2006/74, World Institute for Development Eco-
  nomic Research (UNU-WIDER).




                                          23
Dykstra, S., B. Dykstra, and J. Sandefur (2014): “We Just Ran Twenty-Three
 Million Queries of the World Bank’s Website,” Working Paper 362, Center for Global
 Development.

Fisman, R., P. Jakiela, S. Kariv, and D. Markovits (2015): “The distributional
  preferences of an elite,” Science, 349(6254).

Gaspar, V., L. Jaramillo, and P. Wingender (2016): “Tax Capacity and Growth:
 Is there a Tipping Point?,” Discussion Paper WP/16/234, IMF Working Paper.

Gilens, M. (2012): Aﬄuence and Inﬂuence: Economic Inequality and Political Power in
 America. Princeton University Press.

Gilens, M., and B. I. Page (2014): “Testing Theories of American Politics: Elites,
 Interest Groups, and Average Citizens,” Perspectives on POlitics, 12(3), 564–581.

Gupta, A. S. (2007): “Determinants of Tax Revenue Eﬀorts in Developing Countries,”
 Working papers, IMF.

Higgins, S., and N. Lustig (2016): “Can a poverty-reducing and progressive tax and
  transfer system hurt the poor?,” Journal of Development Economics, 122, 63 – 75.

Igan, D., and P. Mishra (2011): “Three’s company: Wall Street, Capitol Hill, and K
  Street,” MPRA Paper 44220, University Library of Munich, Germany.

IMF, OECD, UN, and WBG (2016): “Enhancing the Eﬀectiveness of External Support
  in Building Tax Capacity in Developing Countries,” Discussion paper, Prepared for
  Submission to G20 Finance Ministers.

Jensen, A. (2011): “State-Building in Resource-Rich Economies,” Atlantic Journal of
  Economics, 39(2), 171–93.

Karabarbounis, L. (2011): “One dollar, one vote,” The Economic Journal, 121, 621–651.

Kautilya, V. (4th Century BC): The Arthashastra, edited, rearranged, translated and
 introduced by L N Rangarajan. Penguin Books, New Delhi, New York, 1992 edn.

Keen, M. (2012): “Taxation and Development; Again,” IMF Working Papers 12/220,
 International Monetary Fund.

La Porta, R., and A. Shleifer (2014): “Informality and Development,” Journal of
  Economic Perspectives, 28(3), 109–26.

Levi, M. (1988): Of Rule and Revenue. University of California Press, Berkeley and Los
  Angeles, CA.


                                         24
Lind, J. T., and K. Moene (2011): “Miserly Developments,” Journal of Development
  Studies, 47(9), 1332–1352.

Mkandawire, T. (2010): “On Tax Eﬀorts and Colonial Heritage in Africa,” Journal of
 Development Studies, 46(10), 1647–1669.

Moore, M. (2013): “Obstacles to Increasing Tax Revenues in Low Income Countries,”
 Working Paper 15, International Centre for Tax and Development.

Olson, M. (1965): The Logic of Collective Action. Harvard University Press.

Prichard, W., J.-F. Brun, and O. Morrissey (2012): “Donors, Aid and Taxation in
 Developing Countries: An Overview,” Working Paper 6, ICTD.

Ravallion, M. (2010): “Do Poorer Countries Have Less Capacity for Redistribution?,”
 Journal of Globalization and Development, 1(2), 1–29.

Schumpeter, J. A. (1918): Die Krise des Steuerstaates. Zeitfragen aus dem Gebiet der
  Soziologie. reprinted in hickel (1976), 329–379 edn.

Solt, F. (2008): “Economic Inequality and Democratic Political Engagement,” American
  Hournal of Political Science, 52(2), 48–60.

United Nations (2015): “Resolution adopted by the General Assembly on 27 July 2015,”
 A/RES/69/313.

Vazquez-Caro, J., and R. M. Bird (2011): “Benchmarking Tax Administrations in
 Developing Countries: A Systemic Approach,” eJournal of Tax Research, 9(1), 5–37.

World Bank (2017): World Development Report 2017: Governance and the Law. The
 World Bank.




                                          25
Appendix A - List of Tables

                                Table 1: List of countries years

   country                    year         P0            I (P ∼p )   I (P r )   I (Π)
   Albania                    2008         0.04          1.00        0.98       0.63
   Algeria                    1995         0.24          0.97        0.24       0.64
   Angola                     2009         0.67          0.47        0.01       0.75
   Argentina–Urban            2010         0.02          1.00        1.00       0.76
   Armenia                    2010         0.20          0.98        0.63       0.60
   Azerbaijan                 2008         0.03          1.00        0.99       0.63
   Bangladesh                 2010         0.77          0.25        0.00       0.61
   Belarus                    2011         0.00          1.00        1.00       0.50
   Belize                     1999         0.22          0.98        0.93       0.87
   Benin                      2003         0.75          0.30        0.02       0.71
   Bhutan                     2012         0.13          0.99        0.94       0.71
   Bolivia                    2008         0.25          0.98        0.92       0.89
   Bosnia and Herzegovina     2007         0.00          1.00        1.00       0.66
   Botswana                   1994         0.49          0.88        0.29       0.84
   Brazil                     2009         0.11          0.99        0.99       0.88
   Bulgaria                   2007         0.00          1.00        1.00       0.53
   Burkina Faso               2009         0.73          0.38        0.04       0.73
   Burundi                    2006         0.93          0.03        0.00       0.64
   Cambodia                   2009         0.50          0.84        0.11       0.68
   Cameroon                   2007         0.30          0.96        0.39       0.70
   Cape Verde                 2002         0.41          0.93        0.64       0.84
   Central African Republic   2008         0.80          0.20        0.00       0.81
   Chad                       2003         0.83          0.13        0.00       0.71
   Chile                      2009         0.03          1.00        1.00       0.87
   China                      2009         0.27          0.97        0.78       0.77
   China–Rural                2009         0.46          0.88        0.25       0.75
   China–Urban                2009         0.03          1.00        0.99       0.66
   Colombia                   2010         0.16          0.99        0.98       0.89
   Comoros                    2004         0.65          0.63        0.02       0.83
   Congo, Dem. Rep            2006         0.95          0.02        0.00       0.78
   Congo, Rep                 2005         0.74          0.36        0.02       0.81
   Costa Rica                 2009         0.06          1.00        0.99       0.84
   Croatia                    2008         0.00          1.00        1.00       0.64
   Czech Republic             1996         0.00          1.00        1.00       0.50
   Cˆote d’Ivoire             2008         0.46          0.85        0.10       0.73
   Djibouti                   2002         0.41          0.89        0.15       0.72
   Dominican Republic         2010         0.10          1.00        0.99       0.80
   Ecuador                    2010         0.11          0.99        0.98       0.83
   Egypt, Arab Rep            2008         0.15          0.98        0.69       0.57
   El Salvador                2009         0.17          0.98        0.94       0.81
   Estonia                    2004         0.02          1.00        1.00       0.66
   Ethiopia                   2011         0.66          0.49        0.04       0.63
   Fiji                       2009         0.23          0.98        0.85       0.75
   Gabon                      2005         0.20          0.98        0.89       0.75



                                               26
Gambia, The         2003   0.56    0.79   0.15   0.81
Georgia             2010   0.36    0.92   0.22   0.73
Ghana               2006   0.52    0.80   0.09   0.75
Guatemala           2006   0.26    0.98   0.94   0.90
Guinea              2007   0.70    0.39   0.00   0.71
Guinea-Bissau       2002   0.78    0.21   0.00   0.66
Guyana              1998   0.18    0.98   0.91   0.77
Haiti               2001   0.78    0.41   0.08   0.91
Honduras            2009   0.30    0.97   0.90   0.88
Hungary             2007   0.00    1.00   1.00   0.59
India               2010   0.69    0.48   0.04   0.65
India–Rural         2010   0.74    0.31   0.02   0.58
India–Urban         2010   0.58    0.74   0.08   0.72
Indonesia–Rural     2011   0.45    0.87   0.03   0.64
Indonesia–Urban     2011   0.42    0.91   0.31   0.75
Iran, Islamic Rep   2005   0.08    1.00   0.97   0.69
Iraq                2007   0.21    0.97   0.24   0.58
Jamaica             2004   0.05    1.00   1.00   0.79
Jordan              2010   0.02    1.00   1.00   0.66
Kazakhstan          2009   0.01    1.00   0.99   0.55
Kenya               2005   0.67    0.57   0.07   0.80
Kyrgyz Republic     2011   0.22    0.97   0.32   0.62
Lao PDR             2008   0.66    0.56   0.05   0.69
Latvia              2009   0.01    1.00   1.00   0.64
Lesotho             2003   0.62    0.68   0.08   0.85
Liberia             2007   0.95    0.03   0.00   0.69
Lithuania           2008   0.00    1.00   1.00   0.68
Macedonia, FYR      2010   0.09    1.00   0.99   0.75
Madagascar          2010   0.93    0.05   0.00   0.78
Malawi              2010   0.82    0.19   0.02   0.78
Malaysia            2009   0.02    1.00   1.00   0.78
Maldives            2004   0.12    0.99   0.93   0.67
Mali                2010   0.79    0.16   0.00   0.61
Mauritania          2008   0.48    0.84   0.12   0.73
Mexico              2010   0.06    1.00   0.99   0.81
Moldova, Rep        2010   0.04    1.00   0.98   0.61
Montenegro          2010   0.00    1.00   1.00   0.54
Morocco             2007   0.14    0.99   0.94   0.73
Mozambique          2008   0.82    0.16   0.00   0.74
Namibia             2004   0.51    0.92   0.72   0.91
Nepal               2010   0.57    0.69   0.00   0.62
Nicaragua           2005   0.32    0.96   0.79   0.82
Niger               2008   0.75    0.28   0.01   0.65
Nigeria             2011   0.78    0.19   0.00   0.71
Pakistan            2008   0.60    0.66   0.03   0.58
Panama              2010   0.14    0.99   0.98   0.85
Papua New Guinea    1996   0.57    0.81   0.26   0.86
Paraguay            2010   0.13    0.99   0.98   0.87
Peru                2010   0.13    0.99   0.98   0.81
Philippines         2009   0.42    0.92   0.27   0.76



                              27
Poland                    2011   0.00    1.00   1.00   0.61
Romania                   2011   0.02    1.00   0.98   0.51
Russian Federation        2009   0.00    1.00   1.00   0.73
Rwanda                    2011   0.82    0.15   0.00   0.74
Senegal                   2011   0.55    0.75   0.04   0.72
Serbia                    2010   0.01    1.00   1.00   0.56
Seychelles                2007   0.02    1.00   1.00   0.67
Sierra Leone              2011   0.80    0.20   0.00   0.66
Slovak Republic           2009   0.00    1.00   1.00   0.50
Slovenia                  2004   0.00    1.00   1.00   0.58
South Africa              2009   0.31    0.98   0.97   0.93
Sri Lanka                 2010   0.24    0.97   0.73   0.68
St. Lucia                 1995   0.41    0.90   0.20   0.75
Sudan                     2009   0.44    0.84   0.00   0.64
Suriname                  1999   0.27    0.97   0.90   0.86
Swaziland                 2010   0.60    0.76   0.14   0.85
Syrian Arab Republic      2004   0.17    0.99   0.84   0.67
 ao Tom´
S˜               ıncipe
         e and Pr´        2001   0.54    0.74   0.00   0.67
Tajikistan                2009   0.28    0.95   0.02   0.58
Tanzania                  2007   0.88    0.08   0.00   0.69
Thailand                  2010   0.04    1.00   0.99   0.71
Timor-Leste               2007   0.73    0.34   0.01   0.61
Togo                      2011   0.53    0.77   0.01   0.70
Trinidad and Tobago       1992   0.14    0.99   0.93   0.71
Tunisia                   2010   0.04    1.00   0.99   0.66
Turkey                    2010   0.05    1.00   0.99   0.71
Turkmenistan              1998   0.50    0.83   0.08   0.73
Uganda                    2009   0.65    0.59   0.04   0.74
Ukraine                   2010   0.00    1.00   1.00   0.49
Uruguay                   2010   0.01    1.00   1.00   0.78
Venezuela, RB             2006   0.13    0.99   0.95   0.77
Vietnam                   2008   0.43    0.87   0.06   0.66
West Bank and Gaza        2009   0.00    1.00   1.00   0.66
Yemen, Rep                2005   0.47    0.85   0.13   0.67
Zambia                    2010   0.87    0.13   0.01   0.87




                                    28
