                                                WPS8112


Policy Research Working Paper                  8112




           Well Begun, But Aiming Higher
            A Review of Vietnam’s Education Trends
         in the Past 20 Years and Emerging Challenges

                         Hai-Anh H. Dang
                          Paul W. Glewwe




Development Data Group
June 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 8112


  Abstract
  Given its modest position as a lower-middle-income coun-                           and completed years of schooling was due to within-com-
  try, Vietnam stands out from the rest of the world with                            mune individual factors, rather than between-commune
  its remarkable performance on standardized test scores,                            or between-province factors. School-level factors played an
  school enrollment, and completed years of schooling. This                          important, but diminishing, role in determining students’
  paper provides an overview of the factors behind this exem-                        test scores, which was likely caused by a convergence in
  plary performance, from an institutional viewpoint and by                          school quality in the country. The paper further discusses
  analyzing several data sources, some of which have rarely                          a host of challenges for the country—most of which have
  been used. The study finds that Vietnam has significantly                          received insufficient attention to date—such as little school
  increased school enrollment at all school levels in the past                       choice, a low secondary enrollment rate (compared with
  20 years, and has achieved virtually universal primary school                      other Programme for International Student Assessment
  enrollment. Girls’ net enrollment rates caught up with and                         participants), inadequate training for the labor market,
  then overtook those of boys at the secondary level in the                          and the necessity of strategic planning for systemic reforms.
  past decade. Most of the variation in school enrollment



  This paper is a product of the Development Data Group. It is part of a larger effort by the World Bank to provide open
  access to its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions around the world. Policy Research Working
  Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The authors may be contacted at hdang@worldbank.org.




          The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
          issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
          names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
          of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
          its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                        Produced by the Research Support Team
           Well Begun, But Aiming Higher: A Review of Vietnam’s Education Trends
                        in the Past 20 Years and Emerging Challenges


                                 Hai-Anh H. Dang and Paul W. Glewwe*




Key words: education, assessment, enrollment, years of schooling, survey, census, Vietnam

JEL: H0, I2, O1, P3




*
  Dang (hdang@worldbank.org; corresponding author) is an economist with the Survey Unit, Development Data
Group, World Bank and a non-resident senior research fellow with Center for Analysis and Forecasting, Vietnam
Academy of Social Sciences; Glewwe (pglewwe@umn.edu) is professor of economics, Department of Applied
Economics, University of Minnesota. We would like to thank Mai Thi Hong Bo, Francois Bourguignon, Michael
Crawford, Joan DeJaeghere, Harry Patrinos, Lant Pritchett, Michel Welmond, Michael Woolcock, Wei Aun Yap, and
participants at the conference “Enhancing the Quality of Service Delivery” organized at the World Bank Global
Knowledge and Research Hub in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia for useful comments on previous versions. We would also
like to thank Huong Dang for capable research assistance, and the RISE Research Programme for its support.
I. Introduction

    Among developing countries, Vietnam has become known for its performance in education.

Perhaps the most striking aspect of Vietnam’s education is its students’ performance on

international assessments of mathematics and reading skills, relative to other countries at its level

of income—or even with a much higher income. For example, in the 2015 PISA international

assessment of skills of 15 year old students in more than 70 countries and economies, Vietnam’s

scores were much higher than those of almost any developing country, and on par with those of

several “developed” countries, including the U.S. and the U.K. This outstanding performance in

math, reading, and science is shown in Figure 1, which plots countries’ mean test scores against

their (log of) per capita GDP. Vietnam stands out from the overall trends and lies in the upper left

corners of all three graphs, suggesting that it is an outlier from all other countries that participated

in the PISA.1

    An education system may follow an elitist approach, which benefits just a select few rather

than the general public (Bourguignon and Verdier, 2000; Grossman and Kim, 2003). If this held

true for Vietnam, its performance seen above—while perhaps still being impressive—would be

much less fascinating since it would be representative of a small, privileged part of the population.

But remarkably, Vietnam’s high-quality education performance is also accompanied by a higher-

than-average quantity of school achievement. Compared to even a larger sample of other countries

around the world, the mean years of schooling of Vietnam’s adult population is higher than would

be predicted by its per capita income (Figure 2). Furthermore, while data on secondary enrollment




1
 Vietnam’s outstanding performance is not restricted to 2015 alone. Another graph using the PISA test score data in
2012 (Figure 1.1 in Appendix 1) provides qualitatively similar results.
                                                          2
rates are not readily available for the country in a comparative setting (e.g., a cross-country

database such as the World Bank’s WDI database),2 its net primary school enrollment rate is also

above the trend (Figure 3). As will be seen below, the country’s enrollment rates are very close to

100 percent at both the primary and lower secondary levels, and its upper secondary net enrollment

rate increased from 27 percent in the early 1990s to over 70 percent in recent years. This strong

performance naturally raises the questions of what factors lie behind it, and whether this success

can be replicated in other countries.

    We aim in this paper to sketch an overview of these factors, both from an institutional

viewpoint and using micro survey data.3 We do not attempt to provide an in-depth analysis of the

causal relationships between these factors, but rather a broad-brushed picture of Vietnam’s

education system where basic trends are observed to emerge over time. To flesh out these trends,

we also supplement our overview by referring to more detailed studies where it is relevant.

    In particular, we make three contributions to the literature. First, we sketch out the trends in

Vietnam’s performance in education over the last two decades. In contrast with most existing

studies that either analyze shorter time periods, or rely on indicators calculated from second-hand

sources, we offer direct estimates based on nationally representative household survey data

spanning the period 1992-2014. The high quality of the household survey data renders our




2
 We return to more discussion on this point in Section VI.
3
 We investigate the factors that result in the different PISA achievements between Vietnam and other countries in a
separate study (Dang, Glewwe, Lee, and Vu, 2017). We also focus in this paper on studying general education (from
grade 1 to grade 12). For recent collections of studies on higher education in Vietnam, see, for example, Harman,
Hayden, and Pham (2010) and Tran et al. (2014).
                                                          3
estimates more reliable. Indeed, we are unware of any other study that provides such a long-run

analysis of education trends for Vietnam as attempted here.4

    Second, after establishing the trends in Vietnam’s enrollment rates and student learning, we

offer a basic, but intuitive, decomposition of their variation into variation at different levels,

including student, commune, and province levels. We provide this analysis using both household

survey data and the national assessment data for students in grade 5. The richness of the various

data sources that we analyze also comes at some cost of data comparability: the household surveys

are representative of the entire population (but have no test score data), while the Grade 5 national

assessment data are representative of students in that grade only, and these two data sources have

different survey designs. To overcome this obstacle, we focus on the common and comparable

levels (and variables) between the two different data sets, thus offer more consistent analysis that

is relevant for policy. In the context of Vietnam, although the Ministry of Education and Training

(MoET) is the government agency in charge of setting education policies for the country, it is each

province’s Department of Education and Training (DoET) that implements these policies, at times

with varying levels of innovation. Thus the decomposition exercise, albeit simple, offer insights

into the relative importance of the latter (versus household characteristics) in children’s

educational accomplishments.

    Finally, the insights gleaned from the analysis discussed above allow us to identify the

challenges currently faced by Vietnam’s education system, as well as set the stage for further

research. We thus highlight some of the challenges and spell out promising areas of future research.




4
  For example, a recent and comprehensive analysis of education trends over the past two centuries by Lee and Lee
(2016) does not offer estimates for Vietnam.
                                                         4
Furthermore, we implement our analysis by pulling together various data sources that appear not

to have been examined together before. Consequently, as a byproduct, we also provide a data

appendix that offers a brief overview of the available data sources related to education that can be

analyzed for further research. Notably, some of these data sets, such as the primary school census,

appear to have been under-utilized, especially in combination with other data sets.

    We find that Vietnam has significantly increased school enrollment at all school levels in the

past 20 years, with virtually universal school enrollment at the primary level and almost universal

enrollment at the lower secondary level. At the upper secondary level, the enrollment rate among

school-age children remarkably almost tripled in the span of 14 years (from 1992-93 to 2006),

from only about one in four children to almost three out of four children. While girls’ net

enrollment rates were lower than those of boys by 10-15 percentage points in 1992-93, from 2006

onwards the rates for girls have been above those for boys at both the lower and upper secondary

levels. The primary net enrollment rate for ethnic minority groups has steadily caught up with that

for ethnic majority groups, but enrollment gaps persist at the secondary level, especially at the

upper secondary level.

   The majority of the variation in school enrollment and completed years of schooling is due to

variation at the individual level within communes; both variation in average rates across provinces

and variation in average rates across communes within provinces play relatively minor roles.

While school level factors appear to play a major role in determining students’ test scores, this role

seems to have diminished from 2001 to 2007. This was likely caused by a convergence in school

quality within the country.

   Nevertheless, despite Vietnam’s impressive performance, we bring attention to several

remaining challenges. These include limited school choice, low enrollment at the upper secondary
                                                    5
level, inadequate training for the labor market, and a strong need for strategic planning for systemic

reforms.

   The rest of this paper is organized as follows. We describe Vietnam’s education system in the

next section, before discussing the data and analytical framework in Section III. We analyze the

trends and decomposition results for enrollment and learning achievement in Sections IV and V.

Section VI examines current education policy issues and future areas for research, and Section VII

concludes.



II. Overview of Vietnam's Education System

   This section provides an overview of Vietnam’s education system, with a particular focus on

some of its most salient features, including administration, organization and finance, instruction

time, and what we know from the existing studies on the returns to education. We pay particular

attention to the evolution of the system over time.

Administrative System

   Administratively, Vietnam is divided into 63 provinces and centrally-administered cities. One

level lower, and under the administration of these provinces and centrally-administered cities, are

more than 500 rural districts and roughly 100 towns and urban districts. At the next lower level

are roughly 11,000 rural communes, (urban) wards, and town districts (GSO, 2016). At the

commune level, People’s Committees are responsible for mobilizing children for primary and pre-

primary education. Below the commune, village heads and others, such as veterans and party

members, may be involved in educational matters.

   Vietnam’s education system consists of primary education (grades 1-5, starting at age 6), lower

secondary (grades 6-9), and upper-secondary (grades 10-12). There is also pre-primary education
                                                      6
(for ages 3-5), secondary vocational training schools, and diverse types of post-secondary

institutions. In 2015 Vietnam had more than 15,000 primary schools, 10,000 lower-secondary

schools, and 2,400 upper secondary schools (GSO, 2016). The education system is governed and

regulated by government offices that span the central and local levels and, in principle, by parent-

teacher associations and other stakeholder groups.

    The increasing diversity of Vietnam’s education system, combined with the movement toward

a more decentralized administration, has introduced certain complexities in the governance of

education. Sub-nationally, educational administration extends to the province and district level and

is organized under a system of “dual accountability”, according to which educational

administrative agencies are accountable to executive authorities at their particular level of

administration and to higher-level agencies within the education system. Thus, Departments of

Education and Training in each province are accountable to both Provincial People’s Committees

and the national Ministry of Education and Training, while district-level Offices of Education and

Training (OoET) are accountable to district-level people’s committees and their respective

province-level DoET.5

Organization and Finance

    The Vietnamese people have always understood that education and learning are vital for their

well-being and for the fortunes of Vietnam as a whole. Indeed, education has historically been the




5
 Administratively, the Ministry of Education and Training (MoET) in Hanoi retains formal authority over the entire
education system, save those educational institutions (usually vocational, technical, tertiary, and research institutions)
affiliated with other “line” ministries (such as health, construction, and finance). MoET responsibilities include: 1.
Drafting of education planning strategies; 2. Planning and management of the national education budget; 3. Setting
norms regarding human resources; and 4. Formulating laws, policies, ordinances, and instructions. These are approved
by the National Assembly (NA) in accordance with the directives of the Communist Party of Vietnam (CPV). MoET
works with other line ministries to determine investments in education, and plays the leading role in education
planning and in determining the content of curricula (London, 2011).
                                                              7
ladder for upward social mobility for thousands of years (Huu Ngoc, 1996; Tran, 2001). But until

the middle of the 20th century, formal education in Vietnam was reserved for a tiny elite. This

changed in the context of Vietnam’s anti-colonial struggle and post-colonial state building;

education, and schooling in particular, became a national imperative. During the 1950s and 1960s,

the Communist Party achieved massive increases in literacy and in access to education in the

northern half of the country, even amid conditions of total war. Education, and indeed most other

institutional spheres, were organized around mass mobilization campaigns. By the 1970s and the

1980s, however, social mobilization and threadbare fiscal foundations presented basic obstacles to

the promotion of schooling in both the north and the south of the now-unified country. Despite

statistically impressive achievements with respect to enrollment, an acute fiscal crisis in Vietnam’s

planned economy severely undermined the education system’s day to day functioning.

   Vietnam’s education system saw sizeable declines in enrollment in the late 1980s and early

1990s, especially at the secondary level, owing to both the poor state of schooling and incentives

for households to use their children’s labor after the “Đổi Mới” reforms (starting in 1986) provided

rural households with individual plots of land. In many places teachers went months without basic

pay, leading most to seek additional employment and many to leave the education sector

altogether. In response, Vietnamese authorities, schools, and households increasingly began to

finance education through a complex mix of state subsidies combined with formal and informal

payments from households. By the mid-1990s, when Vietnam’s state finances were recovering,

political leaders sought to stabilize education sector finance and achieved this objective, with

timely support from international donors and ongoing support from millions of Vietnamese

households.



                                                   8
   Starting around 1990, Vietnam entered a period of rapid growth, with annual GDP growth

between 5 to 7 percent. During this period, Vietnam’s government invested in education

aggressively even as household payments continued to play a central role in education finance. By

the late 1990s, enrollment rates in primary and secondary education had fully returned to levels

attained in the mid 1980s, and since then Vietnam has seen continued gains in enrollment at all

levels. This will be discussed in more detail below.

   The finance and delivery of education in Vietnam occurs through a complex variety of modes,

including both public and several varieties of private (referred to as “non-public” in Vietnam)

education. Almost all primary schools and lower-secondary schools are entirely state-managed and

are thus labeled “public.” Yet at the upper-secondary levels there are both “public” and “non-

public” schools, the latter of which account for 15 percent of all upper-secondary schools in the

country (MoET, 2013). The number of “non-public” schools – either “people-founded” (dân lập)

schools, for which the state may provide land or subsidies, or self-sufficient private schools – is

increasing, especially in urban areas.

   The finance of public education rests on both government subsidies and other payment sources.

Virtually all “public” primary and lower-secondary schools function on the basis of formal and

informal payments. Despite central government norms, the manner in which primary education is

financed varies across provinces and districts, and even within districts. These payments, which

are made by parents, depend on the funding practices of province- and district-level authorities

and they also vary by schools. Indeed, variation in arrangements governing finance can sometimes

be observed even across classes within the same school, even for classes at the same grade level.

   In lower- and upper-secondary education, modes of education provision and finance are even

more varied, and there has been particular movement toward diversification in upper-secondary
                                                  9
education to expand the role of “non-public” schools. Again, however, the terms “public” and

“non-public” must be treated with caution. Across all forms of secondary education, education

payments comprise a mix of formal and (sometimes opaque) informal payments, and “extra study”

(private tutoring) is pervasive (Dang, 2013). Generally, the size of payments increases with the

level of education. A further layer of complexity is the diversity found across and within public

schools with respect to curriculum, as is exemplified by the phenomenon of “high quality”

alongside “normal” classrooms in the same public schools.

Instruction Time

    In 2013, about 50 percent of primary schools were providing “full day” (6 hours) instruction;

the other 50 percent received only “half day” (3.5 hours) instruction, with schools usually

operating two shifts. Extension of “full-day” schooling to poorer localities has proceeded slowly,

which raises potentially major concerns for efforts at system-wide reforms; why it has not yet been

fully implemented is a policy challenge that needs further examination.

    That Vietnam has one of the shortest school days, and one of the shortest school years, in the

world is somewhat misleading. In most areas – even rural areas – parents send their primary and

secondary age children to varying amounts of “extra study” classes.6 As seen in Table 1.1 in

Appendix 1, this phenomenon is not a new one; it dates back to at least the late 1990s, and possibly

even earlier. It decreased in 2002, but has been increasing over time. Given the small share (and

largely urban existence) of the private education sector in Vietnam, private tutoring arguably

represents households’ best substitute for private education (Dang and Rogers, 2016), since




6
  These classes are referred to in the literature under various other names such as “shadow education” or
“supplementary education” (Bray and Lykins, 2012). See Dang and Rogers (2008) for an overview of the private
tutoring phenomenon around the world.
                                                      10
households have been observed to be more willing to spend on education as their incomes rise

(Glewwe and Patrinos, 1999). The time and resources devoted to this activity and the ways it is

organized and/or regulated also vary across provinces. In addition to variation in the availablity of

“full-day schooling,” the high prevalence of extra study has raised equity concerns because poorer

families may not be able to afford extra study classes (Dang, 2007, 2008). Even so, and despite its

cost, extra study continues to be regarded as essential to success, perhaps partly owing to fear of

discrimination and stigma from teachers or peers. However, the value of the material typically

taught in “extra study” has recently been called into question (World Bank, 2014).

Beneficial Impacts of Education

   Education has long been known to be indispensable in raising human capital value and wages

(Becker, 1962). This is generally true for the specific context of Vietnam, where returns to

education were observed to be increasing after Đổi Mới reforms (Liu, 2006; Oostendorp and Doan,

2013; Sakellariou and Fang, 2014). In particular, these returns have become higher for the poor

over time, which indicates that policies to help the rural poor improve their education may help

reduce the urban-rural divide in inequality (Nguyen et al., 2007; Le and Booth, 2014). More and

higher-quality education also helps to narrow the gap in inequality between ethnic minority and

ethnic majority groups (Dang, 2012; Nguyen et al., in press). Higher education levels also result

in larger wage premiums, especially for workers in state-owned firms (Imbert, 2012; Phan and

Coxhead, 2013) or foreign firms (Fukase, 2014).

   Furthermore, some indirect benefits of education are observed as well. For example, child labor

can have negative and long-term effects on health outcomes (O’Donnell et al., 2005) and school

attainment (Beegle, Dehejia, and Gatti, 2009); as such, keeping a child in school longer can have

a positive effect on these outcomes. Education can also create room for personal emancipation and
                                                   11
improves social equity for women (Muller, 2007), which may be particularly relevant in a society

where Confucian influence is still dominant.7



III. Data and Analytical Framework

         Vietnam is fortunate in that there are many data sources that can be used to track its

performance in education over the past 25 years and to investigate the possible causes of that

performance. This section begins by describing the data available for Vietnam from 1990 to 2014,

and then presents a methodology for decomposing the variation in enrollment rates and test scores

into province level factors, community level factors, and individual level factors.

III.1. Data

    This paper uses three main sources of survey data, all of which are nationally representative

surveys, to assess Vietnam’s progress in education since 1990. While these data sources offer

much richer information than what we analyze in this paper, we mostly examine trends, using

variables that are comparable across the different data sources, given that our focus is on broad

trends in the education landscape in the past two to three decades. We provide a brief description

of the data below, and offer more information on these and some other related data in the Data

Appendix (Appendix 2).

    The first source of data is the 1992-93 and 1997-98 Vietnam Living Standards Surveys (VLSS)

and the 2002, 2004, 2006, 2008, 2010, 2012 and 2014 Vietnam Household Living Standards

Surveys (VHLSS). The 1992-93 and 1997-98 VLSS data were collected from a random sample




7
 But there is also some evidence that there have been only modest increases in returns to years of education after the
mid-2000s (Doan and Gibson, 2010).
                                                           12
of 4,800 and 6,000 households, respectively. Since 2002, Vietnam’s General Statistical Office

(GSO) has conducted a biennial survey with a larger sample size (at least 9,000 households),

known as the Vietnam Household Living Standards Survey (VHLSS). The VHLSS is similar to

the VLSS surveys and collects data on school enrollment, years of schooling, and expenditures on

schooling similar to the data on these educational outcomes that were collected in the VLSS

surveys. While the VHLSS questionnaire is generally less detailed than the VLSS questionnaire,

the VHLSS has a rotation scheme that collects data in much more detail on selected topics in

different years. For example, the 2006 VHLSS collected an unusually large amount of education

(and health) data. It also administered school questionnaires and collected detailed information on

extra study classes.

    The second source of data is reading and mathematics assessments of learning of

approximately 69,000 and 55,000 Grade 5 students, from 3,660 and 3,840 primary schools, that

were undertaken by Vietnam’s Ministry of Education in 2001 and 2007, respectively.8 Besides

standardized test scores, these school-based assessment surveys collected data on a number of

student and parental characteristics that are similar to the analogous information in the VLSS and

VHLSS data.9 They also collected rich information on teacher (and principal) qualifications and

experience, as well as school infrastructure, which is generally unavailable in the VHLSS data.

    The third source of data is the 2012 and 2015 rounds of the Programme for International

Student Assessment (PISA), which is conducted by the Organization for Economic Cooperation




8
  Assessment data were also collected in 2011 and 2015, but these data have been criticized as unreliable, so the
discussion is limited to the data collected in 2001 and 2007. We will thoroughly assess the reliability of the 2011 and
2015 data in subsequent work.
9
  For presentation purposes, we refer to both the VLSS and the VHLSS surveys as the VHLSS surveys in the rest of
this paper.
                                                            13
and Development (OECD). Vietnam participated in the PISA starting in 2012, when 65 countries

and economies participated, and it participated again in 2015, when the number of participating

countries and economies increased to 72. Slightly more than 5,800 students who were 15 years old

in 2015 from about 190 schools across Vietnam were tested in math, reading, and science using

internationally standardized test questions. Besides student test scores, the PISA also offers rich

information on school infrastructure and characteristics, including school types (i.e., public or

private) and classroom hours. While we analyze the most recent test scores from the 2015 round,

we will also use the 2012 round for some variables that are not available for Vietnam in the 2015

round, such as classroom hours.

   In addition to these main data sources, we also supplement our analysis with data from several

other data sources. These include the World Bank’s World Development Indicators database

(World Bank, 2017a), UNESCO’s WIDE database (UNESCO, 2017), and Vietnam’s primary

school census implemented between 2005 and 2011.

III.2. Analytical Framework

   In addition to reporting descriptive statistics, this paper also uses the data described above to

decompose differences in student educational outcomes into different contributing factors. In

particular, we decompose the variation in school enrollment and education achievement (including

completed years of schooling and test scores) into variation at each of three levels – province,

commune (school), and child (or student) – as follows;

                                         =    +     +                               (1)

   We can then estimate the share of each level in the total variance as      , where l= p, s or i.

Knowing the relative contribution to the total variation in various education outcomes from each

                                                  14
level can help provide appropriate policy advice. For example, if the school level explains a major

share of the total variation, policies focusing on improving schools (rather than, say, policies that

equalize conditions across provinces) would be likely to be more effective at raising educational

outcomes. A useful feature of equation (1) is that it enables us to make comparisons across

different data sets, as long as the education outcome variables and the levels are similar for these

data sets. This is especially relevant to our analysis of the VHLSS data and of the Grade 5

assessments.

   Equation (1) provides the unconditional decomposition of the variation in test scores into level-

aggregated factors. It is also possible to examine the (more disaggregated) conditional correlations

of education outcomes, using the following linear mixed model:

                                    =    + ′           +                              (2)

where       is an education outcome such as school enrollment or test scores for individual i in

commune (or school) s in province p. The vector of variables               represents individual and

household characteristics such as age, gender, ethnicity, household income, urban/rural residence,

and the maximum education level achieved by the household head (i.e., dummy variables

indicating whether the head completed primary school, lower secondary school, upper secondary

school, or college and/or above). In particular,       + ′   represents the fixed portion of the model

that provides an overall regression line; this in turn produces the population average for the

education outcome for the population with the characteristics Zisp.

   In a similar spirit to equation (1), the variance of the random effects portion of the model in

equation (2) can be written out as follows

                                    =     +        +                                  (3)


                                                       15
     The three terms on the right hand side of equation (3) represent the variances of the random

effects at the province, commune, and child level, respectively, which are the sources of variation

to the overall regression line that are contributed by unobserved factors at each of these levels.

Alternatively, equation (3) can also be interpreted as the conditional version of equation (1), where

after controlling for         the remaining variation in test scores are decomposed into factors at the

province, school, and student levels.

     The linear mixed model presented in equation (2) offers several useful properties. First, its

interpretation is straightforward since the associated relationship of the estimated coefficients on

the fixed portion (i.e. the portion associated with the observable variables) can then be read off of

the regression results just as with the standard OLS regression. Second, it is a generalized version

of the commonly used random effects model in econometrics.10 Thus, it is easy to generalize

equation (2) to allow for contributions to education achievement from different levels of random

effects, both conceptually and practically. In particular, the standard linear random effects model

only offers two levels of random effects, but equation (2) offers three levels and can be readily

extended to incorporate additional levels such as the regional level. In addition, it is also more

straightforward to decompose the variations in education achievement into different components

due to the fixed portion or the random portion of the model.



IV. Trends and Patterns in Enrollment and Years of Completed Schooling since 1990




10
   Note that if there are only two levels of unobserved factors in this model (for example, one at the individual level
and the other at the commune level), equation (2) is equivalent to the standard (commune) random effects model
commonly used in econometrics. Equations (1) and (2) can also be extended to allow for more complicated covariance
structures, but we do not explore these further in this paper. See, for example, Skrondal and Rabe-Hesketh (2004) for
a comprehensive treatment of hierarchical (multilevel) modeling.
                                                            16
IV.1. Trends in School Enrollment

     Since the early 1990s, enrollment rates have increased at both the primary and secondary

levels, as shown in Table 1. (All figures in this table were calculated using the VHLSS data sets).

More specifically, the net primary enrollment rate in Vietnam increased from 85.6 percent in 1992-

93 to 93.7 percent in 1997-87 and then gradually increased to 98.0 percent by 2014.11 Thus

virtually all children of primary school age are enrolled (which limits variation by subgroups, as

discussed below).

     The lower secondary net enrollment rate also increased steadily over this time period, from

72.3 percent in 1992-93, to 86.4 percent in 1997-98, and then more gradually increasing to 94.8

percent in 2014. Thus about 95 percent of children of lower secondary school age are currently

enrolled in lower secondary school, although as discussed below there is some variation by socio-

economic subgroups.

     Finally, the increase in enrollment at the upper secondary level since the early 1990s is nothing

less than dramatic. In 1992-93 the net enrollment rate was only 27.2 percent, but only five years

later (1997-98) it had virtually doubled to 53.2 percent. By 2002 it had increased to 63.1 percent,

and then it reached 73.4 percent in 2006 and has stayed at about that level up until 2014. Thus in

the span of 14 years (from 1992-93 to 2006) the situation improved from only about one in four

children of upper secondary school age (15-17 years old) enrolled in that level of schooling to

almost three out of four children.




11
  The net enrollment rate for any level of education is the number of children enrolled in that level of education who
are in the age range associated with that level (e.g. ages 11-14 for the lower secondary level in Vietnam) divided by
the number of all children in that age range. By definition this rate, expressed in percentage terms, cannot exceed
100%. In contrast, gross enrollment rates include all children enrolled in a given level regardless of their age and thus
can exceed 100% (if, for example, some “overage” children are also enrolled in that level of education).
                                                             17
   Given this increase in the “flow” of educated citizens, the “stock” of education for the adult

population has steadily increased. This is most dramatic for adults age 18-25, for whom the

average years of schooling increased from 7.6 in 1992-93 to 10.5 in 2014, a gain of about three

years of schooling over a period of a little over 20 years. For adults between ages 26 and 65, the

stock of education grew more slowly, from 6.5 years in 1992-93 to 8.4 years in 2014, due to the

fact that about half of the individuals in this age group in 1992-93 were still in this age group in

2014 and so their stock of education did not change at all.

IV.2. Variation in Enrollment Rates by Gender and Ethnicity

   The trends in enrollment rates discussed above are averages for the entire population, and so

more can be learned by disaggregating by various socio-economic groups. To begin, Figure 4

shows trends over time disaggregated by gender. At the primary level, there are virtually no

differences, given the high net enrollment rates that are now very close to 100 percent. Yet at the

lower and upper secondary levels there is some variation. For both of these levels girls’ net

enrollment rates were lower than those of boys by 10-15 percentage points in 1992-93, but about

10 years later, in 2004, the girls’ rates had almost caught up to those of boys, and from 2006

onwards the rates for girls have been above those for boys at both the lower and upper secondary

levels. This “reverse gender gap” is very small at the lower secondary level since the overall rate

is getting very close to 100 percent (95 percent in 2014), but at the upper secondary level the gap

is larger and seems to have increased in 2014 to 10 percentage points.




                                                  18
     Another important issue in education in Vietnam is the gap between the ethnic majority groups

Viet (Kinh) and Hoa (which respectively stand for ethnic Vietnamese and ethnic Chinese)12 and

(disadvantaged) ethnic minority groups. The changes in this gap over time are shown in Figure 5.

At the primary level this gap has decreased dramatically since the early 1990s. In particular, in

1992-93 the primary net enrollment rate for ethnic Vietnamese was about 30 percentage points

higher than those of ethnic minorities (90 percent versus 60 percent), but this gap decreases in

almost every subsequent year for which household survey data are available, so that by 2014 the

gap is only 2 percentage points as the net primary enrollment rate is very close to 100 percent.

     Yet at the secondary level the gaps persist. For lower secondary school the gap was about 14

percentage points in 1992-93 (60 percent versus about 74 percent). This gap was reduced to a little

under 10 percentage points by 1997-98 but since then this gap has persisted even as the overall

rate gradually has steadily increased since the turn of the century.

     At the upper secondary level the gap gradually closed from the early 1990s to 2004, but starting

in 2006 the gap markedly increased until about 2010, after which the large gap of about 30

percentage points has held steady. Particularly worrisome is that the increase in the gap since 2004

is almost completely due to decreasing upper secondary enrollment rates among ethnic minorities,

as opposed to being due to increased enrollment of the ethnic majority. This large increase in this

gap in recent years can be an important question for future research.

IV.3. Sources of Variation in Student Enrollment and Years of Schooling




12
  The Hoa ethnic group is usually considered part of the major Viet ethnic group because of their high degree of
assimilation.
                                                        19
   The decomposition described in equation (1) of Section III can be used to understand further

the nature of variation in student enrollment and years of schooling.

   To begin, Panel A in Figure 6 shows, for each year from 2002 to 2014, the decomposition of

variation in net primary school enrollment into three components: variation in the mean net

enrollment rates across provinces (the blue bars, which are at the bottom of the diagram); within-

province variation in the mean enrollment rates at the community level (the maroon bars just above

the blue bars); and within-commune variation in the enrollment status of individual children of

primary school age (the green bars at the top of the figure). The striking finding, which holds for

all years, is that 80-90 percent of the variation is within communes (at the child level), and there

is very little difference in average enrollment rates across provinces or even across communes

within provinces. Moreover, what little variation there is at the province and commune level seems

to decrease over time. This is not particularly surprising as the overall net enrollment rate gets

closer to 100 percent; the few children who are still not enrolled are spread relatively evenly across

provinces and communes within provinces.

   A similar finding holds for the secondary enrollment rate, for which the decomposition results

are shown in Panel B of Figure 6. (Note that these results combine lower and upper secondary

school.) Again, about 80 percent of more of the variation in (net) secondary school enrollment is

due to variation at the individual level within communes; variation in average rates across

provinces, or in average rates across communes within provinces, plays a relatively minor role.

The one difference, relative to the findings for primary schools, is that there is no obvious change

over time in the patterns found in this decomposition.

   Ultimately, years of schooling of adults may be of more importance than enrollment rates of

school-age children, so Panel A of Figure 7 examines the variance decomposition of years of
                                                   20
schooling of adults age 15 to 25. While it is still the case that more than half of the variation occurs

at the individual level, variation across communes within provinces plays a sizeable role,

accounting for roughly 25 percent of the variation. Variation in mean years of schooling across

provinces, on the other hand, contributes only about 10 percent of the total variation and that

contribution is slowly decreasing over time.13

IV.4. Decomposition into Household and Community Characteristics

     This subsection presents estimates of the explanatory power of observed factors associated

with primary and secondary school enrollment, and years of schooling attained for individuals age

15-25, using nine household surveys that cover the time period from 1992-93 to 2014. That is,

this subsection presents estimates of β in equation (2). The focus here is on how the relationship

between these variables and enrollment or years of schooling attained has changed over time. As

earlier discussed, a major share of the variation in education outcomes is explained at the individual

(or household) level. Thus this subsection will dive deeper into some of the key individual-level

variables that can help further break down these variations.

     Table 2 presents estimates of the linear mixed models of enrollment for children of primary

school age, that is children age 6-10 years old.14 In 1992-93, the following variables had strong

predictive power: age (and its square), ethnic minority status, household per capita expenditures

(which can be interpreted as an income or wealth effect), and the level of education of the head of

household (the omitted category being not completing primary education). The overall trend in




13
   Estimation results for the conditional variance (using equation (3)) point to even stronger variation at the individual
level within communes but are qualitatively similar. These results are shown in Figures 1.2 and 1.3 in Appendix 1,
which respectively correspond to Figures 6 and 7.
14
   These are linear probability model estimates, which are generally similar to probit and logit estimates and are easier
to interpret.
                                                             21
Table 2 is that these variables have less predictive power over time, and some lose statistical

significance. For example, the coefficients on age and its square in 2014 are only about one-fourth

or one-fifth of the size in 1992-93. Also, ethnic minority status becomes statistically insignificant,

and the point estimate switches from negative to slightly (and insignificantly) positive. The impact

of per capita expenditures also decreases to about one-third of its size in the 1992-93 survey,

although it increases somewhat from 2012 to 2014. Finally, in 2014 only one of the four education

level variables retains statistical significance, and the coefficient on that variable (for lower

secondary education), is only a little more than one-tenth of what it was in 1992-93.

     The process underlying the reduction in the explanatory power of the variables in Table 2 is

that the primary net enrollment rate is approaching 100 percent, as seen in Table 1, so there is less

and less variation over time for these variables to explain. Figure 5 showed how the rates for

ethnic minority and non-minority students are becoming more equal over time, which explains the

reduction in the size of the associated coefficient over time in Table 2 and its loss of statistical

significance.

     A similar pattern is seen for some, but not all, variables in the estimates shown in Table 3 of

the factors associated with enrollment in secondary school for children age 11-17, the age range

corresponding to that level of education.15 For example the estimated coefficient for households’

per capita expenditures falls from about 15.8 in 1992-93 to 9.9 in 2014, a decline of almost 40

percent. Similarly, the influence of parental education declines, but still retains statistical




15
   We present estimation results for the secondary level to keep a reasonable sample size, but we also provide
estimation results separately for the lower secondary level and the upper secondary level in Tables 1.2 and 1.3 in
Appendix 1.
                                                         22
significance; for example the coefficient on completing upper secondary school declines from 27.1

to 17.4.

     Perhaps the most interesting change over time in the factors associated with secondary

education is that, controlling for other factors, the situation has changed from one where boys were

more likely to be enrolled than girls (from 1992-93 to 2004) to one where girls are more likely to

be enrolled than boys (starting in 2006). This is not surprising given the patterns seen in Figure 4.

Overall, lower secondary enrollment rates, are getting closer to 100 percent and so many

explanatory variables have a diminished effect, although none loses statistical significance since

there is still a large amount of variation to explain.16

     Finally, Table 4 examines the factors associated with years of schooling, and how they have

changed over time, for individuals age 15-25 years old (most of whom had already finished their

schooling). Except for a temporary reversal in sign in 1998, the influence of age does not show

any particular change over time. In contrast, the reversal from favoring boys and men to favoring

girls and women is found, just as in Table 3 (although there is a lag since years of schooling is a

“stock” variable, not a “flow” variable and thus it take longer to change over time). Differences

by ethnic minority status fluctuate over time with no long-term trend, although there was a

temporary drop in predictive power in 2004 and 2006.




16
  Estimation results for the lower secondary school level, shown in Table 1.2, are rather similar. But estimation results
for the upper secondary level, shown in Table 1.3, are somewhat different from those in Table 3. First, age and its
square are mostly statistically insignificant throughout the time period. Second, the association with per capita
expenditures does not diminish over time. Third, the explanatory power of parental education does not diminish over
time, and if anything it increases over time. The one similarity is that while boys were favored in the earlier years,
starting in 2006 girls are favored. Note that the finding that the explanatory power of many variables does not diminish
over time reflects in part the fact that, unlike at the primary and lower secondary level, upper secondary enrollment
rates are not approaching 100 percent. Also note that to some extent, our results on school enrolment are related to
the issue of school dropout. However, a full investigation of the latter would require panel data for students, which we
will leave for future research.
                                                             23
    From the point of view of equity, the changes over time in the associations of household per

capita expenditures and the education level of the head of the household seem to move in opposite

directions. In particular, the impact of (the log of) per capita expenditures increases rather

dramatically from 1992-93 to 2004, increasing from 1.01 to 1.85, but since that time it has

decreased somewhat to 1.42 in 2014. This is somewhat disappointing in terms of reducing

inequalities in educational outcomes. On a more positive note, the influence of parental education

has dropped dramatically over time, especially from 1992-93 to 2002, so that its influence since

about 2002 is less than half of what it was in 1992-93.



V. Trends and Patterns in Learning/Achievement since 2000

V.1. Trends in Learning/Achievement

    While Vietnam’s performance in attaining high levels of school enrollment and high completed

years of schooling have attracted considerable attention, even more attention has been given to its

performance in terms of student learning as measured by test scores, especially on the 2012 and

2015 PISA assessments. There is relatively little information available on trends in student

learning over time, but there is some information on trends since 2000, and that is discussed in this

section. The main source of information on student performance over time in Vietnam is that

country’s assessments of Vietnamese language and math skills of grade 5 students in 2001 and

2007, which were conducted by Vietnam’s Ministry of Education and Training (MoET).17




17
   There is also a small amount of data comparable over time from the Young Lives study. More specifically, there
are three mathematics questions that were used on the Older Cohort when they were 12 years old in 2006 and on the
Younger Cohort when they were 12 years old in 2013. The percentage of questions answered correctly by 12 year
olds, averaged over the three questions, was 80.5% in 2006 and 83.2% in 2013. This increase in learning over time is
consistent with the Grade 5 assessment data from 2001 to 2007, as seen in Table 6.
                                                          24
   Table 5 shows the results from the Grade 5 assessment data. Note that the test scores have

been normalized so that the mean is approximately zero and the standard deviation is

approximately one for the 2001 test scores, and the 2007 test scores are standardized by the

distribution of 2001 test scores. For Vietnamese language skills, the test scores of grade 5 students

increased by 0.22 standard deviations of the distribution of test scores in 2001 in the six years

between 2001 and 2007. For mathematics, the increases were almost twice as high, an increase of

0.40 standard deviations. These are very large increases over only six years. Note that the data

from Table 1 show that the primary school enrollment rate increased slightly, from about 93

percent in 2002 to about 96 percent 2006 and 2008, over the time period covered by these two

Grade 5 assessments. Presumably the additional students who were enrolled in 2007 were

relatively weak students, whose enrollment would lower test scores, not raise them. So this

increase in learning may be slightly underestimated.

V.2. Decomposition into Household, School and Community Characteristics

   Panels B and C of Figure 7 decompose the overall variation in the Grade 5 assessment test

scores into variation across provinces (dark blue bar), variation across schools within provinces

(maroon bar), and variation across students within schools, separately by year and by test (math or

Vietnamese). As with years of schooling and enrollment rates, variation in mean test scores across

provinces plays little role, about 10-15 percent.       However, variation across schools within

provinces is quite large in 2001 for both tests, accounting for about 40-50 percent of the overall

variation. Finally, variation across students within schools is somewhat less than 50 percent of

total variation in 2001, but by 2007 this had increased to almost 60 percent. Thus school level




                                                   25
factors appear to play a major role in determining students’ test scores, but this role seems to be

diminishing over time, at least from 2001 to 2007.18

     One possible explanation for this decreased role of schools is that there may be a convergence

in school quality within the country. Indeed, the school census data that were collected from 2005

to 2011 provide some supportive evidence for this hypothesis. Figure 8 shows that the percentage

of schools that meet national standards of quality has steadily increased over this time period, from

about 13 percent in 2005 to almost 25 percent in 2011. This also concurs with a recent study that

examined the Young Lives data (Rolleston and Krutikova, 2014), which finds that disadvantaged

students receive relatively equitable access to school quality. This study also observes that

differences at the student level are relatively large where other household characteristics are

considered, such as the number of hours of instruction received, including through private tutoring,

and other learning resources, including computers, the internet, and books other than textbooks.

     Finally, Table 6 examines the explanatory power of some variables for test scores in the Grade

5 assessment data. There are some changes over time in the explanatory power of variables that

are similar to the changes seen in enrollment rates in Tables 2 and 3. In particular, girls performed

less well than boys on the mathematics test in 2001, but by 2007 they outperformed boys. For the

reading test girls outperform boys in both years. However, in contrast to Tables 2 and 3, the role

played by parental education seems to have increased over time, which could reduce equity in

students’ education outcomes. Finally, two additional worrisome trends that stand in contrast to




18
  This result is consistent with those provided by Nguyen and Griffin (2010), who focus on analyzing the 2007 Grade
5 assessment.
                                                          26
the findings in Tables 2 and 3 are the increased gap between ethnic majority and ethnic minority

students over time, and the stronger explanatory power of wealth over time.



VI. Further Reflections on Current Education Policy Issues in Vietnam

       We provide some further reflections on some current issues with the Vietnamese education

system in this section, particularly in comparison with other contexts.



Classroom Hours and Private-Public Partnerships in Education

       As impressive as Vietnam’s education performance has been, there are areas in which its

education system is deemed to be underperforming. One key area is that, in many primary schools,

the school day is very short. Our calculation using the Primary School Census database suggests

that more than half of all primary students in Vietnam attended classes with 5 half-day sessions

per week in the school year 2011-12. Extension of “full-day” schooling to poorer localities has

proceeded slowly, which raises potentially major equity concerns. This shortage of instruction time

could result in increased household investment in private tutoring classes for their children, as

discussed earlier. Figure 9 provides further comparative evidence by plotting the number of

average tutoring hours against the number of average classroom hours, both per week, for all

countries that participate in the 2012 PISA.19 Two observations based on this figure are of

particular importance. First, more classroom hours are generally associated with fewer tutoring

hours. This global trend is also supported by recent evidence from urban China that increased

public spending on basic education is associated with significant reductions in household spending




19
     We show data from the 2012 PISA since there are no data on classroom hours for Vietnam in the 2015 PISA.
                                                           27
on private tutoring (Yuan and Zhang, 2015). Second, Vietnam ranks around the middle of the PISA

sample for the number of classroom hours in language, math, and science (i.e., 10 hours), but it is

an extreme outlier in terms of tutoring hours; its six hours of tutoring per week is three times higher

than the expected number of tutoring hours on the trend line.

   These disparities between “full-day” and “half-day” in access to (high-quality) education could

well be responsible for the learning gaps across different socioeconomic groups (World Bank,

2012a), some of which appear to be increasing over time (e.g. the gap between ethnic minority and

ethnic majority students in learning, as measured by test scores). Clearly, one solution to this issue

is to continue the drive to extend school hours, or the number of schools that offer full-day

schooling. This appears to be the long-term and most desirable solution.

   However, given the typical rigid public education system (at least in the short-run), another

solution is to better mobilize resources from the private sector to develop private-public

partnerships in education. There are multiple advantages of this approach, including more

competition in the education market, flexible arrangements, and more options for the government

to improve education quality (Patrinos, Barreira-Osorio, and Guaqueta, 2009). Indeed, as

discussed earlier, private education is a small component of the education system in Vietnam,

especially in rural areas, and private tutoring is the only—albeit second-best—alternative available

to the majority of Vietnamese households. In fact, it is argued to be the only choice variable for

maximizing a rural household’s utility function regarding their children’s education (Dang and

Rogers, 2016).

    Thus, expanding education choices (e.g., through more incentives to nurture the growth of the

private sector in education) can help better satisfy household demand for education, which is

revealed by the frequent use of private tutoring. This in turns can lead to more efficient allocation
                                                    28
and development of human resources, which was observed to have occurred in other developing

countries, such as Colombia (Angrist et al., 2006) and India (Muralidharan and Sundararaman,

2015). (But also note that a recent review by Urquiola (2016) finds mixed effects of private schools

in other contexts, which suggests that these effects may be context-specific and no conclusive

evidence has been reached yet on the impacts of private school versus public school in general.)



Quantity versus Quality of Education

     Given its income level, Vietnam has achieved better-than-average net primary school

enrollment (Figure 2) as well as years of schooling (Figure 3) compared to other countries. Its net

secondary school enrollment rates are also strong and hover slightly more than 90 percent and 70

percent respectively at the lower secondary level and upper secondary level (Table 1). These

compare favorably with an average net secondary enrollment rate of 70 percent for 142 countries

at different income levels in the WDI database for the period 2010-2015 (our calculations).

     Nevertheless, when we plot test scores against the enrollment rate for the 15-year-old

population for the PISA data (Figure 10), Vietnam is also an outlier for enrollment for the sample

of 72 countries and economies in the PISA.20 In fact, Vietnam has the lowest enrollment

(“coverage”) rate in the PISA sample, which clearly stands out from the global trend of improving




20
  Enrollment rate is defined as the coverage rate of the PISA sample out of the 15-year-old population in each country
(OECD, 2016). The difference between the PISA enrollment rate and those in Table 1 can perhaps be caused by the
different sample designs between the VHLSS and the PISA. In particular, the PISA provides nationally representative
data for the 15-year-olds who are in school, while the VHLSS provides nationally representative data for households
at the province level (or higher). Vietnam also has one of the lowest enrollment rate in the 2012 PISA. We plan to
further explore these differences in subsequent work (e.g., Dang, Glewwe, Lee, and Vu, 2017).
                                                           29
both the quantity and quality of education (i.e., the fitted line slopes upward suggesting a positive

relationship between enrollment and test scores).21

     A question then naturally arises. Moving forward, given its resource constraints (as also a

country with a relatively low level of GDP per capita) should Vietnam then focus more on

improving its quantity of education (e.g., more enrollment) or its quality of education (e.g., better

test scores)? While there may be concerns about a trade-off between the quantity of education and

the quality of education, there are instances where no such trade-off occurred in developing and

richer countries alike. For example, Duflo (2001) finds that a large-scale school construction

program in Indonesia helped increase both enrollment rates and wages. An expansion of the

independent-school sector from a strong monopoly of public schools was also found to improve

average performance at the end of compulsory school as well as long-run educational outcomes in

Sweden (Böhlmark and Lindahl, 2015).



Skills for the Labor Market

     There are also concerns about the content of the curriculum and the subsequent skills learned.

A recent employer survey suggests that Vietnamese graduates have strong academic skills, but

lack crucial work skills; for example, between 70 and 80 percent of graduates do not have the

required skill sets for professional or technical high-paying jobs (World Bank, 2014). Indeed, most

schools in Vietnam currently operate in the traditional mode of teacher-centered learning where

students take a passive role in learning (i.e. simply copy down what the teachers write on the




21
  Note that everything else equal, countries’ incomes and more generally their levels of development, are usually
positively correlated with test scores and enrollment/coverage rates, which can result in this positive correlation.
                                                          30
blackboard).22 In addition, many education and political leaders in Vietnam view the current

textbooks and curriculum as out-of-date, given Vietnam’s adoption of a market economy and

embrace of global integration. They would like to shift Vietnam’s primary and secondary

education system from teaching mostly academic knowledge through rote techniques to a greater

emphasis on competencies such as critical thinking and interpersonal skills (World Bank and MPI,

2016). Efforts are under way to reform the current textbooks and curriculum, with an aim toward

introducing the new version starting from the school year 2018-19.



Systemic versus Piecemeal Reforms

     A recent approach to education reform proposes that the system as a whole be made coherent

for optimal joint operation, rather than have piecemeal changes be implemented that may not fit

into the overall functioning of the system (Pritchett, 2015; Andrews, Pritchett, and Woolcock,

2017). Seen in this light, the country’s education system has much room for improvement. In

particular, since Vietnam’s GDP in 2010 was comparable to that of the Republic of Korea and less

than half that of Singapore in 1970—also top performing countries in the PISA—these countries

can perhaps provide valuable lessons for Vietnam. Compared to Korea and Singapore, Vietnam’s

education system scores well in terms of service delivery, but it lags behind in strategic planning

and system oversight (World Bank, 2012b), which respectively call for better coordination among




22
  A recent new school model, the VNEN model which is based on the Escuela Nueva model in Colombia, has been
introduced at the primary school level in Vietnam in the past few years. There is some preliminary evidence that the
VNEN model has positive impacts on both cognitive and non-cognitive student outcomes (World Bank, 2017b).
                                                          31
the key stakeholders in the education system (e.g., schools, parents, employers) and efficiency and

equity in funding allocation.23

    The latter issue is highlighted by the complex system of education finance, under which the

cost of schooling may be a hardship for lower income families. Our estimation results show that,

while there is evidence for a steadily weaker household income (wealth) impact on for primary

and secondary school enrollment (Tables 2 and 3), there is, in fact, a stronger household income

impact over time on mean years of schooling and Grade 5 test scores (Tables 4 and 6). This

worrisome trend suggests a widening gap for the latter educational outcomes between poor and

better off households.

    Furthermore, virtually all “public” primary and lower-secondary schools function on the basis

of both formal and informal payments. Despite central government norms, the manner in which

primary education is financed varies across provinces and districts, and even within districts. These

payments, which are made by parents, depend on the funding practices of province- and district-

level authorities and they also vary by schools. Indeed, variation in arrangements governing

finance can sometimes be observed even across grades within the same school, or even for classes

at the same grade level. At the same time, the commune-level and province-level factors account

for an increasing share of the total variation in the education outcomes, from less than 20 percent

for enrollment (Figure 6) to around 40 percent for mean years of schooling and Grade 5 test scores

(Figure 7). These figures can be potentially reduced with the appropriate public policy




23
   Strategic planning also includes articulating a strategic direction and prioritizing a demand-led approach for
development of the workforce, and system oversight includes diversifying pathways for skills acquisition and ensuring
relevant and reliable standards (World Bank, 2012b).
                                                           32
interventions, and more efficient and equitable resource allocation would improve the functioning

of the whole system.



VII. Conclusion

   Vietnam’s high performance in education demonstrates that low and middle income countries

are not necessarily condemned to a “low-level equilibrium” with high enrollment but low student

learning. The question is whether its success can be explained, and more importantly whether it

can be replicated in other developing countries. In particular, the fact that Vietnam has one of the

lowest enrollment rates in the PISA sample does not detract from its outstanding performance, but

rather can contribute to the ongoing policy dialogue for the country’s future trajectories.

   This paper did not attempt to explain Vietnam’s successful performance in education, but it

does provide a launching point for future research to do just that by describing Vietnam’s education

system, using existing data to show trends in Vietnam’s performance in the last 25 years, and by

providing some initial analysis to understand the sources of variation in Vietnam’s enrollment rates

and student learning. It has also pointed out some challenges faced by Vietnam’s education system

that are also worthy of future research. Both types of research will be of interest to anyone

interested in education in developing countries.




                                                   33
References

Andrews, Matt, Lant Pritchett, and Michael Woolcock. 2017. Building State Capability: Evidence,
   Analysis, Action. New York, NY: Oxford University Press.

Angrist, Joshua, Eric Bettinger, and Michael Kremer. 2006. “Long-term Educational
   Consequences of Secondary School Vouchers: Evidence from Administrative Records in
   Colombia”. American Economic Review, 96(3): 847-62.

Attfield, Ian and Binh Thanh Vu. 2013. “A Rising Tide of Primary School Standards—The Role
    of Data Systems in Improving Equitable Access for All to Quality Education in Vietnam”.
    International Journal of Education Development, 33: 74-87.

Becker, Gary S. 1962. "Investment in Human Capital: A Theoretical Analysis." Journal of
   Political Economy, 70(5): 9-49.

Beegle, Kathleen, Rajeev Dehejia, and Roberta Gatti. 2009. “Why Should We Care about Child
   Labor? The Education, Labor Market, and Health Consequences of Child Labor”. Journal of
   Human Resources, 44(4): 871-889.

Böhlmark, Anders and Mikael Lindahl. 2015. Independent Schools and Long-run Educational
   Outcomes: Evidence from Sweden's Large-scale Voucher Reform. Economica, 82: 508–551.

Bourguignon, Francois and Thierry Verdier. 2000. “Oligarchy, Democracy, Inequality and
   Growth”. Journal of Development Economics, 62(2): 285–313.

Bray, Mark and Chad Lykins. 2012. Shadow Education: Private Supplementary Tutoring and Its
   Implications for Policy Makers in Asia. Manila: Asia Development Bank.

Dang, Hai-Anh. 2007. “The Determinants and Impact of Private Tutoring Classes in Vietnam”.
   Economics of Education Review, 26(6): 684-699.

---. 2008. Private Tutoring in Vietnam: An Investigation of its Causes and Impacts with Policy
     Implications. Saarbrucken, Germany: VDM Verlag Dr. Mueller Publishing House.

---. 2012. “Vietnam: A Widening Poverty Gap for Ethnic Minorities”. In Gillette Hall, and Harry
     Patrinos. (Eds.). Indigenous Peoples, Poverty and Development. New York: Cambridge
     University Press.

---. 2013. “Private Tutoring in Vietnam: A Review of Current Issues and Its Major Correlates”. In
     Janice Aurini, Julian Dierkes and Scott Davis. (Eds.) Out of the Shadows: The Global
     Intensification of Supplementary Education. United Kingdom: Emerald Press.




                                                 34
Dang, Hai-Anh and Halsey Rogers. 2008. “The Growing Phenomenon of Private Tutoring: Does
   It Deepen Human Capital, Widen Inequalities, or Waste Resources?” World Bank Research
   Observer, 23(2): 161-200.

---. 2016. “The Decision to Invest in Child Quality over Quantity: Household Size and Household
     Investment in Education in Vietnam”. World Bank Economic Review, 30(1):104-142.

Dang, Hai-Anh, Paul Glewwe, Jongwook Lee, and Khoa Vu. 2017. “What Explains Vietnam’s
   Exceptional Performance in Education Relative to Other Countries? Analysis of the PISA
   Data”. Working paper.

Doan, Tinh and John Gibson. 2012. “Return to Education in Vietnam during the Recent
   Transformation”. International Journal of Education Economics and Development, 3(4): 314–
   329.

Duflo, Esther. 2001. “Schooling and Labor Market Consequences of School Construction in
   Indonesia: Evidence from an Unusual Policy Experiment.” American Economic Review, 91:
   795-813.

Fukase, Emiko. 2014. “Foreign Wage Premium, Gender and Education: Insights from Vietnam
   Household Surveys”. World Economy, 37: 834–855.

General Statistical Office (GSO). 2016. Niên Giám Thống Kê 2015. (Statistical Yearbook of
   Vietnam 2015). http://www.gso.gov.vn/default.aspx?tabid=512&idmid=5&ItemID=16051
   Accessed on April 7, 2017.

Glewwe, Paul and Harry Anthony Patrinos. 1999. “The Role of the Private Sector in Education in
   Vietnam: Evidence from the Vietnam Living Standards Survey”. World Development, 27(5):
   887–902.

Grossman, Herschel I. and Minseong Kim. 2003. “Educational Policy: Egalitarian or Elitist?”
   Economics & Politics, 15: 225–246.

Harman, Grant, Martin Hayden, and Pham Thanh Nghi. (Eds.) 2010. “Reforming Higher
   Education in Vietnam: Challenges and Priorities”. Higher Education Dynamics, 29, 10.

Huu Ngoc. 1996. Sketches for a Portrait of Vietnamese Culture. Hanoi: The Gioi Publisher.

Imbert, Clemen. 2012. “Decomposing the Labor Market Earnings Inequality: The Public and
   Private Sectors in Vietnam, 1993–2006”. World Bank Economic Review, 27(1):55-79.

Le, Thu Huong and Alison L. Booth. 2014. “Inequality in Vietnamese Urban–Rural Living
   Standards, 1993–2006”. Review of Income and Wealth, 60: 862–886.



                                                35
Lee, Jong-wha and Hanol Lee. 2016. Human Capital in the Long Run. Journal of Development
   Economics, 122: 147–169.

Liu, Amy Y. C. 2006. “Changing Wage Structure and Education in Vietnam, 1992–98”.
   Economics of Transition, 14: 681–706.

London, Jonathan D. (Ed.) 2011. Education in Vietnam. Singapore: Institute of Southeast Asian
   Studies.

Ministry of Education and Training. (MoET). 2013. Thống Kê Giáo Dục 2013 (Educational
   Statistics 2013). http://pbc.moet.gov.vn/?page=11.11&view=5251. Accessed on April 7, 2017.

Müller, Tanja R. 2007. “Education and Gender in Revolutionary Societies: Insights from Vietnam,
  Nicaragua, and Eritrea”. Compare: A Journal of Comparative and International Education,
  37(5): 635-650.

Muralidharan, Karthik and Venkatesh Sundararaman. 2015. “The Aggregate Effect of School
  Choice: Evidence from a Two-stage Experiment in India”. Quarterly Journal of Economics,
  130(3): 1011-1066.

Nguyen, Cuc and Patrick Griffin. 2010. “Factors Influencing Student Achievement in Vietnam”.
   Procedia Social and Behavioral Sciences, 2: 1871–1877.

Nguyen, Binh T., James W. Albrecht, Susan B. Vroman, and M. Daniel Westbrook. 2007. “A
   Quantile Regression Decomposition of Urban–Rural Inequality in Vietnam”. Journal of
   Development Economics, 83(2): 466–490.

Nguyen, Hoa-Thi-Minh, Tom Kompas, Trevor Breusch, and Michael B. Ward. (In press).
   “Language, Mixed Communes, and Infrastructure: Sources of Inequality and Ethnic Minorities
   in Vietnam”. World Development.

O’Donnell, Owen, Furio C. Rosati, and Eddy van Doorslaer. 2005. “Health Effects of Child Work:
   Evidence from Rural Vietnam”. Journal of Population Economics, 18: 437–467.

OECD. 2016. PISA 2015 Results (Volume I): Excellence and Equity in Education. Paris:
  Organization of Economic Cooperation and Development.

Oostendorp, Remco H. and Quang Hong Doan. 2013. “Have the Returns to Education Really
   Increased in Vietnam? Wage versus Employment Effect”. Journal of Comparative Economics,
   41: 923–938.

Patrinos, Harry Anthony, Felipe Barrera-Osorio, and Juliana Guaqueta. (2009). The Role and
    Impact of Public-Private Partnerships in Education. Washington, DC: The World Bank.



                                                36
Phan, Diep and Ian Coxhead. 2013. “Long-run Costs of Piecemeal Reform: Wage Inequality and
   Returns to Education in Vietnam.” Journal of Comparative Economics, 41(4): 1106-1122.

Pritchett, Lant. 2015. “Creating Education Systems Coherent for Learning Outcomes: Making the
    Transition from Schooling to Learning”. RISE Programme working paper No. 15/005.

Rolleston, Caine and Sofya Krutikova. 2014. “Equalising Opportunity? School Quality and Home
   Disadvantage in Vietnam”. Oxford Review of Education, 40(1): 112-131.

Sakellariou, Chirs and Zheng Fang. 2014. “The Vietnam Reforms, Change in Wage Inequality and
   the Role of the Minimum Wage”. Economics of Transition, 22: 313–340.

Skrondal, Anders and Sophia Rabe-Hesketh. 2004. Generalized Latent Variable Modelling:
   Multilevel, Longitudinal, and Structural Equation Models. Boca Raton, Florida: Chapman &
   Hall/CRC.

Tran, Ngoc Them. 2001. Tìm về Bản Sắc Văn Hóa Việt Nam. (Discovering the Identity of
   Vietnamese Culture). Ho Chi Minh City, Vietnam: Ho Chi Minh City Publishing House.

Tran, Ly, Simon Marginson, Hoang Do, Quyen Do, Truc Le, Nhai Nguyen, Thao Vu, Thach Pham,
   and Huong Nguyen. 2014. Higher Education in Vietnam: Flexibility, Mobility and Practicality
   in the Global Knowledge Economy. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.

UNESCO. 2017. WIDE database. http://www.education-inequalities.org/. Accessed on April 7,
  2017.

Urquiola, Miguel. 2016. “Competition among Schools: Traditional Public and Private Schools”.
   In E. Hanushek, S. Machin, and L.Woessmann. (Eds). Handbook of the Economics of
   Education. Chapter 4. Amsterdam: Elsevier, 210–237.

World Bank. 2012a. Vietnam High Quality Education for All by 2020. Washington, DC: The
  World Bank.

---. 2012b. Vietnam Workforce Development: SABER Country Report 2012. Washington, DC: The
     World Bank.

---. 2014. Skilling up Vietnam: Preparing the Workforce for a Modern Market Economy. Hanoi:
     The World Bank.

---.     2017a. World Development Indicators database. http://data.worldbank.org/data-
       catalog/world-development-indicators. Accessed on April 7, 2017.

---. 2017b. Enhancing School Quality in Vietnam through Participative and Collaborative
    Learning Vietnam Escuela Nueva Impact Evaluation Study. Washington, DC: The World
    Bank.
                                               37
World Bank and Ministry of Planning and Investment of Vietnam. 2016. Vietnam 2035: Toward
  Prosperity, Creativity, Equity, and Democracy. Washington, DC: The World Bank.

Yuan, Cheng, and Lei Zhang, 2015. Public Education Spending and Private Substitution in Urban
   China. Journal of Development Economics 115, 124–139.




                                               38
Table 1: Net Enrollment Rate and Education Achievement, Vietnam 1992- 2014 (percentage)

                                                                                     Year
                                     1992-93    1997-98       2002       2004        2006         2008      2010         2012      2014
   Net enrolment rate
                   Primary school      85.6       93.7        93.8        95.4        96.3        96.1       96.9        97.3       98.0
          Lower secondary school       72.3       86.4        89.8        92.3        92.4        92.7       92.6        92.2       94.8
          Upper secondary school       27.2       53.2        63.1        70.9        73.4        73.5       71.5        72.0       72.5
   Completed years of schooling
                        Age 18-25      7.6         7.7        8.3          9.0        9.5          9.8       9.9         10.3       10.5
                        Age 26-65      6.5         7.4        7.4          7.6        7.7          7.9       8.0          8.1        8.4
   Note: Enrolment rate is defined as the percentage of children that are in school over the total number of children in the appropriate age
   range. These age ranges are respectively 6-10, 11-14, and 15-17 for primary school, lower secondary and upper secondary school. All
   estimates are weighted with population weights, except for the years 1992-93 where the survey data are self-weighted.




                                                                  39
Table 2: Factors Associated with Primary School Enrollment for Children Age 6-10,
                                Vietnam 1992- 2014
                                  1993          1998          2002        2004         2006         2008         2010          2012         2014
Age                            58.076***    28.989***     35.093***   24.248***    27.036***    25.159***    18.321***     14.175***    13.063***
                                 (6.445)      (6.147)       (3.002)     (3.829)      (4.145)      (4.610)      (3.703)       (3.611)      (3.062)
Age squared                    -3.240***    -1.667***     -1.976***   -1.381***    -1.544***    -1.452***    -1.032***     -0.851***    -0.761***
                                 (0.374)      (0.356)       (0.173)     (0.222)      (0.245)      (0.271)      (0.223)       (0.216)      (0.180)
Female                            0.973        -1.529         0.015      -0.888        0.382       -1.067       -0.318        -0.848       -0.004
                                 (1.175)      (0.978)       (0.449)     (0.739)      (0.552)      (0.724)      (0.679)       (0.677)      (0.693)
Ethnic minority               -16.153***    -8.574***     -5.702***   -6.556***    -3.060***      -2.625*       -0.558         0.336        0.732
                                 (4.080)      (3.178)       (1.580)     (2.061)      (1.172)      (1.370)      (1.027)       (1.159)      (1.079)
Log of per capita expenditure 10.137***      7.008***      5.031***    5.234***     2.900***     3.295***     2.819***     2.544***     3.315***
                                 (1.544)      (1.337)       (0.735)     (1.303)      (0.861)      (0.929)      (0.747)       (0.701)      (0.884)
Urban                             1.432       -2.580*        -0.066   -2.754***       -0.519       0.469        -1.193       -1.000       -0.025
                                 (1.930)      (1.390)       (0.609)     (0.978)      (0.985)      (0.782)      (1.026)       (0.817)      (0.744)
Head completed primary         18.744***    22.720***      3.854***    5.802***     4.745***      2.965**      2.076**     3.607***         0.781
school                           (2.970)      (4.860)       (0.637)     (1.442)      (1.067)      (1.430)      (0.819)       (1.033)      (1.009)
Head completed lower           21.428***    23.797***      3.985***    4.341***     5.278***     4.981***     2.432***     3.673***     2.220***
secondary school                 (3.085)      (4.694)       (0.770)     (1.243)      (0.957)      (1.400)      (0.755)       (0.866)      (0.782)
Head completed upper           22.018***    23.802***      3.226***    4.862***     3.320***     4.215***        1.260     4.015***         0.771
secondary school                 (3.770)      (4.507)       (0.783)     (1.100)      (1.225)      (1.432)      (1.041)       (0.941)      (0.951)
Head had college/ university 20.809***      23.823***       2.459**    3.857***     4.394***      3.342**     2.677***         2.106        0.611
education                        (3.534)      (4.738)       (1.004)     (1.294)      (1.001)      (1.583)      (0.816)       (1.427)      (0.877)
Constant                     -251.609***   -101.370***   -97.899***   -50.939**    -45.243**    -39.594**       -8.601       13.384         9.803
                                (31.641)     (28.664)      (16.751)    (19.929)     (19.495)     (19.987)     (16.378)      (18.538)     (16.222)

lnσp                          1.738***      1.795***     1.377***     1.420***       0.026         0.330       -6.563       0.612*        0.498
lnσs                          1.973***      1.538***     1.971***     2.017***     1.771***      2.001***     1.701***     1.573***     1.213***
lnσi                          3.345***      3.058***     3.111***     2.971***     2.892***      2.887***     2.827***     2.775***     2.689***
Log likelihood                 -15202        -15130       -67218       -17236       -13716        -12140       -12931       -12525       -12280
χ2                               210           112          183          93           118           85           73           53           46

No of provinces                    58            59          61           64          64            64            63            63           63
No of communes                    150            194       2669          2110       1863           1714          1858         1881          1873
No of individuals                3174           3359       14712         3862       3146           2771          3012         2954          2968
Note: *p<0 .1, **p<0.05, ***p<0.01. Robust standard errors clustered at the commune level are in parentheses. Estimates are obtained from a mixed
model with random effects at three levels: province, commune and child.




                                                                      40
Table 3: Factors Associated with Secondary School Enrollment for Children Age 11-17,
                                 Vietnam 1992- 2014
                                   1993       1998           2002       2004       2006       2008       2010       2012       2014
 Age                           -14.420*** 24.744***      11.248*** 13.479*** 11.038*** 10.864*** 13.864*** 12.886*** 21.042***
                                  (5.478)    (4.177)        (2.368)    (3.466)    (2.648)    (3.094)    (3.427)    (3.763)    (4.345)
 Age squared                       0.044   -1.226***      -0.672*** -0.701*** -0.601*** -0.599*** -0.731*** -0.676*** -0.968***
                                  (0.199)    (0.149)        (0.084)    (0.127)    (0.094)    (0.113)    (0.122)    (0.137)    (0.160)
 Female                        -12.542*** -7.700***       -4.043***  -2.301**    2.433**   3.442***   3.684***   2.690***    5.063***
                                  (1.481)    (1.155)        (0.752)    (1.159)    (1.081)    (1.211)    (1.100)    (0.935)    (1.050)
 Ethnic minority                   1.880     4.760*          0.279   4.689***      2.092     -1.619    -3.906*    -4.799**    -2.563
                                  (3.094)    (2.783)        (1.256)    (1.593)    (1.955)    (1.766)    (2.297)    (2.236)    (2.466)
 Log of per capita expenditure 15.802*** 13.599***       17.399*** 14.309*** 13.913*** 11.748*** 10.141*** 12.018*** 9.893***
                                  (1.388)    (1.496)        (0.956)    (1.187)    (1.309)    (1.055)    (1.216)    (1.320)    (1.384)
 Urban                             2.698      0.033         -0.624     -1.816      0.577     -0.239    2.136**    -2.813**    -0.620
                                  (2.121)    (2.734)        (0.925)    (1.330)    (0.985)    (1.204)    (0.939)    (1.207)    (1.545)
 Head completed primary         10.412*** 18.216***       8.076***   7.596***   7.009***   10.668*** 9.840***    10.559*** 10.307***
 school                           (2.673)    (3.578)        (0.753)    (1.508)    (1.307)    (1.653)    (1.806)    (1.809)    (1.707)
 Head completed lower           21.712*** 35.395***      13.208*** 12.930*** 15.359*** 18.038*** 16.798*** 14.389*** 15.309***
 secondary school                 (3.035)    (4.086)        (0.874)    (1.386)    (1.392)    (1.720)    (1.858)    (1.570)    (1.544)
 Head completed upper           27.105*** 44.647***      16.068*** 15.448*** 16.371*** 20.349*** 20.343*** 19.233*** 17.398***
 secondary school                 (3.500)    (4.301)        (1.003)    (1.446)    (1.569)    (1.679)    (1.813)    (1.598)    (1.712)
 Head had college/ university 37.013*** 47.143***        12.102*** 13.041*** 13.348*** 19.470*** 16.926*** 15.590*** 14.972***
 education                        (3.837)    (4.871)        (1.405)    (2.167)    (1.727)    (1.801)    (2.164)    (1.887)    (1.637)
 Constant                      122.912*** -162.839***    -87.643*** -89.112*** -77.111*** -62.737*** -71.206*** -87.862*** -125.342***
                                 (34.832)   (30.643)       (15.335)   (22.688)   (19.107)   (21.271)   (22.421)   (28.124)   (29.169)

 lnσp                          1.696***      1.572***     1.933***     1.755***     1.877***      1.600***     1.623***     1.816***     1.444***
 lnσs                          2.004***      2.035***     2.347***     2.340***     2.384***      2.513***     2.463***     2.496***     2.295***
 lnσi                          3.642***      3.567***     3.541***     3.473***     3.444***      3.432***     3.462***     3.439***     3.409***
 Log likelihood                 -20339        -26556      -118719       -35966       -33146        -29125       -23681       -22041       -19609
 χ2                              3813          1610         1148          703          539           459          567          420          446

 No of provinces                    58            59          61           64          64            64            63            63           63
 No of communes                    150            194        2679         2238       2064           1907          1671         1646          1600
 No of individuals                4006           5307       23781         7278       6736           5918          4789         4471          4017
 Note: *p<0 .1, **p<0.05, ***p<0.01. Robust standard errors clustered at the commune level are in parentheses. Estimates are obtained from a mixed
 model with random effects at three levels: province, commune and child.




                                                                 41
Table 4: Factors Associated with Completed Years of Schooling for Individuals Age 15-25,
                                  Vietnam 1992- 2014
                                     1993        1998           2002     2004       2006        2008      2010       2012       2014
   Age                             0.895***    -0.342**      1.267***  1.488***   1.615***    1.512***  1.611***   1.529***   1.214***
                                    (0.168)     (0.139)       (0.095)   (0.141)    (0.116)     (0.140)   (0.134)    (0.136)    (0.139)
   Age squared                    -0.019***     0.008**     -0.033*** -0.038*** -0.041*** -0.038*** -0.040*** -0.036*** -0.027***
                                    (0.004)     (0.003)       (0.002)   (0.004)    (0.003)     (0.004)   (0.003)    (0.003)    (0.003)
   Female                         -0.254***   -0.321***        -0.090  -0.204**    -0.017       0.054     0.045     0.182**   0.376***
                                    (0.087)     (0.080)       (0.060)   (0.089)    (0.082)     (0.086)   (0.092)    (0.091)    (0.090)
   Ethnic minority                 -0.604**   -0.701***     -0.870***  -0.435**   -0.367**   -0.567*** -0.623*** -0.678*** -0.588***
                                    (0.239)     (0.174)       (0.154)   (0.172)    (0.149)     (0.185)   (0.164)    (0.167)    (0.178)
   Log of per capita expenditure 1.008***      1.361***      1.849***  1.945***   1.850***    1.603***  1.459***   1.540***   1.420***
                                    (0.096)     (0.096)       (0.072)   (0.096)    (0.099)     (0.106)   (0.092)    (0.107)    (0.096)
   Urban                            0.290**     0.331**      0.354***   0.260**   0.240***      0.149    0.191**     0.094    0.295***
                                    (0.141)     (0.162)       (0.100)   (0.106)    (0.092)     (0.097)   (0.091)    (0.090)    (0.098)
   Head completed primary          2.704***    2.065***      1.011***  1.128***   1.224***    1.172***  1.104***   1.086***   1.150***
   school                           (0.148)     (0.153)       (0.063)   (0.117)    (0.105)     (0.107)   (0.141)    (0.106)    (0.121)
   Head completed lower            4.728***    3.915***      1.770***  1.843***   2.050***    1.819***  1.714***   1.622***   1.677***
   secondary school                 (0.148)     (0.134)       (0.067)   (0.122)    (0.103)     (0.126)   (0.132)    (0.112)    (0.139)
   Head completed upper            6.252***    5.310***      2.183***  2.091***   2.170***    2.182***  2.078***   1.896***   2.003***
   secondary school                 (0.201)     (0.176)       (0.074)   (0.137)    (0.119)     (0.146)   (0.133)    (0.122)    (0.145)
   Head had college/ university    7.502***    6.901***      2.249***  2.207***   2.176***    2.369***  2.275***   1.813***   2.261***
   education                        (0.265)     (0.219)       (0.110)   (0.196)    (0.179)     (0.230)   (0.179)    (0.165)    (0.178)
   Constant                      -14.152***    -3.476**    -19.407*** -22.389*** -23.336*** -20.544*** -21.428*** -22.204*** -18.749***
                                    (1.831)     (1.543)       (0.893)   (1.340)    (1.040)     (1.442)   (1.541)    (1.650)    (1.409)

   lnσp                          -0.433***    -0.551***     -0.279***    -0.256***    -0.386***    -0.470***     -0.442***    -0.490***    -0.515***
   lnσs                          -1.118***    -0.681***       0.058      0.178***      0.118**        0.076       0.137**      0.091*        0.015
   lnσi                           0.817***     0.832***     0.880***     0.835***     0.818***      0.808***     0.800***     0.781***     0.818***
   Log likelihood                  -11180       -18396       -67471       -20973       -20970        -20056       -17659       -16472       -14764
   χ2                               2642         3067         3492         2335         3132          2408         1523         2810         2389

   No of provinces                    58            59          61           64          64            64            63            63           63
   No of communes                    150            194       2849          2737       2801           2793          2738         2709          2625
   No of individuals                4964           8111       28739         8912       8998           8657          7608         7161          6355
   Note: *p<0 .1, **p<0.05, ***p<0.01. Robust standard errors clustered at the commune level are in parentheses. Estimates are obtained from a mixed
   model with random effects at three levels: province, commune and child.




                                                                        42
Table 5: Trends in Learning over Time since 2000

           Results from Grade 5 Assessment (Average Vietnamese and Math Test Scores)
                              2001             2007              Statistical Difference
       Vietnamese
       (standardized)         0.00             0.22              ***

       Math
       (standardized)            0.00           0.40               ***
   Note: *p<0 .1, **p<0.05, ***p<0.01.




                                              43
Table 6: Determinants of Test Scores for Grade 5 Students, Vietnam 2001- 2007
                                                                    2001                                              2007
                                                        Math                    Vietnamese                Math                 Vietnamese
Age                                                  -0.151***                   -0.217***             -0.614***                -0.376***
                                                       (0.031)                     (0.044)               (0.086)                  (0.069)
Age squared                                           0.004***                    0.006***              0.021***                 0.011***
                                                       (0.001)                     (0.002)               (0.003)                  (0.003)
Female                                               -0.028***                    0.097***              0.029***                 0.184***
                                                       (0.005)                     (0.006)               (0.008)                  (0.008)
Ethnic minority                                      -0.089***                   -0.129***             -0.250***                -0.180***
                                                       (0.017)                     (0.021)               (0.027)                  (0.024)
Household asset index                                 0.035***                    0.037***              0.058***                 0.043***
                                                       (0.002)                     (0.002)               (0.003)                  (0.002)
Urban                                                 0.245***                    0.241***              0.291***                 0.283***
                                                       (0.035)                     (0.034)               (0.032)                  (0.024)
Head completed primary school                          0.025*                     0.050***              0.139***                 0.125***
                                                       (0.013)                     (0.014)               (0.019)                  (0.020)
Head completed lower secondary school                 0.078***                    0.120***              0.269***                 0.226***
                                                       (0.013)                     (0.015)               (0.021)                  (0.020)
Head completed upper secondary school                 0.221***                    0.266***              0.460***                 0.389***
                                                       (0.015)                     (0.016)               (0.027)                  (0.021)
Head had college/ university education                0.227***                    0.269***              0.344***                 0.309***
                                                       (0.018)                     (0.020)               (0.027)                  (0.023)
Constant                                              0.647***                    1.065***              3.883***                 2.274***
                                                       (0.188)                     (0.270)               (0.558)                  (0.441)

lnσp                                                 -1.131***                  -1.364***              -1.043***                -1.426***
lnσs                                                 -0.366***                  -0.428***              -0.569***                -0.760***
lnσi                                                 -0.547***                  -0.450***              -0.073***                -0.336***
Log likelihood                                         -66194                     -72300                 -77536                   -63195
χ2                                                      1295                       1561                   1956                     2089

No of provinces                                           61                        61                        64                         64
No of schools                                            3627                      3627                      3841                       3841
No of students                                          68918                     68920                     54920                      54799
Note: *p<0 .1, **p<0.05, ***p<0.01. Robust standard errors clustered at the commune level are in parentheses. Estimates are obtained from a mixed
model with random effects at three levels: province, commune and child. Test scores in 2007 are standardized by the distributions in 2001.




                                                                           44
Figure 1: PISA Test Scores vs. Country Income Level, 2015

      550




                                                                            550




                                                                                                                                  550
                                                                                                                                               VNM
      500




                                                                            500




                                                                                                                                  500
                                 VNM
                                                                                         VNM




                                                                                                                           science score
                                                                     reading score
 math score
     450




                                                                           450




                                                                                                                                 450
      400




                                                                            400




                                                                                                                                  400
      350




                                                                            350




                                                                                                                                  350
                  7              8       9      10     11       12                   7    8       9      10     11    12                   7   8       9      10     11    12
                                  log of per capita GDP                                    log of per capita GDP                                log of per capita GDP


Data source: PISA database and World Bank’s WDI database.

Figure 2: Mean Years of Schooling of Adult Population vs. Country Income Level
                   15
       mean years of education
                        10




                                                                                                         VNM
          5        0




                                 5                          6                               7              8                                         9                    10
                                                                                         log of per capita GDP
                                 Note: education achievement is obtained from household surveys implemented between 2000 and 2014; GDP data
                                 are from 2012


Data source: UNESCO’s WIDE database and World Bank’s WDI database.

                                                                                                                 45
Figure 3: Net Primary School Enrollment vs. Country Income Level



                  100
                                                                    VNM

                           90
     Net primary enrolment
          70       80
                  60
                  50




                                         6                                 8                                 10                    12
                                                                         log of per capita GDP
                                Note: both net primary school enrolment and GDP data are from 2012.



Data source: World Bank’s WDI database.

Figure 4: Net Enrollment Rate by School Level and Gender, Vietnam 1992- 2014
(percentage)
            100  80
  Percentage (%)
        60  40
            20




                1992−93                             1997−98                  2002     2004            2006   2008   2010    2012   2014
                                                                                     year

                                                              girls, primary                             boys, primary
                                                              girls, lower sec.                          boys, lower sec.
                                                              girls, upper sec.                          boys, upper sec.

Data source: VHLSS.
                                                                                                 46
Figure 5: Net Enrollment Rate by School Level and Ethnicity, Vietnam 1992- 2014
(percentage)
           100
                                 Panel A: Primary school                                              Panel B: Lower secondary school




                                                                                         100
                  80




                                                                                                80
   Percentage (%)




                                                                                 Percentage (%)
          60




                                                                                        60
 40




                                                                               40
           20




                                                                                         20
              1992−93        1997−98      2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014                1992−93    1997−98   2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014
                                              year                                                                   year
                            Panel C: Upper secondary school
           100   80
  Percentage (%)
 40     60 20




              1992−93        1997−98      2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014
                                              year

                                       minority           majority


Data source: VHLSS.

Figure 6: Proportion of the Variance in School Enrollment Due to Variation in Student,
Commune and Province Factors, Vietnam 1992- 2014 (percentage)

                           Panel A: Primary enrolment                              Panel B: Secondary enrolment
              100




                                                                                                                                       100
              80




                                                                                                                                       80
  percentage (%)




                                                                                                                                        percentage (%)
             60




                                                                                                                                                   60
 40




                                                                                                                                       40
              20




                                                                                                                                       20
              0




                                                                                                                                       0




                       1993 1998 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014       1993 1998 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014

 Note: green, maroon, and blue bars represent the contribution to the total variations in enrollment from student, commune, and
 province respectively.

Data source: VHLSS.
                                                                                                      47
Figure 7: Proportion of the Variance in Education Achievement Due to Variation in Student,
Commune and Province Factors, Vietnam 2002- 2014 (percentage)

                          Panel A: Years of schooling                    Panel B: Math             Panel C: Vietnamese




                                                                                                                              100
         100




                                                                                                                              80
         80
  percentage (%)




                                                                                                                                           60
             60




                                                                                                                              percentage (%)
 40




                                                                                                                              40
         20




                                                                                                                              20
         0




                                                                                                                              0
                        2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014              2001           2007            2001        2007


 Note: green, maroon, and blue bars represent the contribution to the total variations in years of schooling (panel A) and test
 scores (panels B and C) from student, commune, and province respectively.

Data source: VHLSS and Grade 5 Assessment.

Figure 8: Percentage of Primary Schools that Meet National Standards of Quality, Vietnam
2005- 2011
                   25
                   20
         percent (%)
       10         15
                   5
                   0




                            2005     2006      2007          2008          2009           2010           2011

Data source: Primary School Census database.

                                                                               48
Figure 9: Average Tutoring Hours vs. Weekly Classroom Hours in Math, Science, and
Language, PISA 2012

                                                                                  VNM
                   6
       tutoring hours per week
         2         0    4




                                 5                                               10                                    15                                                  20
                                                                                      class hours per week
                                 Note: weekly class hours are in math, language, and science.



Data source: PISA database.

Figure 10: Test Scores vs. Enrollment Rate of 15-Year-Old Population, PISA 2015
      550




                                                                        550




                                                                                                                                  550




                                                                                                                                            VNM
      500




                                                                        500




                                                                                                                                  500




                       VNM
                                                                                  VNM
                                                                                                                           science score
                                                                 reading score
 math score
     450




                                                                       450




                                                                                                                                 450
      400




                                                                        400




                                                                                                                                  400
      350




                                                                        350




                                                                                                                                  350




                  50    60      70    80     90      100                          50    60      70    80     90      100                    50    60      70    80     90      100
                 coverage of 15−year−old population (%)                          coverage of 15−year−old population (%)                    coverage of 15−year−old population (%)


Data source: PISA database.
                                                                                                               49
Appendix 1: Additional Tables
Table 1.1: Attendance at Private Tutoring Classes, Vietnam 1997- 2014 (percentage)




                                             50
Table 1.2: Factors Associated with Lower Secondary School Enrollment for Children Age
                               11-14, Vietnam 1992- 2014
                                  1993         1998       2002      2004              2006          2008      2010             2012        2014
Age                             44.179**     18.457   24.858***   17.835*            15.968     40.074***    16.683            1.537      17.517
                                (18.772)    (14.862)    (5.241)   (9.209)          (11.433)      (10.595)  (10.363)         (14.465)    (10.831)
Age squared                    -2.297***      -0.958  -1.196***  -0.863**           -0.778*     -1.740***   -0.821*           -0.198     -0.800*
                                 (0.753)     (0.601)    (0.211)   (0.376)           (0.461)       (0.432)   (0.423)          (0.586)     (0.442)
Female                        -11.292***   -6.149*** -2.410***     -1.496             1.288        0.669    2.231**           0.378      1.680*
                                 (1.745)     (1.381)    (0.770)   (1.259)           (1.017)       (1.153)   (1.063)          (1.117)     (0.972)
Ethnic minority                   2.556      5.209**     -1.024    -0.288             0.522        -0.384    -0.242           -0.228       0.837
                                 (3.660)     (2.324)    (1.048)   (1.606)           (2.037)       (1.680)   (1.943)          (1.721)     (2.097)
Log of per capita expenditure 16.316***     9.081***  10.732*** 8.486***           8.909***      6.366***  5.676***         8.777***    6.523***
                                 (2.008)     (1.536)    (0.997)   (1.265)           (1.298)       (1.122)   (1.166)          (1.334)     (1.781)
Urban                            -3.398        0.467  -2.633***   -1.836*            -1.266        -1.508     0.225        -4.123***      -0.788
                                 (2.192)     (2.052)    (0.974)   (1.080)           (0.897)       (1.054)   (1.296)          (1.406)     (1.113)
Head completed primary         14.403***   23.684*** 7.581***    7.716***          6.840***     10.538*** 9.286***          8.242***    8.707***
school                           (3.852)     (5.204)    (0.891)   (1.663)           (1.505)       (1.863)   (1.823)          (1.645)     (1.646)
Head completed lower           25.871***   34.427*** 11.452*** 10.254***           9.817***     14.661*** 11.577***         9.610***    9.756***
secondary school                 (4.084)     (5.621)    (0.962)   (1.356)           (1.260)       (1.757)   (1.789)          (1.706)     (1.452)
Head completed upper           30.098***   37.567*** 11.554*** 10.508***           9.802***     13.807*** 12.115***        10.153***    8.909***
secondary school                 (4.353)     (5.945)    (1.051)   (1.419)           (1.192)       (1.733)   (1.733)          (1.828)     (1.423)
Head had college/ university 32.635***     38.871*** 7.660***    8.500***          6.714***     12.550*** 9.249***          7.843***    6.637***
education                        (4.931)     (5.815)    (1.520)   (1.965)           (1.319)       (1.861)   (1.787)          (1.850)     (1.825)
Constant                      -246.408**     -91.337 -122.128*** -69.060            -65.330    -198.281*** -47.745           13.905      -70.002
                               (116.480)    (94.742)   (33.691)  (59.154)          (73.223)      (68.241)  (65.265)         (88.745)    (68.291)

lnσp                          1.789***      1.428***     1.562***     1.628***     1.501***      0.899**      1.030***     1.267***     1.075***
lnσs                          2.135***      1.512***     2.129***     2.035***     2.250***      2.263***     2.329***     2.466***     1.970***
lnσi                          3.630***      3.423***     3.323***     3.212***     3.156***      3.121***     3.147***     3.115***     3.050***
Log likelihood                 -11880        -14686       -65778       -19620       -17010        -14449       -11760       -11356       -10450
χ2                               803           276          485          155          202           176          96           182          81

No of provinces                    58            59          61           64          64            64            63            63           63
No of communes                    150            194       2679          2238       2064           1907          1671         1646          1600
No of individuals                2342           3024       13763         4190       3656           3127          2527         2441          2308
Note: *p<0 .1, **p<0.05, ***p<0.01. Robust standard errors clustered at the commune level are in parentheses. Estimates are obtained from a mixed
model with random effects at three levels: province, commune and child.




                                                                          51
 Table 1.3: Factors Associated with Upper Secondary School Enrollment for Children Age
                                15-17, Vietnam 1992- 2014
                                   1993        1998        2002           2004         2006         2008         2010        2012           2014
Age                               -7.977     38.076     -63.196**       20.369       -84.218    -109.575*    111.593** -116.671*          64.437
                                (56.501)    (63.550)     (28.592)      (45.888)     (52.334)     (59.546)      (55.613)   (67.047)       (63.860)
Age squared                      -0.104       -1.637      1.681*         -0.900        2.384      3.182*       -3.764**      3.382         -2.281
                                 (1.754)     (1.986)      (0.896)       (1.433)      (1.637)      (1.866)       (1.733)    (2.096)        (1.995)
Female                        -13.843***   -9.129***    -6.097***      -3.666**      3.243*      6.629***     5.109***   5.972***       10.921***
                                 (1.899)     (1.813)      (1.067)       (1.749)      (1.818)      (1.624)       (1.679)    (1.547)        (1.798)
Ethnic minority                    1.258       6.575       3.018      12.260***       5.161*       -1.870       -6.215* -10.327***         -6.179
                                 (3.956)     (4.519)      (2.356)       (2.556)      (2.947)      (2.717)       (3.661)    (3.889)        (4.090)
Log of per capita expenditure 15.101***    18.418***    24.736***     21.353***    19.172***    17.654***    15.576*** 16.444***        14.489***
                                 (1.993)     (1.963)      (1.362)       (1.750)      (1.831)      (1.815)       (1.762)    (2.070)        (2.407)
Urban                         10.438***       -0.318      2.564*         -1.971        2.475       0.608      4.304***      -1.713         -0.297
                                 (3.179)     (4.016)      (1.522)       (2.319)      (1.783)      (2.190)       (1.638)    (2.310)        (3.107)
Head completed primary             4.496   11.236***     9.774***     7.638***     9.017***     12.580***    11.098*** 14.675***        14.091***
school                           (2.935)     (4.103)      (1.198)       (2.566)      (2.374)      (2.766)       (3.074)    (3.425)        (3.173)
Head completed lower           17.384***   40.447***    17.887***     18.354***    25.001***    24.429***    24.334*** 21.463***        24.326***
secondary school                 (3.393)     (4.013)      (1.384)       (2.681)      (2.574)      (2.508)       (2.898)    (3.286)        (3.177)
Head completed upper           23.839***   56.981***    26.013***     24.758***    27.795***    30.771***    30.745*** 31.306***        32.019***
secondary school                 (4.653)     (4.197)      (1.807)       (2.701)      (3.246)      (2.833)       (2.917)    (3.323)        (3.501)
Head had college/ university 43.468***     58.945***    20.658***     21.946***    23.033***    27.095***    29.171*** 30.763***        31.334***
education                        (4.810)     (5.316)      (1.896)       (3.874)      (2.943)      (2.956)       (4.074)    (3.768)        (3.271)
Constant                         64.627     -312.575     438.141*      -209.229     629.962      836.507*    -912.860** 893.822*         -536.894
                               (454.822)   (505.810)    (229.415)     (367.886)    (416.297)    (473.183)     (445.024)  (538.083)      (517.480)

lnσp                          1.745***      1.529***     2.257***     2.028***     2.109***      1.881***     1.884***     2.286***     1.890***
lnσs                          1.687***      2.539***     2.678***     2.603***     2.453***      2.846***     2.831***     2.665***     2.826***
lnσi                          3.633***      3.660***     3.698***     3.668***     3.634***      3.586***     3.598***     3.604***     3.584***
Log likelihood                  -8433        -11678       -51790       -15903       -15731        -14258       -11577       -10368        -8729
χ2                               578          1807         1176          517          594           576          637          436          479

No of provinces                    58            59          61           64          64            64            63            63           63
No of communes                    150            194       2505          1940       1971           1848          1604         1516          1324
No of individuals                1664           2283       10018         3088       3080           2791          2262         2030          1709
Note: *p<0 .1, **p<0.05, ***p<0.01. Robust standard errors clustered at the commune level are in parentheses. Estimates are obtained from a mixed
model with random effects at three levels: province, commune and child.




                                                                          52
Figure 1.1: PISA Test Scores vs. Country Income Level, 2012
         600




                                                                           600
         550




                                                                           550
                        VNM                                                               VNM
              500




                                                                                500
                                                                     reading score
    math score
 450




                                                                   450
         400




                                                                           400
         350




                                                                           350




                    7       8         9        10     11      12                      7     8         9        10     11         12
                                log of per capita GDP                                           log of per capita GDP
 Note: both PISA test scores and GDP data are from 2012.


Data Source: PISA database and World Bank’s WDI database.

Figure 1.2: Proportion of the Conditional Variance in School Enrollment Due to Variation
in Student, Commune and Province Factors, Vietnam 1992- 2014 (percentage)

                        Panel A: Primary enrolment                             Panel B: Secondary enrolment
         100




                                                                                                                           100
         80




                                                                                                                           80
  percentage (%)




                                                                                                                            percentage (%)
             60




                                                                                                                                       60
 40




                                                                                                                           40
         20




                                                                                                                           20
         0




                                                                                                                           0




                    1993 1998 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014       1993 1998 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014

 Note: green, maroon, and blue bars represent the contribution to the total variations in enrollment from student, commune, and
 province respectively.



                                                                                          53
Figure 1.3: Proportion of the Conditional Variance in Education Achievement Due to
Variation in Student, Commune and Province Factors, Vietnam 2002- 2014 (percentage)

                     Panel A: Years of schooling                         Panel B: Math             Panel C: Vietnamese




                                                                                                                              100
         100




                                                                                                                              80
         80
  percentage (%)




                                                                                                                                           60
             60




                                                                                                                              percentage (%)
 40




                                                                                                                              40
         20




                                                                                                                              20
         0




                                                                                                                              0
                   2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014                   2001           2007            2001        2007


 Note: green, maroon, and blue bars represent the contribution to the total variations in years of schooling (panel A) and test
 scores (panels B and C) from student, commune, and province respectively.




                                                                               54
Appendix 2: Data Appendix—Surveys with Data on Education Outcomes
2.1. Programme for International Student Assessment (PISA)
The PISA is a triennial international survey which provides evaluation of 15-year-old students on
benchmarked standardized tests. The PISA has been implemented by the OECD in 2000, 2003,
2006, 2009, 2012, and 2015. More than half a million students, representing 28 million 15-year-
olds in 72 countries and economies, participated in the PISA in 2015. Besides offering data on
student test scores, the PISA also collects a rich set of information on student, parent (optional),
and school characteristics. The data are available (http://www.oecd.org/pisa/pisaproducts/) and
have been widely analyzed by governments, international agencies, and researchers for insights
into educational policies.

2.2. Grade 5 Assessment
The Grade 5 Assessment survey implements national large-scale evaluations of Grade 5 students.
It has been implemented in 2001, 2007, 2011, and 2015 by Vietnam’s Ministry of Education. The
2001 round received strong technical assistance from the World Bank. Each survey round collects
data on approximately 60,000 students from around 4,000 primary schools across the country.
Besides standardized test scores, the Grade 5 Assessment survey also collects data on a number of
student and parental characteristics, teacher (and principal) qualifications and experience, as well
as school infrastructure. Application for the data can be made to the MoET, Vietnam. The 2001
and 2007 rounds have been analyzed in several publications including World Bank (2012b) and
Nguyen and Griffin (2010).

2.3. Vietnam Living Standards Surveys (VLSS) and Vietnam Household Living Standards
Surveys (VHLSS)
The General Statistics Office of Vietnam has implemented nationally representation household
surveys in 1992-93, 1997-98, 2002, 2004, 2006, 2008, 2010, 2012, and 2014. The 1992-93 and
1997-98 surveys are known as the Vietnam Living Standards Surveys (VLSS). Starting in 2002,
they were renamed the Vietnam Household Living Standards Surveys (VHLSS) are were
implemented biennially. The 1992-93 and 1997-98 VLSS rounds collected data on 4,800 and 6,000
households, respectively, while the 2002 VHLSS round collected data on 45,000 households.
Since 2004, the VHLSS has collected data on approximately 9,000 households. The household
questionnaire collects detailed information on household expenditures, and standard information
on education: enrollment, years of schooling, and highest degree of education for all household
members. The VHLSS also has a community (commune) questionnaire for rural areas that collects
information on the availability of different types of schools, as well as some basic information
about their characteristics. The VHLSS data can be obtained by writing to the General Statistical
Office in Hanoi. Instructions on how to obtain the data are available at
http://econ.worldbank.org/WBSITE/EXTERNAL/EXTDEC/EXTRESEARCH/EXTLSMS/0,,contentMDK:2148264
0~menuPK:4196952~pagePK:64168445~piPK:64168309~theSitePK:3358997,00.html). The VHLSS data have
been widely analyzed by the Government of Vietnam, international donors, and researchers for
insights into educational policies.

2.4. Primary School Census (PSC)
Vietnam’s Ministry of Education and Training (MoET) has collected primary school census (PSC)
data annually on all primary schools in the country. It was supported by a World Bank project
                                                  55
between 2005 and 2011, and is currently implemented by MoET. The PSC collects detailed
information on school infrastructure and quality and students. For example, the collected data
include the number of students who are currently enrolled or who repeat classes, which are further
disaggregated by grade, gender, age, ethnicity, and disability status. These data are provided by
school principals (or the most knowledgeable school official) with the support of World Bank
projects. The PSC data can be obtained by writing to the MoET in Hanoi, Vietnam. The data have
been analyzed in a few publications including Attfield and Vu (2013) and Dang and Rogers (2016).

2.5. Young Lives Survey (YL)
Young Lives is an international study of childhood poverty following the lives of 12,000 children
in Ethiopia, India (in the states of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana), Peru and Vietnam over 15
years, from 2002 to 2017. Two cohorts of children—2,000 children born in 2001-02, and 1,000
born in 1994-95—are followed in all four countries. In Vietnam, the YL survey has been
implemented in 5 provinces (out of 63 provinces in all of Vietnam). These children belong to
households that are poorer, and have less access to basic social utilities than the average household
in the country. The YL has been implemented for Vietnam in 2002, 2006, 2009, 2013, and 2016.
Data are publicly available (http://www.younglives.org.uk/content/use-our-data). The YL data
have been widely analyzed by researchers for insights into educational policies. Given the scope
of this paper, we do not analyze this survey.




                                                   56
