                                                      WPS8129


Policy Research Working Paper                        8129




              The Nexus of Energy Supply
                  and Human Health
                              Govinda R. Timilsina




Development Research Group
Environment and Energy Team
June 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 8129


  Abstract
  Uses of main primary energy resources, such as coal, oil, and                      biomass used for cooking and space heating, dispropor-
  solid biomass, are directly linked with adverse impacts on                         tionately falls on women and children under age five years.
  human health. Air pollution emitted from various activities                        Acute respiratory infections, mainly caused by household
  in the energy supply chains is the main risk factor to human                       air pollution, are one of the largest categories of deaths
  health, along with accidental and occupational risk expo-                          (64 percent) of children under age five years in developing
  sures. Estimates of premature deaths are over four million                         countries. These statistics indicate the deep nexus between
  per year for ambient air pollution (2015) and household                            the energy supply chain and human health. Yet, the negative
  or indoor air pollution (2012). More than 80 percent of                            implications for human health from energy use often receive
  the mortality from ambient air pollution emitted from the                          inadequate consideration. It is critically important to take
  energy supply chains occurs in developing countries. The                           account of these human health impacts in developing energy
  impact of household air pollution, mainly from traditional                         supply plans and energy policies in developing countries.




  This paper is a product of the Environment and Energy Team, Development Research Group. It is part of a larger effort by
  the World Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions around
  the world. Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The author may be
  contacted at gtimilsina@worldbank.org.




          The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
          issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
          names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
          of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
          its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                        Produced by the Research Support Team
                      The Nexus of Energy Supply and Human Healthǂ


                                          Govinda R. Timilsina¶




Key words: Energy and health, Ambient air pollution, Household air pollution, Health impacts of
energy, Energy supply chain

JEL Classification: I10, Q53



ǂ
  The author would like to thank Mike Toman and the participants of the Global Health Economics Summit, Berlin,
Germany (July 25-26 2016) for their valuable comments and suggestions. Prayas Timilsina compiled lists of accidents
in various activities of energy supply chains presented in the appendix of this paper. The views and interpretations are
of author’s and should not be attributed to the World Bank Group.
¶
    Senior Economist, Development Research Group, World Bank Washington, DC. E-mail: gtimilsina@worldbank.org
                   The Nexus of Energy Supply and Human Health


1. Introduction



       Energy is an essential input to economic growth and the welfare of human beings.
However, energy also causes negative impacts to human health at various stages of the energy
supply chain, from production to utilization. Energy production, such as coal and uranium mining,
energy transformation such as electricity generation from coal or oil and its utilization at the end-
use level, such as using fuelwood for cooking are associated with direct and indirect impacts to
human health. Among the adverse health impacts originating from various stages of energy supply.
Energy mining and production activities, such as coal mining, oil and gas drilling, can be the source
of accidents and also pose a risk of long-term exposure of mining and drilling crews to harmful
substances or pollutants. Energy transformation activities, such as power generation and charcoal
production, could be a source of occupational as well as air pollution related health effects in
addition to risks of accidents. Energy consumption activities, particularly burning of solid fuels,
such as coal, and wood fuel for cooking emit harmful emissions, such as particulate matter that
causes health risks, especially to women and children who are more likely to be exposed these
emissions. In fact, indoor or household air pollution is a key risk factor to human health in low
income countries around the world because almost one-third of the population in the world
currently relies on these solid fuels for cooking (World Bank, 2015).

       As we will discuss later in this paper, air pollution is one of the main risk factors to human
health as it enhances respiratory diseases, heart attacks, strokes, lung cancers and other health
problems. Cohen et al. (2017) show that ambient air pollution alone, which is mainly caused by
burning of fossil fuels in power generation, industries and transportation, is the fifth largest
contributor to global mortality in 2015, after high blood pressure, smoking, diabetes and high
cholesterol. Most of the impacts occur in developing countries. According to the World Health
Organization (WHO) ambient air pollution (AAP) and household air pollution (HAP) cause more
than 7 million deaths a year globally with a disproportionate majority of deaths occurring in low-
and middle-income countries. Cohen et al. (2017) estimate that exposure to PM2·5 caused 3·7
million to 4·8 million deaths and 90·8 million to 115·1 million disability-adjusted life-years

                                                 2
(DALYs) in 2015. These mortality and morbidity represent, respectively 7·6% and 4.2% of global
deaths and DALYs in that year. Similarly, household air pollution caused 4.3 million deaths in
2012 (WHO, 2016). The impacts of HAP not only occur in low and middle income countries but
also mostly affect women and children. These statistics indicate the degree of linkage between the
energy supply/consumption system and human health.

       It is also important to note that coal, petroleum products and biomass, the main sources of
ambient and household air pollution account for more than 70% of global energy supply (IEA,
2016); in year 2014, coal, oil and biomass accounted for 28.6%, 31.3% and 10.3% of the global
primary energy supply. The share of these fuels would not change significantly by 2035 unless
rapid decarbonization of the global economy is achieved to meet targets under the Paris Climate
Accord. According to BP Energy Outlook (BP, 2017), oil and coal would still occupy almost 60%
of the total primary energy supply by 2035.

       Considering the predominance of the fossil fuel based global energy supply system now
and for several decades to come and also considering the harmful air pollution emitted from
burning of fossil fuels and biomass, it is expected that the energy system (production,
transformation and utilization) would continue to be a major concern to human health. This paper,
therefore, aims to explain, in-depth, how various activities in the energy supply/consumption chain
starting from mining/production to final consumption of energy are linked to human health.

       Both energy and health economics are rich in literature examining corresponding issues.
However, literature focusing on cross-cutting issues between these two disciplines is very limited.
One comprehensive review in this direction is Smith et al. (2013), which presents human health
impacts of different types of fuel (coal, petroleum, natural gas, renewables). Our study is different
from Smith et al. in several respects. First, our study presents more recent information on health
impacts, particularly through air pollution. Second, it systematically presents the health impacts
through type or channel of impact: accidents, occupation and air pollution. Third, it provides
detailed accounts of accidental impacts since the 1950s. Fourth, it derives policy implications from
the analysis.

       In this review paper, we first discuss the three key channels (accidental, occupational and
air pollution) that energy supply chain affects human health. Energy supply chain also impacts
human health through climate change as fossil fuels are the main source of global warming.

                                                 3
However, we have not included this indirect health impacts in this review. This is because health
impacts from climate change are indirect impacts to human health. Second, this topic has been
well covered in existing literature, particularly in Chapter 11 of the Working Group II of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (Smith et al. 2014). Earlier, Haines et al. (2009) also
elaborated the impacts of climate change on human health.

2. Sources of Health Impacts from Energy Supply Chains

   Figure 1 and Table 1 illustrate the medium and sources of human health impacts at various
stages of the energy supply chain. Each stage of energy supply (i.e., mining and production,
physical and chemical transformation and utilization) is associated with various impacts to human
health. The impacts can be classified into three categories: accidental (e.g., coal mining explosion,
oil tanker explosion), occupational (e.g., asthma and lung cancers to coal miners) and health
impacts caused by air pollution resulted from energy supply chain (e.g., asthma and cancers caused
by air pollution released from household cooking using solid fuels). The sources of impacts could
be several such as radiation, exposure to toxic substances and indoor or outdoor air pollution.

   Table 1 clarifies, with examples, how different stages of the energy supply chain are linked
with health impacts. For example, some energy mining releases substances (e.g., acid mine
drainage, sediments, dissolved solids, and toxic substances), which contaminate soils or are leaked
into ground water. These substances could, for example, include heavy metals, such as lead,
arsenic, cadmium, nickel, selenium, mercury and chromium. These substances could lead to
damages of the nervous systems and kidneys, cause cardiovascular disease, carcinogens (lung,
bladder, kidney, and skin cancers) and impact on respiratory and immune systems. Similarly,
oxides of sulfur and nitrogen cause asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD),
cardiac disease and ischemic stroke. Table 1(b) briefly presents the types of diseases caused by
various air pollutants.




                                                 4
             Figure 1: Energy supply chain, medium and source of health impact




Table 1. Examples of energy supply chain, medium and source of health impacts

   (a) Energy supply chain and medium of health impacts

   Energy supply                             Medium of health impacts
      activity
 Mining                Surface and ground water pollution (e.g., acid mine drainage, sediments,
                       dissolved solids, and toxic substances); exposure to toxic substances;
                       dust and particulate air pollution; high mortality and morbidity
 Transportation        Major accidents (oil tanker blasts, oil and gas pipeline explosions), air
                       pollution (railway or truck transportation)
 Oil and gas           Toxic substances from drilling liquids and muds (e.g., Polycyclic
 drilling              aromatic hydrocarbons, cadmium, chromium, lead, mercury, chromate
                       and barite)
 Transformation        Particulate Matters (PM), carbon monoxide (CO), methane (CH4),
 (power generation),   carcinogenic PAH, oxides of sulfur and nitrogen, volatile organic
 and consumption       compounds (VOC), toxic substances (e.g., benzene, formaldehyde,
 at end-use            sulfur mercury, arsenic, fluorine, selenium)
 (e.g., cooking)
                       All these pollutants are harmful to human health at varying ways and
                       degrees
 Radiation             Nuclear radiation, radiation from coal fly ash



                                               5
   (b) Sources and actual health impacts

     Air pollutants                             Health impacts or diseases
 Sulphur dioxide           Asthma; chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD); cardiac
 and nitrous oxides        disease; ischemic stroke
 Transportation            Asthma, COPD, lung cancer, cardiac arrhythmias; acute myocardial
                           infarction, congestive heart failure, ischemic stroke
 Particular matter         Cardiovascular and respiratory diseases, as well as of lung cancer
 (PM10, PM2.5)
 Polycyclic Aromatic       Adverse effects on liver, kidney, and testes; may impair the
 Hydrocarbons (PAHs)       reproductive system
 Volatile       Organic    Impaired lung functions, impaired memory, respiratory symptoms,
 Compounds (VOCs)          effects to the liver and kidneys, probable carcinogen
 Heavy metals              Damages the nervous systems, kidneys; cardiovascular disease,
 (Lead, Arsenic,           carcinogens (lung, bladder, kidney, and skin cancers), impacts on
 Cadmium, Nickel,          respiratory and immune systems
  Selenium, Mercury
 Chromium, etc.
Source: WHO (2006).



       Figure 2 illustrates how air pollution either ambient air pollution or household (indoor) air
pollution affects human health. Incomplete combustion of fossil fuels (e.g. coal) in power
generation, petroleum products (e.g., gasoline, diesel) in transportation and solid fuels (e.g., fuel
wood, charcoal, agricultural residues) in household cooking emits substantial quantities of harmful
air pollutants and contaminants including small particulate matter (PM), carbon monoxide (CO),
methane (CH4), carcinogenic polyaromatic hydrocarbons (PAH), volatile organic compounds
(VOC), benzene and formaldehyde and sulfur and mercury (Smith et al., 2013). All these
pollutants are harmful to human health in varying ways and degrees. Among these pollutants,
particulate matter poses the greatest risks to human health. Large particulate matters (with
diameter 10 µm and higher), such as dust or pollen, get lodged in the nasal cavity, upper airways
or thoracic cavity. Smaller particles (with diameter 2.5 µm or smaller) can reach deeper into the
smaller airways of the body and deposit on the alveoli – the tiny sacs in the lungs where oxygen
exchanges with carbon dioxide in the blood (WHO, 2016b).




                                                 6
             Figure 2. Illustration of how particulate matters impact human health




                                         Source: WHO (2016b)


        Among the various mediums (accidents, occupation and air pollution), air pollution causes
the greater risks to human health. Exposure to elevated concentrations of particulate matters,
specifically with size of 10 microns (PM10) or less (PM2.5) in diameter, are the main contributors
to these risks, specifically through cardiovascular and respiratory disease, and cancers. Table 2
summarizes the characteristics of key air pollutants with human health risk, main diseases caused
by them and tolerable limits of their concentration as specified by the World Health Organization
(WHO, 2006).


Table 2. Major air pollutants with human health risks, their potential impacts and WHO
thresholds
             Pollutants                          Impacts                    Safety threshold (WHO 2005
                                                                                     Guidelines)
 Parliculate     matters    (PM):     Chronic exposure to particles PM2.5: 10μg/m3 (annual mean)
 mixture of solid and liquid          contributes to the risk of and 25μg/m3 (24-hour mean)
 particles    of   organic     and    developing cardiovascular and
 inorganic     substances     with    respiratory diseases, as well as of PM10: 20μg/m3 (annual mean)
 diameter of 10 microns or less, (≤   lung cancer                         and 50 μg/m3 (24-hour mean)
 PM10)       including     sulfate,
 nitrates,   ammonia,      sodium
 chloride, black carbon, mineral
 dust and water.


                                                    7
    Ozone at ground level: a            It can cause breathing 100 μg/m3 8-hour mean
    pollutant generated from            problems, trigger asthma,
    photochemical reaction with         reduce lung function and
    other chemical compounds,           cause lung diseases
    which are themselves are
    pollutants (e.g., nitrogen
    oxides from vehicle and
    industry    emissions     and
    volatile organic compounds
    emitted by vehicles, solvents
    and industry); sunny weather
    can generate highest levels of
    ozone pollution.
    Nitrogen dioxide (NO2)              Long-term exposure can 40 μg/m3 (annual mean) and
                                        increase       bronchitis     in 200 μg/m3 (1-hour mean)
                                        asthmatic children and reduce
                                        lung function
    Sulfur dioxide (SO2)                It can affect the respiratory 20 μg/m3 (24-hour mean) and
                                        system and the functions of 500 μg/m3 (10-minute mean)
                                        the lungs (coughing, mucus
                                        secretion, aggravation of
                                        asthma         and      chronic
                                        bronchitis)       and     causes
                                        irritation of the eyes
Source: WHO (2006)



3. Accidental Risks in Energy Supply Systems

          Almost every activity under energy supply chains poses adverse impacts to human health
through accidents. For example, every stage of coal mining or production – both surface mining
and underground mining,1 coal washing or processing,2 and coal transportation (Lockwood et al.,
2009) are prone to accidents. Some studies (e.g., Burgherr and Hirschberg, 2014) have analyzed
accidental impacts from the energy sector, from coal mining to LPG use in kitchen. Based on


1
  Surface mining is used when coal reserves is open or buried less than 200 feet underground. It includes removing
top soils and layers of rock to expose large beds of coal and its extraction using heavy machineries. Underground
mining involves when coal reserve is buried several hundred feet below the surface. Deep wells with elevators and
deep mine shafts are used in this process.
2
  When coal is extracted from mine, it is sent to, normally using conveyor belts, to preparation plants located at the
mining site to clean or wash it removing dirt, rock, ash, sulfur, and other unwanted materials. Cleaning or washing
increases heating value of coal per unit of weight.


                                                          8
Burgherr and Hirschberg (2014), Figure 3 presents statistics of accidents and corresponding
fatalities from energy sector activities occurred during 1970-2008 period.

Figure 3: Energy sector accidents during the 1970-2008 period
(excludes accidents less than 5 fatalities)
    (a) Number of accidents
         2,481
        2,394




                                                                   OECD     Non-OECD       Total
                         545
                      358
                     187




                                 187



                                              128
                                109
    87




                                78



                                             70
                                             58




                                                           22
                                                           21
                                                           1




                                                                           1
                                                                           1


                                                                                      2
                                                                                      2


                                                                                                   1
                                                                                                   1
       Coal            Oil     Natural gas    LPG          Hydro         Nuclear    Biogas    Geothermal




    (b) Number of fatalities
            38,672
            40,931




                                                                            OECD     Non-OECD        Total
                                                                30,083
                                                                30,069
                       3,853
                       3,495
    2,259




                                              1,926
                                              1,856
                                 1,336
                                 1,258
                     358



                                78



                                             70




                                                                           31
                                                                           31
                                                           14




                                                                                      18
                                                                                      18


                                                                                                   21
                                                                                                   21




       Coal            Oil     Natural gas    LPG          Hydro         Nuclear    Biogas    Geothermal




Note: 85% of the total accidents and 70% fatalities in the coal sector in Non-OECD countries occurred in China.
Moreover, 26,108 fatalities out of total 30,083 fatalities from hydropower accidents during the 1970-2008 period
caused by a single accident in China’s Banqiao dam and Shimantan Reservoir Dam systems that occurred in August
1975.
Source: Burgherr and Hirschberg, 2014


                                                       9
        As illustrated in Figure 3, there occurred 3,367 accidents in the energy sector that caused
more than 5 fatalities during the 1970-2008 period. Those accidents caused a total 78,199 fatalities.
Of the total accidents, 87% occurred in Non-OECD countries. Eighty-nine percent of the total
fatalities in the energy sector accidents also occurred in Non-OECD countries.

        Coal is the main source accidents and corresponding deaths; 2,481 accidents in the coal
sector killed 40,931 people during the 1970-2008 period (see Figure 3). It accounts for 74% of the
total energy sector accidents and 52% of the total fatalities. Of the total coal sector accidents, 97%
occurred in Non-OECD countries resulting in 95% of the total coal sector accident fatalities. China
alone accounted for 85% of accidents and 70% of fatalities in the coal sector in Non-OECD
countries (Burgherr and Hirschberg, 2014).

        Most of the accidents in the coal sector occurred in coal mining. Table A1 in the Appendix
presents selected coal mining accidents since 1950 to present examples of major coal mine
accidents around the world. The two main sources of coal mine accidents are underground
explosions and flooding of mines. One of largest coal mine accidents was the underground
explosion in Laobaidong coal mine, located near Datong in the Shanxi province of China on May
9, 1960. The accident was caused by coal dust and methane explosion and it was the most fatal
coal mine disaster since the inception of People's Republic of China in 1949 and killed 684 coal
minors.3 The most recent coal mining accident occurred in Soma, Turkey on 13 May 2014 where
one of the pits was engulfed with fire and carbon monoxide killing 301 miners burning alive or
suffocating.4 It was the largest coal mine disaster in Turkey’s history.

        Explosions of oil and gas wells, pipelines and tankers are another the major sources of
accidental impacts of human health from energy supply chain. During the 1970-2008 period,
Burgherr and Hirschberg, (2014) reported 732 accidents in the oil and gas sector (excluding LPG
related accidents) causing deaths of 5,189 people. The liquefied petroleum gas (LPG), the most
popular fuel for cooking in developing world, caused 128 accidents killing 1,336 people during
the 1970-2008 period (Figure 3). Tables A2 and A3 in the appendix present selected of oil and
gas production and transportation related explosions since 1950 to show examples of major


3
  The Globe and Mail, May 14, 2014, https://www.theglobeandmail.com/news/world/turkish-tragedy-among-the-
worlds-worst-mining-disasters/article18662842/
4
  BBC News, 13 May 2015. http://www.bbc.com/news/world-europe-32709431

                                                    10
accidents in the oil and gas industry. One of the biggest accidents in the developed world so far
was the Gulf of Mexico accident occurred on April 20, 2010 where a deep-water horizontal drilling
rig, owned and operated by British Petroleum, exploded. It caused a fire on the mobile offshore
drilling unit and caused deaths of 11 workers and seriously injured 17 others. The oil spill caused
by this accident is considered the largest accidental marine oil spill in the world, and the largest
environmental disaster in U.S. history.5

        Some notable and relatively recent oil and gas transportation (pipeline, tanker) related
accidents include 2013 Lac-Mégantic accident in Quebec, Canada (July7); 1998 oil pipeline
explosion in Nigeria (October 18), 1989 Ufa train disaster in former Soviet Union (June 4). The
2013 Lac-Mégantic accident occurred when an oil tanker train (73 tank cars) carrying light crude
oil exploded causing 47 deaths; It was the fourth-deadliest rail accident in Canadian history.6 The
1998 Nigerian oil pipeline accident occurred in Niger Delta (October 18, 1998) due to a cigarette
ignited fire on leaked oil around the oil pipeline and caused deaths of more than 1,000 people.7The
Ufa accident ignited by wheel sparks from two passenger trains heading in opposite directions at
a site where a leaking natural gas liquids (mainly propane and butane) created a highly flammable
cloud of fuel vapor, killed 575 people and injured another 800 people.8

        In the United States, the Centers for Diseases Control and Prevention (CDC) reports that
during the recent oil and gas boom period (2003-2013), 1,189 work-related fatalities occurred in
the oil and gas extraction industry; two-thirds of these fatalities were attributed to transportation
incidents and contact with objects/equipment (Mason et al. 2015).

        Hydropower accidents are few in number, 22 during the 1970-2008 period, but they caused
38% of the energy sectors total accidental deaths during the period (see Figure 3). 87% of the
hydropower accident fatalities during the period occurred in a single accident in China, Banqiao


5
  Goldenberg, Suzanne; MacAlister, Terry (November 28, 2012). "BP suspended from new US federal contracts over
Deepwater disaster". The Guardian. London; Zeller, Jr., Tom (May 28, 2010). "Estimates Suggest Spill Is Biggest in
U.S. History". The New York Times; "Bird Habitats Threatened by Oil Spill" from National Wildlife". National
Wildlife Federation. April 30, 2010.
6
  Associated Press, July 11, 2013.
http://www.syracuse.com/news/index.ssf/2013/07/canadian_train_derailment_death_roll_at_50_residents_of_lac-
megantic_jeer_rail_c.html
7
  Greenleft Weekly, July 19, 2000 NIGERIA: Hundreds die in pipeline disaster by Norm Dixion.
https://www.greenleft.org.au/content/nigeria-hundreds-die-pipeline-disaster. Retrieved June 17, 2017.
8
  Russia remembers 1989 Ufa train disaster". RIA Novosti. 2009-06-04,
https://sputniknews.com/russia/20090604155167464/

                                                       11
dam and Shimantan Reservoir Dam systems that occurred in August 1975 killing 26,108 people.
The dam systems built on the Ru River in Henan Province in Central China collapsed due to heavy
rainstorm inundating thousands of square kilometers. Besides the 26,108 direct deaths caused by
flooding and inundation, the accident was estimated to cause deaths of another 145,000 people
through subsequent epidemics and famine.9

        Contrary to general perception, the numbers of accidents and fatalities are much smaller
from nuclear energy sector. During the 1970-2008, one nuclear plant accident killed 31 people
(Figure 3). The Chernobyl nuclear disaster in current Ukraine occurred on April 26, 1986 where
the Chernobyl 4 nuclear reactor exploded dissipating the large amounts of radioactive materials.
Of 600 workers present on the site during the accident, 134 received high doses and suffered from
radiation sickness. Of these, 28 died in the first three months and another 19 died in 1987-2004 of
various causes. 530,000 people who were involved in recovery operations between 1986 and 1990
have got minor radiations and bear a potential risk of late consequences such as cancer and other
diseases.10 The most recent nuclear disaster is the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear reactors in Japan
caused by the 2011 (March 11), tsunami triggered by massive earthquake. The tsunami disabled
the cooling systems of Fukushima Daiichi nuclear reactors Unit 1, 2, 3 and 4 thereby resulting in
meltdowns and explosions and releasing radioactive materials for three days. Despite the scale of
the disaster, no immediate deaths were linked to radiation due to the accident reported, however,
some studies (Normile, 2012; Hoeve and Jacobson, 2012) estimate, based on the linear no-
threshold theory of radiation safety, 130–640 deaths in the long-run due to the radiation. Selected
list of power plant accidents is presented in Table A4 in the Appendix to show examples of major
accidents in the power generation industry.

    4. Occupational Risks in Energy Supply Systems

    Occupational impacts here refer to health impacts due to long-term exposure of people working
in energy supply chain including coal mines, power plants, oil refinery, gas processing plants and
energy transportation business. These people get exposed to harmful substances (e.g., dust in coal


9
  Yi Si, "The World's Most Catastrophic Dam Failures: The August 1975 Collapse of the Banqiao and Shimantan
Dams," in Dai Qing, The River Dragon Has Come!, M.E. Sharpe, New York, 1998.
http://www.sjsu.edu/faculty/watkins/aug1975.htm. Retrieved on June 7 2017.
10
   Chernobyl: The Chernobyl accident - UNSCEAR's assessments of the radiation effects,
http://www.unscear.org/unscear/en/chernobyl.html, retrieved on June 10, 2017.

                                                     12
mines or coal power plants) or situations (e.g., long-term exposure to heavy noise and vibrations
in power plants, oil refineries) and their health gets affected adversely. A large number of studies
(e.g., Attfield and Seixas, 1995; Kuempel et al. 1995; Attfield and Kuempel, 2008) have confirmed
various types of diseases are caused due to long term exposure in coal mining. Examining a group
of 3,194 underground bituminous coal miners and ex-miners between 1985 and 1988, Attfield and
Seixas (1995) finds that miners who work for 40 years in bituminous coal mines in the United
States have a higher risk of having progressive massive fibrosis (type of severe pneumonia).
Examining the quantitative relationship between exposure to respirable coal mine dust and
mortality from nonmalignant respiratory diseases in a group of 8,878 working male coal miners
who were medically examined from 1969 to 1971 and followed to 1979, Kuempel et al. (1995)
finds increasing standardized mortality ratios with increasing cumulative exposure category. The
study concluded that miners exposed at or below the current U.S. coal dust standard of 2 mg/m3
over a working lifetime, have an elevated risk of dying from pneumoconiosis or from chronic
bronchitis or emphysema. Evaluating mortality experience over 22–24 years of 8,899 working coal
miners initially medically examined in 1969–1971 at 31 U.S. coal mines, Attfield and Kuempel
(2008) shows that exposure to coal mine dust leads to increased mortality, even in the absence of
smoking.

       A number of literature have also investigated the occupational impacts of coal mining on
human health in the nearby areas (Coggon and Tylor, 1998; Hendryx and Ahern, 2008; Hendryx
and Ahern, 2009; Hendryx et al. 2008). Using data from a survey of 16,493 West Virginians,
Hendryx and Ahern (2008) finds that high levels of coal production are associated with worse
adjusted health status and with higher rates of cardiopulmonary disease, COPD, hypertension, lung
disease, and kidney disease. Through a national county-level analysis to identify contributions of
smoking rates, socioeconomic variables, coal-mining intensity and other variables to age-adjusted
lung cancer mortality in Appalachia, Hendryx et al. (2008) finds that lung cancer mortality for the
years 2000–2004 is higher in areas of heavy Appalachian coal mining after adjustments for
smoking, poverty, education, age, sex, race and other covariates. Comparing data from 3,141
counties for years 1979-2005 including counties in Appalachia with levels of coal mining above
the median, Appalachian counties with levels of mining below the median, non-mining counties
in Appalachia, and other counties in the nation, Hendryx and Ahern (2009) finds 1,736 to 2,889
excess annual age-adjusted deaths in coal mining areas. Reviewing a large body of literature

                                                13
examining the relationship between exposure of coal miners to dust from coal mines and loss of
their lung function, Coggon and Tylor (1998) confirms that coal mining increases the risks of
COPD in coal miners. Through monitoring of emission levels of surface coal mining in Jharia
Coalfield in India, Ghosh and Majee (2007) reports that emission levels of TSP, PM10 and benzene
soluble materials are much higher in the mining area as compared to those in ambient air outside
the mining area; obviously these pollutants cause adverse impacts on coal minors’ health.

       Oil refineries also poses a health risks to workers as inhalation of oil vapors and dermal
contact of crude oil, feed stocks, benzene could have adverse health impacts including cancers.
Based on a review and meta-analyses of cohort studies of more than 350,000 petroleum workers
in the United States, the United Kingdom, Canada, Australia, Finland, Sweden, and Italy, Wong
and Raabe (2000) concludes that exposure to various petroleum chemicals could cause a small
increase of skin cancer mortality (10%). Follow up investigation of a cohort of 1,583 workers
employed during the 1949–1982 period in a northern Italy oil refinery plant, Consonni et al. (1999)
observes elevated mortality from lymphoma and leukemia. The study also finds excess risk among
workers with 15 or more years of employment.

       A few studies are available examining occupational health impacts on electric utility
workers. van Wijngaarden et al. (2001) finds, through an investigation of mortality patterns of a
cohort of 138,905 male electric utility workers in the United States, that electric utility workers
had excess risk of total mortality, cardiovascular disease and some cancers. Further investigation
of deaths of electric utilities workers, Savitz et al. (2000) finds that both cumulative and average
magnetic field exposure is positively associated with brain cancer mortality in the United States.

       Mining and the production of nuclear fuels, such as Uranium, poses several risks to human
health. Long exposure to radon decay products causes greatest risks from nuclear fuel mining and
processing. Radon’s alpha-emitting radioactive decay products are strongly and causally linked to
lung cancer in humans (NRC, 2012). Similarly, uranium’s radioactive decay by alpha, beta, or
gamma emissions also pose hazards to uranium miners and processors. However, despite the fears
of the general public or a bad perception in general, the existing literature does not present
significant health risks from mining of nuclear fuels and nuclear power plants. Using data from
randomly selected 136 nuclear facilities and using several models, Baker and Hoel (2007) conduct
a meta-analysis to examines the linkage between childhood leukemia and proximity of nuclear

                                                14
facilities. While the analysis shows an increase in childhood leukemia near nuclear facilities, it
does not support a hypothesis to explain the excess; the majority of studies find elevated childhood
leukemia rates, but not statistically significant.



5. Air Pollution Impacts from the Energy Supply Chain

         As illustrated in the next section, air pollution is the largest source of human health risks
as compared to accidents and occupational impacts linked to energy supply and consumption
activities.


5.1 Health Impacts of Ambient Air Pollution


         Air pollution is one of the major environmental risks to human health. Exposure to elevated
concentrations of particulate matters, specifically with size of 10 microns (PM10) or less (PM2.5)
in diameter, are the main contributors to these risks as they cause cardiovascular and respiratory
disease, and cancers.
         There are hundreds of studies examining the linkage between ambient air pollution and
human health. Anderson et al. (2012) reviews such studies published over 30 years between 1990
and 2010 to determine the linkage between PM and human health. The study concludes that the
effects of PM on cardiovascular diseases are most pronounced. Similar relationship exists, but at
lower scale, between PM and respiratory diseases. It suggests further studies for the relationship
between PM and cerebrovascular disease.
         With evaluation of 79 risk factors to human health in 195 countries from 1990 to 2015, the
2015 Global Burden of Diseases, Injuries, and Risk Factors Study (GBD 2015) finds that air
pollution is the fifth largest contributor to global mortality and morbidity, particularly in low- and
middle-income countries after high blood pressure, smoking, diabetes and high cholesterol. Cohen
et al. (2017) estimates that long-term exposure to ambient PM2·5 caused 4·2 million deaths in
2015 representing 7·6% of total global mortality.11 The study also estimates that 103·1 million

11
   In order to produce these estimates, Cohen at al. (2017) used (i) spatially and temporally resolved estimates of
population-weighted exposure, (ii) specification of a theoretical minimum risk exposure level (TMREL), (iii)
estimation of relative risks across the exposure distribution, and (iv) estimates of the deaths and disability-adjusted
life-years (DALYs) for diseases linked causally to air pollution to attribute the deaths and DALYs to ambient air

                                                          15
years of healthy life got lost in 2015 due to this exposure. Another ambient air pollutant ozone was
estimated to cause an additional 254,000 deaths in the same year (Cohen, 2015). Although global
rates of mortality and morbidity due to PM2·5 exposure have decreased during the 1990-2015
period, the absolute numbers of deaths and disability-adjusted life-years have increased.
         Based on data provided by Cohen et al. (2017), Figure 4 presents distribution of global
mortality and morbidity due to ambient air pollution to the type of diseases enhanced by the
ambient air pollution. Of the total ambient air pollution caused deaths of 4.2 million in 2015, 36%
can be attributed to ischemic heart disease and about 20% each to cerebrovascular diseases and
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease. Seven percent of the total deaths were caused by lung
cancer (Figure 4a). Ambient air pollution poses a major risk to elderly people. Of the total people
died due ambient air pollution in 2015, more than 50% were those with age greater than 70 years.
About 42% of the total ambient air quality related death in 2015 were women. Of the total
morbidity, measured in terms of disability-adjusted life-years (DALYs) in 2015, that was caused
by ambient air pollution, 31% was caused by ischemic heart disease followed by lower respiratory
infection with 28% of the total DALYs (Figure 4b).




pollution. Exposure is quantified based on population-weighted annual mean concentrations of PM2·5 and ozone.
Global annual mean exposure to PM2·5 was estimated at 0·1 × 0·1° (~11 km × 11 km at the equator) resolution using
estimates from satellites combined with a chemical transport model, surface measurements, and geographical data.
Uniformly distributed TMREL values were 2·4 to 5·9 µg/m³ for PM2·5 and 33·3 to 41·9 parts per billion for ozone.
Risks across exposure distribution were determined based on integrated exposure–response functions (IERs). IERs
assign concentrations of PM2·5 to each type of exposure on an equivalent µg/m³ basis assuming that risk is determined
by the 24-h PM2·5 inhaled dose regardless of the exposure source. The relative risk of COPD mortality from ozone
exposure using a linear exposure–response function for respiratory mortality. DALYs and deaths attributable to
ambient air pollution were calculated by applying the year-specific, location specific, age-specific, and sex-specific
PAF to the numbers of DALYs and deaths. PAF (population-attributable fraction) is the proportion of deaths and
DALYs attributable to exposure above the TMREL.



                                                         16
Figure 4. Ambient Air Pollution caused Mortalities and Morbidities by type of Diseases in
                                 2015 (Unit: Thousand and %)


  (a) Mortality
                            Lung cancer ,
                              283.3, 7%


                                Lower
                              respiratory
                            infection, 675,
                                                       Ischaemic heart
                                 16%
                                                       disease , 1521.1,
                                                             36%



            Chronic                         Cerebrovascular
          obstructive                       disease , 898.1,
          pulmonary                              21%
        disease, 863.6,
             20%


  (b) Morbidity
                      Lung cancer ,
                        6,209, 6%




                                                      Ischaemic heart
                           Lower respiratory          disease , 32,406,
                           infection, 28,360,               31%
                                  28%

                                                 Cerebrovascular
                  Chronic                        disease , 19,243,
                 obstructive                           19%
                 pulmonary
              disease, 16,848,
                    16%

      Source: Cohen et al. (2017)

                                                 17
        The distribution of global mortality due to ambient air pollution for year 2013, is presented
in Figure 5 based on World Bank & IHME (2016). As can be seen from the figure, almost 90% of
global mortality due to ambient air pollution occurs in developing countries with the greatest
number in East Asia & Pacific region, followed by South Asia region. South Asian countries have
the highest mortality rate due to ambient air pollution with 136.3, 135.5 and 133.2 deaths per
hundred thousand population, respectively in Pakistan, India and Bangladesh in 2015 (Cohen et
all. 2017).


        Figure 5. Geographic Distribution of Ambient Air Pollution Related Mortality in 2013
                         Middle East and
                                                                  North America, 2%
                         North Africa, 2%
     Latin America and
       Caribbean, 3%

      Central Asia &
     Easteran Europe,
            9%

                                                                                  East Asia & Pacific,
                                                                                         40%
   Sub-Saharan Africa,
          11%




              South Asia, 32%




Source: World Bank & IHME (2016)


5.2. Health Impacts of Household Air Pollution
        Household air pollution (HAP) also called indoor air pollution refers to the air pollution
that occurs mostly inside a household and is mainly caused by burning of solid fuels, particularly,
biomass used for cooking or home heating. WHO (2016) reports that burning biomass and fossil
fuels in households is the primary source of indoor or household air pollution from elevated PM


                                                 18
level. Over a 24-hour period, levels of PM10 in biomass-using homes in Africa, Asia or Latin
America can range from 300 to 3000 micrograms per cubic meter (μg/m3) with the peak as high
as 10,000 μg/m3 during cooking time. These values are many folds higher than the standards set
by the World Health Organization (WHO). WHO standards suggest that 24-hour mean
concentration of PM10 should not exceed 50 μg/m3 (WHO, 2005).
       The adverse health impacts of indoor air pollution from biomass include child pneumonia,
other acute respiratory illnesses, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) and lung cancer
(Smith et al., 2004). According to the World Health Organization, around 3 billion people (or 40%
of the current world population) still cook and heat their homes using solid fuels (i.e. wood, crop
wastes, charcoal, coal and dung) in open fires and leaky stoves and each year more than 4 million
deaths are caused by the household air pollutants emitted from cooking with solid fuels. Mainly
women and young children are at risk, particularly in Sub-Saharan and South Asia regions (UNDP
and WHO, 2009).
       Many studies, published especially in medical or public health journals, have provided the
linkages between HAP exposure and health impacts. While it is not possible to discuss all those
studies here, we have presented a few examples of those studies.
       Three recent meta-analyses (Kurmi et al., 2010; Hu et al., 2010; Po et al., 2011) find that
exposure to smoke from burning biomass fuels for cooking and/or heating is associated with
increased risk of COPD. There is also evidence of indoor air pollution impacts on child cognitive
function, low birth weight, cervical cancer, adverse pregnancy outcomes, asthma, and tuberculosis
(Velema et al., 2002; Pokhrel et al., 2010; Pope et al., 2010; Hosgood III et al., 2011; Dix-Cooper
et al., 2012; Sumpter and Chandramohan, 2013; Trevor et al., 2013; Wong et al, 2013).
       Epstein et al. (2013) examines the impact of cooking fuels on low birth weight (LBW <
2500 g), and neonatal mortality (death within 28 days of birth) using cross-sectional data from
India's National Family Health Survey (NFHS-3) and finds that compared to households using
cleaner fuels (in which the mean birth weight is 2901 g), the primary use of coal, kerosene, and
biomass fuels is associated with significant decreases in mean birth weight (of −110 g for coal,
−107 g for kerosene, and −78 g for biomass). It also finds risk of neonatal death strongly associated
with household use of coal.
       Adetona et al. (2013) finds that women in Trujillo, Peru who cooked exclusively with
fuelwood or kerosene had higher exposure to polyaromatic hydrocarbons (PAH) compare to

                                                 19
women who cooked with LPG or coal briquette. PAH is an organic compound chronic or long-
term exposure to which could decrease immune function, damage kidney and liver and ause
breathing problems, asthma-like symptoms, and lung function abnormalities. It is also
carcinogenic.
       Studies in India and Nepal reveal that non-smoking women exposed to biomass smoke
have death rates from chronic respiratory disease comparable to those of heavy smokers who are
males (Modi et al., 2005). Based on 2003-2004 district level household survey, Lakshmi et al.
(2013) finds that biomass and kerosene cooking fuels are associated with stillbirth among married
women aged 15-49, representing about 12% of stillbirths in India. In Gambia, girls under the age
of five carried by their mothers while cooking have a six times greater risk of lung cancer than if
their parents smoked cigarettes and were not exposed to HAP from cooking (Gaye 2007).
       Dix-Cooper et al. (2012) investigated whether early life chronic exposure to wood smoke
is associated with children's neurodevelopmental and behavioral performance in San Marcos,
Guatemala and find that children’s neuropsychological tests were significantly associated with
mothers’ 3rd trimester CO exposures during her pregnancy. The neuropsychological tests included
visuo-spatial integration, short-term memory recall, long-term memory recall, and fine motor
performance and these findings persisted even if they were adjustment for child sex, age, visual
acuity, and socio-economic status.
       Pokhrel et al. (2010) investigates, in Nepal, the relationship between HAP exposure and
tuberculosis with the cases of 125 female patients of 20 - 65 years’ age, who visited TB clinics and
who had been newly diagnosed with active pulmonary TB by chest X-ray and positive active
sputum smears. The study finds that use of indoor biomass and kerosene fuels are associated with
TB in women.
       Lakshmi et al. (2013) analyzed the data from 188,917 ever-married women aged 15–49
included in India's 2003–2004 District Level Household Survey-II to investigate the association
between household use of cooking fuels (liquid petroleum gas/electricity, kerosene, biomass) and
the risk of stillbirth. The study finds that women who cook with firewood were more likely to have
experienced a stillbirth than those who cook with LPG/electricity. Moreover, kerosene lamp use
was also associated with stillbirths compared to electric lighting.
       Based on the latest information available from the World Health Organization (WHO,
2016), HAP causes 4.3 million deaths each year (Figure 6). Of the total, 34% is caused by stroke,

                                                 20
26% by ischemic heart dieses and 22% by COPD. Mortality caused by HAP accounts for almost
8% of global mortality, which is higher than that from malaria, tuberculosis and HIV/AIDS
combined (WHO, 2016). WHO (2016) also reports, in terms of morbidity, that HAP poses the
biggest environmental health risk factor worldwide, more critical compared to lack of access to
clean water and sanitation.
       WHO (2016) also reports that HAP doubles the risk of child mortality (under 5-year age)
due to pneumonia, which is the single biggest killer of children aged under five years worldwide.
The same report suggests that more than half of deaths of children below Age 5 due to acute lower
respiratory infections (ALRI), is caused by HAP, and almost one-quarter of all premature deaths
from stroke can be attributed to the chronic exposure to HAP. Similarly, approximately 15% of all
deaths due to ischemic heart disease (or over a million premature deaths annually), can be
attributed to HAP and more than one-third of premature deaths from COPD in adults in low- and
middle-income countries are due to HAP exposure. Furthermore, approximately 17% of annual
premature lung cancer deaths in adults are attributable to HAP. Besides, HAP causes other health
risks such as such as low birth weight and stillbirths, cervical cancer, tuberculosis, asthma, ear and
upper respiratory infections, and with nasopharyngeal and laryngeal cancers.


                Figure 6: Mortality from Household Indoor Air Pollution in 2012
                                           Total deaths due to HAP in 2012 in the world
                               34%
                                                            4.3 Million

                                                 26%
                                                                     22%



          12%

                                                                                        6%




       Pneumonia              Stroke        Ischaemic heart   Chronic obstructive   Lung cancer
                                                disease       pulmonary disease
                                                                   (COPD)


                                         Source: WHO (2016)




                                                  21
Women and children in low income countries are the most vulnerable to HAP related health
impacts as 60% of all premature deaths attributed to HAP occur in women and children (WHO,
2016). This is because, women and children get higher level of exposure to HAP due to their
greater involvement in daily cooking and other domestic activities. In terms of geographic
distribution of HAP mortality, regions with higher poverty incidence where traditional biomass
(wood fuel, animal waste and agriculture residues) are the primary fuels for cooking and home
heating, suffer the most (Figure 7). South-east Asia and the Western Pacific account for almost
80% of the global mortality due to HAP. India is the single country that suffers the highest from
HAP with 1.3 million premature deaths each year from HAP.

 Figure 7: Geographical Distribution of Mortality from Household Indoor Air Pollution in
                                          2012



            1,690
                           1,620         Total deaths due to HAP in 012 in the world
                                                         4.3 Million




                                        581.3



                                                      200.8
                                                                   117.2         81.3


         South & East Western Pacific   Africa      Eastern       Europe    The Americas
             Asia                                 Mediterranean


                                        Source: WHO (2016)

       Besides air pollution, activities in energy supply chains impact human health through water
and soil contamination by release of the toxic substances. Coal mines pose risks to human health
even after the mining operation is over as rainwater in abandoned mines reacts with exposed rock
and oxidizes metal sulfide minerals, thereby releasing iron, aluminum, cadmium, and copper into
the surrounding water system which could be a source of drinking water (Lashof et al. 2007). Coal
washing forms slurry of polymer chemicals, which is injected into old mine shafts that can release

                                                 22
arsenic, barium, lead, and manganese into nearby wells, contaminating local water supplies. Oil
and gas drilling also cause water and soil contamination as drilling muds, chemical used for
hydraulic fracturing contains high dose of hazardous substances. Jackson et al. (2014) argues that
horizontal drilling and hydraulic fracturing create challenges for maintaining well integrity due to
high pressures created in the reservoirs. The buildup pressure inside the well annulus pose a risk
of forcing fracking fluids and drilling muds out of the wellbore and toxic chemical substances
contained in the fluids and the muds could reach shallow groundwater. Although hydraulic
fracturing occurs thousands of meters underground and is unlikely to directly contaminate shallow
drinking water aquifers, it could connect the man-made hydraulic fractures (crakes) to a natural
fault or fracture or some other underground pathways thereby allowing toxic ﬂuids to migrate
upward (Myers, 2012; Warner et al. 2012). However, studies examining water and soil
contamination from activities in energy supply chains are very limited and mortality and morbidity
data from energy activity related water and social contamination do not exist.


     6. Comparison of Accidental, Occupational, and Air Pollution Impacts from Power
        Generation

        It would be interesting to have a comparison of human health impacts from the energy
supply chain through various channels – accidental, occupational and air pollution. However, lack
of data preclude such a comparison. There are no reliable data on accidental impacts although we
have listed major accidents in the energy chains in the appendix. Estimation of mortality and
morbidity from energy supply chain specific occupational impacts. Existing literature provide the
evidence of occupational impacts but do not provide reliable estimates of deaths and injuries.
Moreover, a common yardstick for the comparison does not exist as well. Nevertheless, some
studies attempted to compare accidental, occupational and air pollution impacts from different
types of power generation expressing the impacts per unit of electricity generation from the
corresponding generation type. Markandya and Wilkinson (2007) make such a comparison of
health impacts from various types of electricity generation in Europe. Figure 8 presents this
comparison.12 As can be seen from the Figure 8(a), air pollution is the main source of mortality


12
  The methods used in this estimation is called ‘Impact-Pathway-Approach’ developed by European Union project
‘External Costs of Energy’ or ‘ExternE’ that ran for 15 years from 1990 to 2005. It is a bottom-up approach, in which
emissions from a source are traced through as they disperse into the environment, after which the eﬀects of the

                                                         23
from power generation, and as expected, coal (both lignite and other coal) contributes the highest
to the total mortality from air pollution caused by power plants.13

Figure 8. Mortality and morbidity rates of power generation in Europe

          (a) Mortality: average number of death per TWh of power generation

 35                                                                              0.120

 30                                                                              0.100

 25
                                                                                 0.080
 20
                                                                                 0.060
 15
                                                                                 0.040
 10

  5                                                                              0.020

  0                                                                              0.000
             Air Pollution        Accidental              Occupational                             Accidental                     Occupational

              Lignite    Coal   Gas    Oil      Biomass     Nuclear                               Lignite    Coal   Gas     Oil    Nuclear




          (b) Morbidity: average number of illness per TWh of power generation

 350                                                                             20000
                                                                                                                     Minor illness
                                Major illness                                    18000
 300
                                                                                 16000
 250                                                                             14000
                                                                                 12000
 200
                                                                                 10000
 150                                                                               8000

 100                                                                               6000
                                                                                   4000
  50
                                                                                   2000
      0                                                                                  0
            Lignite     Coal     Gas           Oil   Biomass      Nuclear                    Lignite        Coal      Gas            Oil         Biomass



Note: Mortality number includes acute and chronic eﬀects. Chronic eﬀect deaths are between 88% and 99% of the
total. For nuclear power, they include all cancer-related deaths. Serious illness includes respiratory and
cerebrovascular hospital admissions, congestive heart failure, and chronic bronchitis. For nuclear power, they
include all non-fatal cancers and hereditary eﬀects. Minor illness includes restricted activity days, bronchodilator
use cases, cough, and lower-respiratory symptom days in patients with asthma, and chronic cough episodes.



dispersed pollutants, including on human health, are estimated. For more information, please visit
http://www.externe.info/externe_2006.
13
   Note that the data are from 90’s and early 2000; air pollution impacts might have gone down due to higher
environmental standards, particularly on the emissions of local air pollutants.

                                                                            24
Source: Markandya and Wilkinson (2007)

       Compared to air pollution caused mortality, accidental and occupational mortality is
negligible. Despite the general perception that nuclear power has the highest mortality rate, in fact
its coal and lignite power generation that have higher mortality rate as compared to nuclear power
generation. Like in the case of mortality, coal and lignite based power generation causes most
morbidity rate, no matter whether it is minor illness or major illness.

       Markandya and Wilkinson (2007) is not the only one reporting the scale of health impacts
of coal based power generation, a number of other studies do so. For example, Greenpeace
Indonesia (2015) reports that two air pollutants (PM2.5 and Ozone) from existing coal power
plants cause an estimated 7,100 premature deaths each year in Indonesia, of which almost 40%
from strokes, 36% from ischemic heart disease and remaining 24% from chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease, lung cancer and other cardiovascular and respiratory diseases. In a similar
study for Thailand, Greenpeace, Southeast Asia (2015) also reports that these two air pollutants
emitted from coal fired plants in Thailand caused 1,550 premature deaths in year 2011.



   7. Policy Implications and Conclusions

       This review leads to several policy implications. First, air pollution, both ambient and
household, is the major source of human health impacts from the energy supply chain (mining,
production, transformation and utilization). More than six million people are estimated to die each
year due to ambient and household air pollution emitted from the energy supply chain, making air
pollution one of the main risk factors to human health. Therefore, control of local air pollution,
specifically particulate matter, should be one of the main policy focuses in developing countries.
At present, such environmental issues are often overshadowed by climate change agendas, whereas
developing countries suffer more from local air pollution problems. The estimated deaths of more
than 6 million people per year is clear evidence of how developing countries suffer more from
local air pollution problems.

       Most of the mortality and morbidity from energy supply chains occur among the poor. It
mainly occurs in low- or middle-income countries and within those countries it mainly falls on
low-income households, because they are more vulnerable and have lower affordability to cure the

                                                 25
diseases. Poor households are not only vulnerable to air pollution related health impacts, they are
also vulnerable to accidental and occupational health impacts. This is because much of the
workforce is in coal mining, oil and gas drilling, oil tanker driving, and coal hauling in power
plants comes from low-income households. In many developing countries, casual workers in
mining, power plants and hydropower dams do not have proper health and safety measures and
insurance plans.

       Health impacts from the energy supply chain, particularly from household air pollution,
disproportionally fall on women and children. About half of the global population and most of
them in developing countries, use traditional biomass, the main source of household air pollution,
for cooking. Women and small children (under age 5 years) are the ones who are most exposed to
household air pollution and its health consequences. This implies that clean cooking either through
switching to cleaner fuels or to low emitting more fuel-efficient biomass stoves should be a
primary energy policy issue in the developing world.

       Nuclear power traditionally has had a bad perception among the general public. Many
countries do not allow nuclear power because of the perception problem. From the human health
impact angle, however, nuclear power is not the worst. Historically, it has one of the lowest impacts
on human health compared to other sources of energy. Nuclear power has lower accidental and
occupational health impacts compared to other source of energy, particularly coal. Moreover, it
does not produce air pollution, which is the main channel of health risks in the energy supply
chains. Policy makers should consider a social cost approach that accounts for both environmental
and human health impacts while making the choice of fuels to meet their energy needs, particularly
electrical energy.



References

Adetona, O., Z. Li, A. Sjödin, L.C. Romanoff, M. Aguilar-Villalobos, L.L. Needham, D.B. Hall,
       B.E. Cassidy and L.P. Naeher, 2013. Biomonitoring of polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbon
       exposure in pregnant women in Trujillo, Peru—Comparison of different fuel types used
       for cooking. Environment International, Vol. 53, pp. 1-8.



                                                 26
Anderson, J.O., J.G. Thundiyil and A. Stolbach (2012). Clearing the Air: A Review of the Effects
       of Particulate Matter Air Pollution on Human Health. Journal of Medical Toxicology, Vol.
       8, Issue 2, pp. 166–175.

Attfield, M.D. and N. S. Seixas (1995). Full Prevalence of pneumoconiosis and its relationship to
       dust exposure in a cohort of U.S. Bituminous coal miners and ex-miners. American Journal
       of Industrial Medicine. Vol. 27, Issue 1, pp. 137–151.

Attfield, M.D., E.D. Kuempel (2008). Mortality among U.S. underground coal miners: A 23-year
       follow-up. American Journal of Industrial Medicine. Vol. 51, Issue 4. pp. 231–245.

Baker, P.J. and D.G. Hoel (2007). Meta-analysis of standardized incidence and mortality rates of
       childhood leukaemia in proximity to nuclear facilities. Cancer Care, Vol. 16, Issue 4, pp.
       355–363.

British Petroleum (2017). BP Energy Outlook 2017, BP. London.

Peter Burgherr and Stefan Hirschberg (2014) Comparative risk assessment of severe accidents in
       the energy sector, Energy Policy, Vol. 74, Supplement 1, pp. S45-S56.

Coggon and Taylor (1998). ‘Coal mining and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: a review of
       the evidence’ Thorax 398.

Coggon, D. and A.N. Taylor (1998). Coal mining and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease: a
       review of the evidence. Thorax. Vol.53, pp.398–407.

Cohen, AJ, M. Brauer, R. Burnett, HR Anderson, J. Frostad, K. Estep, K. Balakrishnan, B.
       Brunekreef, L. Dandona, R. Dandona, V. Feigin, G. Freedman, B. Hubbell, A. Jobling, H.
       Kan, L. Knibbs, Y. Liu, R. Martin, L. Morawska, CA Pope III, H. Shin, K. Straif, G.
       Shaddick, M. Thomas, R. van Dingenen, A. van Donkelaar, T. Vos, CJL Murray, M H
       Forouzanfar (2017). Estimates and 25-year trends of the global burden of disease
       attributable to ambient air pollution: an analysis of data from the Global Burden of Diseases
       Study 2015. Lancet, Vol. 389, pp. 1907–18.

Consonni, D., A. C. Pesatori, A. Tironi, I. Bernucci, C. Zocchetti and P. A. Bertazzi (1999).
       Mortality study in an Italian oil refinery: Extension of the follow-up. American Journal of
       Industrial Medicine, Vol. 35, Issue 3, pp. 287–294.

                                                27
Dix-Cooper, L., B. Eskenazi, C. Romero, J. Balmes and K.R. Smith, 2012. Neuro developmental
       performance among school age children in rural Guatemala is associated with prenatal and
       postnatal exposure to carbon monoxide, a marker for exposure to wood smoke.
       NeuroToxicology, Vol. 33, pp. 246-254.

Epstein, M.B., M.N. Bates, N.K. Arora, K. Balakrishnan, D.W. Jack and K.R. Smith, 2013.
       Household fuels, low birth weight, and neonatal death in India: The separate impacts of
       biomass, kerosene, and coal. International Journal of Hygiene and Environmental Health
       Vol. 216 (5), pp. 523-532.

Gaye, Amie “Access to Energy and Human Development,” Human Development Report
       2007/2008 (United Nations Development Program Human Development Report Office
       Occasional Paper, 2007).

Ghose, M. K. and S. R. Majee (2007). Characteristics of Hazardous Airborne Dust Around an
       Indian Surface Coal Mining Area. Environmental Monitoring and Assessment, Vol. 130,
       No. 1, pp. 17-25.

Greenpeace, Indonesia (2015). Human cost of coal power:
       http://www.greenpeace.org/seasia/Press-Centre/Press-Releases/Research-from-Harvard-
       reveals-health-impacts-of-Indonesias-coal-plants/

Greenpeace, Southeast Asia (2015). Human cost of coal power: How coal-fired power plants
       threaten the health of Thais. http://www.greenpeace.or.th/Thailand-human-cost-of-coal-
       power/en.pdf

Haines, A., A. J. McMichael, K. R. Smith, I. Roberts, J. Woodcock, A. Markandya, B. G.
       Armstrong, D. Campbell- Lendrum, A. D. Dangour, M. Davies, N. Bruce, C. Tonne, M.
       Barrett and P. Wilkinson, 2009. Public Health Benefits of Strategies to Reduce
       Greenhouse-Gas Emissions: Overview and Implications for Policy Makers. The Lancet,
       374 (9707): 2104–2114.

Hendryx, M. and M. M. Ahern (2008). Relations between Health Indicators and Residential
       Proximity to Coal Mining in West Virginia. American Journal of Public Health: Vol. 98,
       No. 4, pp. 669-671.


                                              28
Hendryx, M. and M. M. Ahern (2009). Mortality in Appalachian Coal Mining Regions: The Value
       of Statistical Life Lost. Public Health Reports, Vol. 124, No. 4, pp. 541-550.

Hendryx, M., K. O’Donnell and K. Horn (2008). Lung cancer mortality is elevated in coal-mining
       areas of Appalachia, Lung Cancer, Vol. 62, No. 1, pp. 1–7.

Hoeve, J.E.T and M. Z. Jacobson (2012). "Worldwide health effects of the Fukushima Daiichi
       nuclear accident". Energy & Environmental Science. Vol. 5, No. 9, pp. 8743 -8750.

Hosgood III, H. D., H. Wei, A. Sapkota, I. Choudhury, N. Bruce, K. R. Smith, N. Rothman and Q.
       Lan., 2011. Household coal use and lung cancer: systematic review and meta-analysis of
       case-control studies, with an emphasis on geographic variation. International Journal of
       Epidemiology, Vol. 40 (3), pp. 719-728.

Hu, G., Y. Zhou, J. Tian, W. Yao, J. Li, B. Li and P. Ran, 2010. Risk of COPD From Exposure to
       Biomass Smoke: A Metaanalysis. Chest, Vol. 138 (1), pp. 20-31.

International Energy Agency (2016). Key World Energy Statistics. IEA, Paris.

Jackson, RB, Avner Vengosh, JW Carey, RJ Davies, TH Darrah, F. O’Sullivan and G. P´etron
       (2014). The Environmental Costs and Beneﬁts of Fracking. Annual Review of
       Environmental Resource. Vol. 39. Pp. 327-362.

Kirk R. Smith, Howard Frumkin, Kalpana Balakrishnan, Colin D. Butler, Zo¨e A. Chafe, Ian
       Fairlie, Patrick Kinney, Tord Kjellstrom, Denise L. Mauzerall, Thomas E. McKone,
       Anthony J. McMichael, and Mycle Schneider (2013). Energy and Human Health. Annual
       Review of Public Health, Vol. 34. Pp.159–188.

Kuempel, E. D., Leslie T. Stayner, Michael D. Attfield, C. Ralph Buncher (1995). Exposure-
       response analysis of mortality among coal miners in the United States. American Journal
       of Industrial Medicine. Vol. 28, Issue 2. pp. 167–184.

Kurmi, O.P., S. Semple, P. Simkhada, W.C.S. Smith and J.G. Ayres, 2010. COPD and chronic
       bronchitis risk of indoor air pollution from solid fuel: a systematic review and meta-
       analysis. Thorax, Vol. 65 (3), pp. 221-228.




                                               29
Lakshmi, P.V.M., N.K. Virdi, A. Sharma, J.P. Tripathy, K.R. Smith, M.N. Bates and R. Kumar,
       2013. Household air pollution and stillbirths in India: Analysis of the DLHS-II National
       Survey. Environmental Research, Vol. 121, pp.17-22.

Lashof DA, Delano D, Devine J et al. (2007). Coal in a changing climate. Natural Resources
       Defense Council. http://www.nrdc.org/globalwarming/coal/coalclimate.pdf.

Lockwood, A.H., Kristen Welker-Hood, Molly Rauch and Barbara Gottlieb (2009). Coal’s Assault
       on Human Health: A Report from Physicians for Social Responsibility. Physicians for
       Social Responsibility, Washington, DC.

Markandya, A. and P. Wilkinson (2007). Electricity generation and health. Lancet, Vol. 370, pp.
       979–90.

Mason, KL, KD Retzer, R Hill, JM Lincoln (2015). Occupational Fatalities During the Oil and
       Gas Boom — United States, 2003–2013, CDC Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report.
       Vol. 64, No. 20 (May 29 Issue), pp. 551-554.

Modi, V., S. McDade, D. Lallement and J. Saghir, 2005. Energy Services for the Millennium
       Development Goals. The World Bank and the United Nations Development Program
       (UNDP).

Myers T. (2012). Potential contaminant pathways from hydraulically fractured shale to aquifers.
       Groundwater 50:872–82 83.

Narain, Urvashi, and Chris Sall (2016). “Methodology for Valuing the Health Impacts of Air
       Pollution: Discussion of Challenges and Proposed Solutions.” World Bank, Washington
       DC.

National Research Council (2012). Potential Human Health Effects of Uranium Mining,
       Processing, and Reclamation (in Uranium Mining in Virginia: Scientific, Technical,
       Environmental, Human Health and Safety, and Regulatory Aspects of Uranium Mining
       and Processing in Virginia). National Academies Press. Washington, DC.

Normile, D. (2012). "Is Nuclear Power Good for You?". Science. 337 (6093): 395–396 (27 July
       2012)). doi:10.1126/science.337.6093.395-b.


                                                30
Pokhrel, A., Bates, M., Verma, S., Joshi, H., Sreeramareddy, C., and K.R. Smith. 2010.
       "Tuberculosis and indoor biomass and kerosene use in Nepal: a case-control study."
       Environmental Health Perspectives 118:558–564.

Pope, D. P., V. Mishra, L. Thompson, A. R. Siddiqui, E. A. Rehfuess, M. Weber and N. G. Bruce,
       2010. Risk of low birth weight and stillbirth associated with indoor air pollution from solid
       fuel use in developing countries. Epidemiologic Reviews, Vol. 32 (1), pp.70-81.

Savitz, D.A., J. Cai, E. van Wijngaarden, D. Loomis, G. Mihlan, V. Dufort, R. C. Kleckner, L.
       Nylander-French, H. Kromhout, H. Zhou (2000). Case-cohort analysis of brain cancer and
       leukemia in electric utility workers using a refined magnetic field job-exposure matrix.
       American Journal of Industrial Medicine. Vol. 38, Issue 4, pp. 417-435.

Smith, K.R., A. Woodward, D. Campbell-Lendrum, D.D. Chadee, Y. Honda, Q. Liu, J.M. Olwoch,
       B. Revich, and R. Sauerborn, 2014: Human health: impacts, adaptation, and co-benefits.
       In: Climate Change 2014: Impacts, Adaptation, and Vulnerability. Part A: Global and
       Sectoral Aspects. Contribution of Working Group II to the Fifth Assessment Report of the
       Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change [Field, C.B., V.R. Barros, D.J. Dokken, K.J.
       Mach, M.D. Mastrandrea, T.E. Bilir, M. Chatterjee, K.L. Ebi, Y.O. Estrada, R.C. Genova,
       B. Girma, E.S. Kissel, A.N. Levy, S. MacCracken, P.R. Mastrandrea, and L.L. White
       (eds.)]. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, United Kingdom and New York, NY,
       USA, pp. 709-754.

Sumpter, C. and D. Chandramohan, 2013. Systematic review and meta-analysis of the associations
       between indoor air pollution and tuberculosis. Tropical Medicine and International Health,
       Vol. 18 (1), pp. 101-108.

Trevor J., V. Antony and S.K. Jindal, 2013. The effect of biomass fuel exposure on the prevalence
       of    asthma     in    adults     in    India    -     review     of    current     evidence.
       doi:10.3109/02770903.2013.849269.

van Wijngaarden, E., D. A. Savitz, R. C. Kleckner, R. Kavet and D. Loomis (2001). Mortality
       patterns by occupation in a cohort of electric utility workers. American Journal of Industrial
       Medicine. Vol. 40, Issue 6, pp. 667–673.



                                                31
Velema, J., A. Ferrera, M. Figueroa, R. Bulnes, L. Toro, O. De Barahona, L. Claros and W.
       Melchers, 2002. Burning wood in the kitchen increases the risk of cervical neoplasia in
       hpv-infected women in Honduras. International Journal of Cancer, Vol. 97, pp. 536-541.

Vengosh A, Jackson RB, Warner N, Darrah TH, Kondash A. 2014. A critical review of the risks
       to water resources from unconventional shale gas development and hydraulic fracturing in
       the United States. Environmental Science and Technology. 48:8334–48.

Warner NR, Jackson RB, Darrah TH, Osborn SG, Down A, et al. (2012). Geochemical evidence
       for possible natural migration of Marcellus formation brine to shallow aquifers in
       Pennsylvania. Proceedings of National Academy of Sciences, Vol. 109, pp. 11961–66.

Wong, G.W.K., B. Brunekreef, P. Ellwood, H.R. Anderson, M.I. Asher, J. Crane and C.K.W. Lai,
       2013. Cooking fuels and prevalence of asthma: a global analysis of phase three of the
       International Study of Asthma and Allergies in Childhood (ISAAC). The Lancet
       Respiratory Medicine, Vol. 1 (5), pp. 386-394.

Wong, O. and G. K. Raabe (2000). A Critical Review of Cancer Epidemiology in the Petroleum
       Industry, with a Meta-analysis of a Combined Database of More Than 350,000 Workers.
       Regulatory Toxicology and Pharmacology. Vol. 32, pp. 78–98.

World Bank and Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation (2016). The Cost of Air Pollution:
       Strengthening the Economic Case for Action. World Bank, Washington, DC.

World Health Organization (WHO). 2006. WHO Air Quality Guidelines for Particulate Matter,
       Ozone, Nitrogen dioxide and Sulfur dioxide: Global Update 2005 – Summary of Risk
       Assessment. WHO. Geneva.

World Health Organization (WHO). 2016a. Ambient air pollution: A global assessment of
       exposure and burden of disease. WHO. Geneva.

World Health Organization (WHO). 2016b. Burning opportunity: clean household energy for
       health, sustainable development, and wellbeing of women and children. WHO. Geneva.




                                              32
33
Table A1: List of selected Coal Mining Accidents since 1950

                                                                                                          Number of
      Date                  Location                                            Description                deaths
 21-Dec-1951   West Frankfurt, Illinois, USA        Orient 2 coal mine explosion                                119
 12-Oct-1954   Chhindwara, India                    Flooding of Newton Chikli colliery                            63
 8-Aug-1956    Marcinelle, Belgium                  Fire on Bois du Cazier mine                                 262
 22-Jan-1959   Luzerne County, Pennsylvania         Flooding on River Slope Mine                                  12
 9-May-1960    Datong, China                        Underground explosion in Laobaidong mine                    684
 9-Nov-1963    Kyushu, Japan                        Explosion and CO poisoning at the Miike coal mine           458
 28-May-1965   Dhanabad, India                      Underground explosion in Dhanbad coal mine                  300
 17-May-1965   South Wales                          Cambrian Colliery in South Wales                              31
 21-Oct-1966   Aberfan disaster                     Aberfan disaster                                            144
 20-Nov-1968   Farmington, West Virginia            Farmington Mine Disaster                                      78
 6-Jun-1972    Wankie, Zimbabwe                     Series of underground explosion in Wankie coal mine         426
 21-Mar-1973   West Yorkshire, England              Lofthouse Colliery disaster                                    7
 27-Dec-1975   Dhanbad, India                       Chasnala mining disaster                                    372
 12-Sep-1983   Shemiranat, Tehran                   Mohd.Darabi Coal mine disaster                                14
 16-Sep-1986   South Africa                         Underground fire in Kinross mine                            177
 2-Jun-1988    Borken, Hessen, Germany              Lignite mine explosion                                        57
 9-May-1992    Pictou County, Nova Scotia, Canada   Methane and coal dust explosion in Westray mine               26
 9-May-1993    Nambija, Ecuador                     Soil erosion on top of Nambija mine burrying miners         300
 28-Aug-1994   Rajpura Dariba,                      Flooding in Rajpura Dariba mine                               63
 10-May-1995   Vaal Reefs, South Africa             Fall of a locomotive on Vaal Reefsccoal mine                104
 20 Jun 2003   Heilongjiang Province, China         Coal mine explosion                                         124

 5-Apr-2010    Upper Big Branch Mine disaster       Upper Big Branch Mine disaster                               29
 5-Aug-2010    Atacama Desert, Chile                Copiapó mining accident                                       0
 19-Nov-2010   New Zealand                          Pike River Mine disaster                                     22
 13-May-2014   Soma, Turkey                         Soma mine disaster                                          300
Sources:

                                                                 34
Kucuker H. "Occupational fatalities among coal mine workers in Zonguldak, Turkey, 1994–2003". Occup Med (Lond) 2006 Mar;56(2):144-6. PMID 16490795

Terazawa K, Takatori T, Tomii S, Nakano K. Methane asphyxia. Coal mine accident investigation of distribution of gas. Am J Forensic Med Pathol. 1985
Sep;6(3):211-4. PMID 3870672

Retzer, John. "Ten Worst Mining Disasters". Michigan, USA: Bogey Media. Archived from the original on 18 April 2010. Retrieved 17 May 2014.

"The world's worst coal mining disasters". Retrieved 16 August 2015.

"Chinazhaoge Blog" (in Chinese). sohu.com. Retrieved 7 August 2010.

Pittsburgh Post Gazette July 3,1960 page 3 section 1

History.com. "Mine explodes in Oklahoma". History.com. A+E Networks. Retrieved 10 February 2016.

http://www.dmm.org.uk/uknames/u1893-03.htm

McAteer, Davitt (December 6, 2007). Monongah: The Tragic Story of the 1907 Monongah Mine Disaster, the Worst Industrial Accident in US History. West
Virginia University Press. p. 332. ISBN 1-933202-29-7




                                                                            35
Table A2: List of selected accidents in oil and gas wells and refineries and storage facilities
Only large accidents are included
        Date & Accident                                         Description                                                       Impacts
 1982:                            On 15 February 1982, Ocean Ranger, a semi-submersible mobile                      All 84 crew members on board died
 Sinking of Ocean Ranger,         offshore drilling and exploration platform sank on the Grand
 Canadaa                          Banks of Newfoundland, Canada due to a high tide
 1984: Oil refinery explosion in On July 23, 1984, an explosion and fire took place at a Union Oil                  Deaths of 17 people
 Romeoville, Illinoisb            petroleum refinery in Romeoville, Illinois, outside Chicago
 1984: San Juan Ixhuatepec,       On 19 November 1984, a large LPG storage and distribution                         500–600 people killed, and 5000–7000
 LPG storage disaster nearby      center in San Juan Ixhuatepec, 20 km north of Mexico City,                        others suffered with severe burns
 Mexico Cityc                     exploded due to a fire ignited in LPG vapor cloud created due to
                                  leakage
 1988: Norco, oil refinery,       Fire and explosion due to escaped gas from a corroded pipe in                     7 fatalities, 42 injured
 Louisiana, USAd                  one of the facility's catalytic cracking units
 2005:                            On March 23, 2005, a hydrocarbon vapor cloud was ignited and                      Deaths of 5 workers and 180 others
 Texas refinery explosione        exploded at the ISOM isomerization process unit at BP's Texas                     injured
                                  City refinery, which is US’s third largest refinery
 2010: Gulf of Mexico, drilling   On April 20, 2010 where a deep-water horizontal drilling rig,                     Deaths of 11 workers and seriously
 rig explosionf                   owned and operated by British Petroleum, exploded. It caused a                    injured 17 others
                                  fire on the mobile offshore drilling unit
a
 The New York Times (16 February 1982). “84 Feared Dead as Oil Drilling Rig Reportedly Sinks in North Atlantic".
http://www.nytimes.com/1982/02/16/world/84-feared-dead-as-oil-drilling-rig-reportedly-sinks-in-north-
atlantic.html?scp=7&sq=sinks%20in%20Atlantic&st=cse
b
 Chicago Tribune (2 November 1985). "Welding Cracks Caused Union Oil Blast Fatal To 17" by Dave Schneidman. http://articles.chicagotribune.com/1985-11-
02/news/8503150149_1_cracks-weld-fire-marshal
c
    Arturson, G. (1987). "The tragedy of San Juanico--the most severe LPG disaster in history". Burns Incl Therm Inj. 13 (2): 87–102.
d
 Tim Haïdar (August 27, 2012), Five Deadliest Onshore Oil & Gas Blasts. Oil & Gas IQ, https://www.oilandgasiq.com/integrity-hse-maintenance/articles/five-
deadliest-onshore-oil-gas-accidents
e
    BP Fatal Accident Investigation Report -Isomerization Unit Explosion Final Report, Texas City, Texas, USA. December 9, 2005.

The Guardian (November 28, 2012). "BP suspended from new US federal contracts over Deepwater disaster" by Suzanne Goldenberg and Terry MacAlister.
https://www.theguardian.com/environment/2012/nov/28/epa-suspends-bp-oil-spill

                                                                                 36
Table A3: List of selected accidents in oil and gas transportation (pipelines and tankers)
Only large accidents are included

        Date & Accident                                                Description                                                     Impacts
    1989:                         On June 4, 1989, Wheel sparks from two passenger trains heading in opposite              killed 575 people and injured
    Ufa train disaster in         directions ignited fire in a site about 50 kilometers from the city of Ufa where a       another 800 people
    former Soviet Uniona          highly flammable cloud of fuel vapor was created due to leakage natural gas
                                  liquids (mainly propane and butane)
    1998: Jesse, Niger            On October 18, 1998, A cigarette ignited fire on leaked oil around the oil               Deaths of more than 1,000
    Delta oil pipeline            pipeline in Jesse, Niger Delta                                                           people
    explosion, Nigeriab
    2000: Another oil             On July 12, 2000 after about two years of major explosion, an oil pipeline again         250 deaths
    pipeline explosion in         exploded due to fire when, apparently, villagers were scooping up spilled
    Jesse, Niger Delta,           gasoline with buckets
    Nigeriac
    2004:                         On 18 February 2004, a runaway train with 51 wagons carrying sulphur,                    295 confirmed deaths and over
    Nishapur train disaster,      fertiliser, petrol and cotton wool crashed into the community in the middle of           460 injured, including 182
    Irand                         the night and exploded                                                                   rescue workers and state
                                                                                                                           officials
    2006: Lagos oil pipeline      On December 26, 2006, a gasoline pipeline ruptured by thieves exploded in a              260 deaths
    explosion, Nigeriae           poor neighborhood of Lagos
    2009: Viareggio train         A 14-car freight train carrying LPG got derailed and ploughed into houses in             Deaths of 12 people and injured
    crash, Italyf                 the small Italian town of Viareggio, causing an explosion and a fire                     at least 50

    2013: Lac-Mégantic            On July6, 2013, an oil tanker train (73 tank cars) carrying light crude oil              47 deaths
    tanker disaster, Quebec,      derailed resulting in the fire and explosion of multiple tank cars in the town of
    Canadag                       Lac-Mégantic in Quebec
a
    Russia remembers 1989 Ufa train disaster". RIA Novosti. 2009-06-04, https://sputniknews.com/russia/20090604155167464/
b
 Greenleft Weekly (July 19, 2000). “ NIGERIA: Hundreds die in pipeline disaster” by Norm Dixion. https://www.greenleft.org.au/content/nigeria-hundreds-die-
pipeline-disaster.
c
    Las Angeles Times (12 July 2000), “Pipeline Blast Kills as Many as 250 Nigerians”. http://articles.latimes.com/2000/jul/12/news/mn-51655
d
    BBC News (25 February, 2004), 'Error' caused Iran train blast. http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/middle_east/3487290.stm
e
    Associate Press (December 27, 2006), “Gas Line Explodes in Nigeria, Killing at Least 260” http://www.nytimes.com/2006/12/27/world/africa/27nigeria.html


                                                                                37
f
 The Guardian (30 June 2009). Train carrying liquid gas explodes in Italy killing 12. https://www.theguardian.com/world/2009/jun/30/train-crash-viareggio-
lucca
g
 Associated Press (July 11, 2013). “Canada train derailment: Death toll at 50; Lac-Megantic residents jeer rail CEO”, by
http://www.syracuse.com/news/index.ssf/2013/07/canadian_train_derailment_death_roll_at_50_residents_of_lac-megantic_jeer_rail_c.html




                                                                             38
Table A4: List of selected accidents in power plants
Accidents with more than 5 fatalities were reported; also presented are accidents with large media coverage, such as Fukushima.

     Date & Accident                             Description                                                      Impacts
    1963:                 On October 9, 1963, 260 million cubic metres of rock          Destroyed several villages in the valley and killed almost
    Vajont Dam, Italya    broke off from the top of Monte Toc and fell into the         2,000 people
                          reservoir of the Vajont Dam on the border between
                          Veneto and Friuli Venezia Giulia. It caused overflow of
                          water causing flooding in the downstream valley
    1975:                 On August 8, 1975, the Shimantan and Banqiao dams             It caused 26,000 deaths directly and another 145,000 deaths
    Shimantan/Banqiao     built on the Ru River in Central China collapsed due to       through subsequent epidemics and famine.
    Dam Failure,          heavy rainstorm inundating thousands of square
    Henan Province,       kilometers
    Chinab
    1979: Machchu-2       On August 11, 1979, unprecedented flooding caused by          1,500 deaths
    dam, Gujrat, Indiac   torrential rain triggered the collapse of the Machchu-2
                          dam on the Machhu river and inundated Morvi town of
                          Rajkot district of Gujrat
    1986: Chernobyl       On 26 April 1986, Chernobyl 4 nuclear reactor exploded        Of 600 workers present on the site during the accident, 134
    Nuclear Power         dissipating the large amounts of radioactive materials        received high doses and suffered from radiation sickness. Of
    Plant, Ukrained                                                                     these, 28 died in the first three months and another 19 died
                                                                                        in 1987-2004 of various causes. 530,000 people who were
                                                                                        involved in recovery operations between 1986 and 1990
                                                                                        have got minor radiations and bear a potential risk of late
                                                                                        consequences such as cancer and other diseases.
    2009:                 Water flooded a turbine room at the Sayano–                   72 fatalities
    Sayano–               Shushenskaya Dam located more than 3,000 km east of
    Shushenskaya          Moscow
    Dam, Russiae
    2011: Fukushima       On 11 March 2011, a tsunami triggered by massive              No immediate death linked to radiation due to the accident,
    Daiichi nuclear       earthquake disabled the cooling systems of Fukushima          but some studies (Normile, 2012; Hoeve and Jacobson,
    disaster, Japanf      Daiichi nuclear reactors Unit 1, 2, 3 and 4 thereby           2012) estimate, based on the linear no-threshold theory of
                          resulting in meltdowns and explosions and releasing           radiation safety, 130–640 deaths in the long-run due to the
                          radioactive materials for three days                          radiation
a
  Expecting Disaster: The 1963 Landslide of the Vajont Dam. Arcadia, 2011, No. 8. http://www.environmentandsociety.org/arcadia/expecting-disaster-1963-
landslide-vajont-dam

                                                                            39
b
 Shimantan/Banqiao Dam Failure - Thayer Watkins. "The Catastrophic Dam Failures in China in August 1975". San Jose State University. Retrieved on July 7
2017.
c
 Machchu dam: Noorani, A. G. (25 August 1979). "The Inundation of Morvi". Economic and Political Weekly. 14 (34): 1454 and Noorani, A. G. (21 April
1984). "Dissolving Commissions of Inquiry". Economic and Political Weekly. 19 (16): 667–668.
d
    Chernobyl: The Chernobyl accident - UNSCEAR's assessments of the radiation effects, http://www.unscear.org/unscear/en/chernobyl.html
e
 Ilya Naymushin (2009-08-17). "Russian dam disaster kills 10, scores missing". Reuters. http://www.reuters.com/article/us-russia-accident-sb-
idUSTRE57G0M120090817?sp=true
f
 Normile, D. (27 July 2012). "Is Nuclear Power Good for You?". Science. 337 (6093): 395–396. doi:10.1126/science.337.6093.395-b; Hoeve, J.E.T. and M. Z.
Jacobson (2012). "Worldwide health effects of the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear accident". Energy & Environmental Science. 5 (9): 8743.




                                                                              40
