                                                     WPS8040


Policy Research Working Paper                       8040




    Financial Inclusion and Inclusive Growth
             A Review of Recent Empirical Evidence

                               Asli Demirguc-Kunt
                                  Leora Klapper
                                 Dorothe Singer




Development Research Group
Finance and Private Sector Development Team
April 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 8040


  Abstract
 There is growing evidence that appropriate financial services                      payments services, savings accounts, loans, and insurance—
 have substantial benefits for consumers, especially women                          can contribute to inclusive growth and economic development.
 and poor adults. This paper provides an overview of financial                      This paper also discusses some of the challenges to achieving
 inclusion around the world and reviews the recent empirical                        greater financial inclusion and directions for future research.
 evidence on how the use of financial products—such as




  This paper is a product of the Finance and Private Sector Development Team, Development Research Group. It is part of
  a larger effort by the World Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy
  discussions around the world. Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org.
  The authors may be contacted at lklapper@worldbank.org.




         The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
         issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
         names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
         of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
         its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                       Produced by the Research Support Team
                     Financial Inclusion and Inclusive Growth:
                       A Review of Recent Empirical Evidence


                   Asli Demirguc-Kunt, Leora Klapper, and Dorothe Singer




JEL: D14, G02, G28


Keywords: Consumer Finance; Financial Inclusion; Financial Institutions; Government Policy and
          Regulation
1      Introduction

Financial inclusion means that adults have access to and can effectively use a range of
appropriate financial services. Such services must be provided responsibly and safely to the
consumer and sustainably to the provider in a well regulated environment. At its most basic
level, financial inclusion starts with having a deposit or transaction account at a bank or other
financial institution or through a mobile money service provider, which can be used to make and
receive payments and to store or save money. Yet 2 billion or 38 percent of adults reported not
having an account in 2014 (Demirguc-Kunt et al., 2015). Financial inclusion also encompasses
access to credit from formal financial institutions that allow adults to invest in educational and
business opportunities, as well as the use of formal insurance products that allow people to better
manage financial risks.

This paper provides a brief overview of financial inclusion around the world and discusses the
benefits of financial inclusion and how they can contribute to inclusive growth and economic
development, summarizing related empirical evidence.1 It concludes by outlining some of the
challenges to realizing the benefits of financial inclusion and directions for future research.

Financial inclusion can help reduce poverty and inequality by helping people invest in the future,
smooth their consumption, and manage financial risks. Adults around the world and in all
income groups use an array of different financial services. However, many low-income adults
rely on informal financial services (Collins et al., 2009). Access to formal financial services
allows people to make financial transactions more efficiently and safely and helps poor people
climb out of poverty by making it possible to invest in education and business. By providing
ways to manage income shocks like unemployment or the loss of a breadwinner, financial
inclusion can also prevent people from falling into poverty in the first place. This is especially
relevant for people living in the poorest households.

Financial inclusion also benefits society more broadly. Shifting payments from cash into
accounts allows for more efficient and more transparent payments from governments or

                                                            
1
 See Klapper, et al. (2016) for a review of how financial inclusion can help achieve the Sustainable Development
Goals (SDG’s). See Karlan and Morduch (2010) and Beck (2015) for surveys of the literature on access to finance
and Cull et al. (2014) for a summary of the benefits of financial inclusion.

                                                               2
 
businesses to individuals – and from individuals to government or businesses. Although no
conclusive evidence exists at this point, access to the formal financial system and appropriate
credit can potentially facilitate investments in education and business opportunities that could, in
the long term, boost economic growth and productivity.

Most of the attention and research on household finance and economic development in the past
two decades has been on the impact of microcredit. Celebrated by many as an effective
development tool, microcredit was the basis for the 2006 Nobel Peace Prize. But as rigorous
evaluations of the development impacts of microcredit became more common and evidence
started to accumulate of the more mixed effects of access to microcredit for low-income
individuals, there has been a shift in focus in recent years towards account ownership and the
savings and payments services accounts can provide. Similarly, there has also been an increased
focus on insurance, especially agricultural insurance.

There is some evidence that financial depth – a concept related to but distinct from financial
inclusion – also can contribute to shared economic growth and development. While financial
inclusion is typically measured by ownership of an account by individuals, financial
development is measured by macro-level indicators, such as market capitalization of the stock
market or a country’s ratio of credit to gross domestic product (GDP). Many factors influence
both a country’s level of financial inclusion and financial development, including income per
capita, good governance, the quality of institutions, availability of information, and the
regulatory environment (Allen et al. 2016; Rojas-Suarez 2010; Karlan et al. 2014; Park and
Mercado 2015). Research has empirically linked measures of financial depth with greater
economic growth and lower income inequality (King and Levine 1993; Beck et al. 2000; Clark et
al. 2006; Beck et al. 2007; Demirguc-Kunt and Levine, 2009).

However, the relationship between financial inclusion, inequality, and macroeconomic growth is
not yet well understood, and there is relatively limited research on the topic. In their study of
towns in Mexico where bank branches were rapidly opened, Bruhn and Love (2014) use a
natural experiment to argue that increased access to financial services leads to an increase in
income for low-income individuals by allowing informal business owners to keep their
businesses open and creating an overall increase in employment. Similarly, Burgess and Pande


                                                  3
 
(2005) have documented a decrease in rural poverty in India due to an expansion of bank
branches in rural areas, although these findings have been questioned (Panagariya 2006 and
Kochar 2011). Within the limitations of country level data, the IMF has related financial
inclusion with a number of macroeconomic outcomes, including economic growth, stability and
equality (Sahay et al. 2015). Their analysis suggests that financial inclusion can be positively
related to these outcomes but that the relationship may depend on factors such the level of per
capita income or quality of the regulatory environment. Yet, so far there is no rigorous research
showing a direct impact of financial inclusion on economic growth and inequality at the country
level.

One reason why the relationship between financial inclusion and inequality and macroeconomic
growth is not yet well understood is data availability. Establishing such a relationship requires a
sufficiently long time-series on financial inclusion measures. Analysis of the factors shaping
macroeconomic growth and inequality often requires decades of data. Until very recently, data
on financial inclusion on a comparable, global level have not been available, limiting the ability
to assess its impact.2 Data on financial inclusion collected by financial institutions have been
available for select economies starting as early as 2004 as part of the IMF’s Financial Access
Survey.3 There was no comparable global demand-side data on financial inclusion collected from
the perspective of individuals until the World Bank launched its first Global Findex database in
2011 (Demirguc-Kunt et al., 2015). Another reason the connection between financial inclusion
and macroeconomic outcomes remains unclear is that national policies aimed at increasing
financial inclusion are for the most part very recent, and assessing their impact on country-level
growth and inequality will take time.

The paper proceeds as following: Section 2 provides a description of account ownership around
the world. Section 3 discusses the evidence on the benefits of financial inclusion organized
around four major types of formal financial products: payments, savings, credit, and insurance.
Section 4 discusses some of the challenges to achieving greater financial inclusion and directions
for future research.


                                                            
2
    See World Bank (2014) for an overview of data sources on financial inclusion.
3
    https://www.imf.org/external/np/sec/pr/2015/pr15455.htm

                                                               4
 
2. Account Ownership around the World

Worldwide, 62 percent of adults reported having an account – either at a financial institution
such as bank or through a mobile money provider – in 2014 according to the Global Findex
database (Demirguc-Kunt et al., 2015). Not surprisingly, account ownership varies widely
around the world. In high-income OECD economies account ownership is almost universal: 94
percent of adults reported having an account in 2014. In developing economies only 54 percent
did. There are also enormous disparities among developing regions, where account penetration
ranges from 14 percent in the Middle East to 69 percent in East Asia and the Pacific (map 1;
figure 1).

Map 1: Account penetration around the world




Globally, nearly all adults who reported owning an account said that they have an account at a
financial institution: 60 percent reported having a financial institution account only, 1 percent
having both a financial institution account and a mobile money account, and 1 percent a mobile
money account only.




                                                 5
 
Sub-Saharan Africa is an exception to this global picture. There, almost a third of account
holders—or 12 percent of all adults—reported having a mobile money account. Within this
group about half reported having both a mobile money account and an account at a financial
institution, and half having a mobile money account only. Mobile money accounts are especially
widespread in East Africa, where 20 percent of adults reported having a mobile money account
and 10 percent a mobile money account only (map 2). But these figures mask wide variation
within the subregion. Kenya has the highest share of adults with a mobile money account, at 58
percent, followed by Somalia, Tanzania, and Uganda with about 35 percent.

Map 2: Mobile money account penetration in Sub-Saharan Africa




Account ownership not only varies across countries, but also by characteristics such as
household income and gender. Over half (54 percent) of adults in the poorest 40 percent of
households within-economy were unbanked in 2014. There is also a significant gender gap in
account ownership. Although in high-income OECD economies there was virtually no gender
gap in account ownership, in developing economies the gender gap remained a steady nine
percentage points.




                                                6
 
3. Empirical Evidence of the Benefits and Risks of Financial Inclusion

This section discusses the empirical evidence of the benefits and risks of using formal financial
services, organized around four major types of formal financial products: payments, savings,
credit, and insurance.

    3.1 Payment Services

Most people receive or make payments. People receive payments for work, the sale of
agricultural goods or as a remittance or government transfer payment. And they make payments
such as when making purchases at retail stores, paying utility bills or sending a remittance
payment. Increasingly, adults are making and receiving payments digitally, directly from and to
their accounts. In 2014, virtually all account holders (95 percent) in high-income OECD
economies made or received at least one digital payments from or into their account while in
developing countries 62 percent of account holders did so. This includes payments made directly
with a debit or credit card or using a phone or via the internet. But many payments are still made
in cash. In developing economies, the majority of adults who reported receiving a wage payment
(59 percent) or a payment for the sale of agricultural goods (91 percent) and almost half of adults
who reported receiving a government transfer payment (48 percent) did so in cash instead of into
an account in 2014. Similarly, of the 56 percent of adults in developing countries that made
regular payments for utilities in 2014, almost 90 percent did so in cash.

There is evidence that shifting payments from cash into accounts has many potential benefits, for
both senders and receivers, especially when it comes to long-distance or higher-value payments.4
Accounts can improve the efficiency and convenience of payments by significantly lowering the
cost of making and receiving them and by increasing their speed. For example, recipients of cash
payments in rural areas often have to travel considerable distances to a bank branch, money
transfer operator, or government office in order to receive a remittance or government transfer
payment. Paying bills or sending remittances can require similar trips. A rigorous evaluation of a
                                                            
4
 Digital payments can also be made without the use of an account in so-called over-the-counter transactions, which
are used, for example, for remittance payments or bill payment. Some but not all of the benefits of shifting from
cash to digital payments also accrue to digital over-the-counter transactions.

                                                               7
 
social transfer program in Niger found that disbursing transfers by mobile transfer reduced
overall travel and wait time to a quarter of the time required to collect manual cash transfers.
Overall, based on agricultural wages, the time savings attributable to the digital transfers
translated into an amount large enough to feed a family of five for a day (Aker et al., 2013).

Digital payments also save money for governments and businesses. The Niger study showed that
mobile transfers of government social benefits cut administrative costs by 20 percent compared
to manual cash distribution (Aker et al., 2013). In South Africa, the cost of disbursing social
grants in 2011 by smart card was a third that of manual cash disbursement (R13.50 compared to
R35.92) (CGAP, 2011). And in Mexico, a study estimates that the government’s shift to digital
payments (which began in 1997) trimmed its spending on wages, pensions, and social welfare by
3.3 percent annually, or nearly $1.3 billion (Babatz, 2013). The study attributes most of the
savings to less money lost in unauthorized or incorrect payments. There are also some savings
due to interest earned by not having to deposit funds in advance of payments and due to not
having to pay bank fees for distributing cash payments.

In contrast to cash, digital payments can be virtually instantaneous, even if the sender and the
recipient of the payment are not in the same place. This means that payments arrive much faster
which can be a considerable benefit when the timely arrival of money is of essence such as in
emergency situations. In Kenya, for example, two-thirds of adults reported the mobile money
service M-Pesa as the fastest and most convenient way to receive money from family living
elsewhere (GSMA, 2014). Similarly, insurance payouts or government financial assistance can
be made without delay when the need is greatest. For example, the Liberian government was
able to quickly pay thousands of Ebola workers, often working in rural areas, by opening
accounts for health workers and making payments digitally (BTCA, 2015).

Shifting cash payments into accounts can also increase the security of payments and lower the
associated incidence of crime. Senders and recipients of large amounts of cash – whether for a
remittance, wage, or rent payment – are particularly susceptible to street crime. Also vulnerable
are large payments which are disbursed at publicly known times, such as social benefits
transfers. In the mid-1990s, the United States began distributing social benefits through
electronic debit cards instead of paper checks which needed to be cashed. As a direct result of


                                                 8
 
this switch, the overall crime rate dropped by almost 10 percent over the next 20 years (Wright et
al., 2014).

Shifting cash payments into accounts can also increase transparency and ensure that people
receive wage or government transfer payments in full. Cash is easily pilfered by middlemen, but
digital payments curb opportunities for theft by reducing the number of intermediaries between
senders and recipients. Digital payments also are easier to track than cash, and when recipients
have records of the amount of payments they are entitled to, it is more difficult for middlemen to
seek bribes. In Argentina, moving cash payments for a national anti-poverty program into
accounts was found to reduce corruption. When the payments were made in cash, 4 percent of
recipients reported paying kickbacks to people or organizations that helped enroll them in the
program; when the payments were made directly into accounts, that number dropped to just 0.03
percent (Duryea and Schargrodsky, 2008). In India, bribe demands for receiving social security
pension payments were cut by 1.8 percentage points (or 47 percent) when the payments were
made via smart cards instead of being handed out in cash by government officials (Muralidharan
et al., 2014). At the same time, shifting cash payment into accounts can also help governments
and businesses reduce the incidence of “ghost” or fake recipients. Payments into accounts
generally require more stringent identification documentation, making it harder for ghost
recipients to remain undetected. Incidence of ghost recipients fell by 1.1 percentage points when
India’s social security pension payments were made digitally via smart cards rather than cash
(Muralidharan et al., 2014).

Shifting payments, especially regular bill payments, from cash into accounts can also help people
build a payments data history which can then be leveraged for better access to credit. Access to
credit often depends on lenders being able to assess the credit risk of potential borrowers based
on their credit history. However, many low-income adults lack a documented credit history,
which might reduce their ability to secure a loan. Including payment data on regular bill
payments such as utility or telephone payments can help adults build credit history and qualify
for better loan terms. In the United States, for example, the inclusion of utility and telecom
payment data into credit files reduced the share of adults for whom no credit score could be
calculated from 12 percent to 2 percent. The greatest benefits accrued to lower-income adults,
members of minority communities, young adults, and the elderly (Turner et al., 2012; Turner and

                                                 9
 
Varghese 2012). And in Kenya, M-Shwari – a combined savings and loan product offered in
partnership between CBA, a bank, and Safaricom, the mobile money operator behind M-Pesa –
offers small, short-term loans to its customers based on their transaction and payments history
with Safaricom and M-Pesa (Cook and McKay, 2015).

Incorporating payments data into credit files not only has benefits for potential borrowers but
also helps financial institutions in better being able to assess credit risks and thus minimize their
nonperforming loan (NPL) portfolio. Using the payments and transaction history of its customers
with Safaricom to assess their credit worthiness and assign individual credit limits, CBA in
Kenya was able to significantly reduce NPLs of its M-Shwari portfolio (Cook and McKay,
2015). While a reduction in nonperforming loans can contribute to overall financial sector
stability, for most financial institutions loans extended to adults solely based on payments data
will likely make up a very small share of their overall loan portfolio.

Finally, moving payments from cash into accounts might be especially valuable for women, who
benefit from the greater confidentiality and control such payments offer. This is particularly true
for payments women receive either as compensation for work, remittance payments, or
government transfer payments. The arrival of a payment into an account is private information,
allowing the recipient to at least temporarily conceal the payment from other household members
or friends or relatives who may place inappropriate demands on the use of the money. A
payment into an account thus gives women more control over their money and assets and makes
it harder for family and friends to access these funds.

There is evidence from the earlier mentioned social cash transfer program in Niger, for instance,
that the greater privacy and control of mobile transfers, compared to manual cash transfers, shifts
intra-household decision making in favor of women who receive the transfers (Aker et al., 2013).
And in Kenya, research has shown that the arrival of mobile money transfers has increased
women’s economic empowerment in rural areas by making it easier for women to request
remittances from their husbands who migrated to urban areas for work (Morawczynski and
Pickens, 2009). Giving women more control over their money may also have larger societal and
development benefits. A large body of research suggests that income in the hands of women,




                                                 10
 
compared to men, is associated with larger improvements in child health and higher spending on
health, housing, and nutritious food (for an overview, see Duflo, 2012).




    3.2 Savings Products

People save for future expenses such as large purchases, investments in education or business,
old age, and potential emergencies. In 2014, over half (56 percent) of adults around the world
reported having saved or set aside money in the past year, including 54 percent of adults in
developing economies. Globally in 2014, a quarter of adults—or almost half of savers—reported
having saved formally in the past year at a bank or another type of financial institution. In
developing economies a common alternative to saving at a financial institution is to save
semiformally, by using an informal savings clubs or a person outside the family. One common
form of informal savings club is a rotating savings and credit association (ROSCA). These
associations generally operate by pooling the weekly deposits of their members and disbursing
the entire amount to a different member each week. In 2014, about 10 percent of adults in
developing economies reported having saved semiformally in the past year. But the most
common form of saving in developing countries (reported by about half of savers) is in some
way other than at a financial institution or by using an informal savings club or a person outside
the family. This may include saving in cash at home (“under the mattress”) or saving in the form
of jewelry, livestock, or real estate.

Saving money at a bank or another type of formal financial institution has many potential
benefits over saving cash at home. One advantage of formal savings is safety from theft. Another
advantage is that it can curb impulse spending and therefore encourage better cash management.
The option to save using an account can also strengthen women’s economic empowerment by
offering confidentiality and greater control over their savings by making it harder for family and
friends to access these funds.

There is also evidence that savings accounts can help achieve a range of development goals (for
an overview see Karlan et al., 2014a). In Kenya, for example, a field experiment showed that
market vendors (mostly women) were able to save significantly more when provided with a


                                                 11
 
savings account and as a result saw increases in private expenditures by 38 percent and business
investment by 60 percent compared to a control group (Dupas and Robinson, 2013a). However,
the study found no such impact for men working as bicycle taxi drivers. Evidence from Malawi
shows that accounts can also increase savings for farmers that translate into increased
agricultural output and household expenditures (Brune et al., 2016). In particular, compared to
the control group of the study, increases in agricultural investments appear to translate into a 15
percent increase in agricultural output and 11 percent increase in household expenditures. And in
Nepal, female household heads provided with savings accounts in a field experiment were better
able to cope with income shocks, reallocated their expenditures (more spending on education and
food; less on health and dowries), and reported that their overall financial situation improved
even though the study could not document statistically significant increases in savings compared
to the control group (Prina, 2015). These papers express uncertainty about the exact mechanisms
that allow people to save more or better manage their funds with savings accounts. But some
speculate that by keeping the money in an account where it might not be immediately accessible,
people can better resist impulse spending or demands on their income from family and friends
(Dupas and Robinson, 2013a). There is mixed evidence with regard to whether commitment
features of savings accounts – which restrict access to funds until a certain date or goal is
achieved – are a possible mechanism (Brune et al., 2015, Dupas and Robinson, 2013b, Karlan et
al., 2014a).

However, a set of field experiments in Uganda, Malawi and Chile found no evidence that
extending access to basic, no-frills bank accounts to the rural poor resulted in overall increases in
savings or improvements in developmental outcomes such as consumption, schooling, or health
(Dupas et al., 2016). The study speculates that accounts not tailored to specific needs, high
transaction costs in using the account, as well as poorer individuals compared to other studies
limited the impact of expanding account access.

Using a natural experiment of bank expansion in India, Burgess and Pande (2005) have
documented a 2.22 percent decrease in rural poverty for every 1 percentage point increase in the
share of savings in bank accounts, although Panagariya (2006) and Kochar (2011) have disputed
the findings.



                                                 12
 
The greater confidentiality and control over savings offered by formal accounts compared to
saving at home can be especially important for women. For example, the study in Kenya cited
above (Dupas and Robinson, 2013a) shows that having access to a savings account made a
difference to women, but not to men.5 There is also evidence suggesting that power imbalances
and different savings priorities between men and women can depress household savings rates.
Therefore, having access to a savings account in her own name can help improve a woman’s
ability to save, invest in household durables relevant to herself, and empower her in household
decision making due to the greater control and restricted access savings accounts offer (Ashraf et
al., 2010 and Karlan et al., 2014a).




       3.3 Credit

Most people borrow money from time to time. They may want to invest in an education or
business, or buy land or a home. People also borrow to cover the cost of unexpected emergency
expenses. Globally in 2014, less than half (42 percent) of all adults reported borrowing money in
the past 12 months (excluding through the use of credit cards).6 In high-income OECD
economies a financial institution was the most frequently reported source of new loans. In all
other regions family and friends were the most common source of new loans. Overall in
developing economies, three times as many adults borrowed from family or friends than
borrowed from a financial institution. In several regions more people reported borrowing from a
store (using installment credit or buying on credit) than reported borrowing from a financial
institution. This practice is particularly common in the Middle East.



                                                            
5
  The difference in outcome might be in part attributable to that fact that men and women worked in different
sectors.
6
  Credit cards are a payment instrument. But in addition they serve as a source of short-term credit, especially when
credit card holders do not pay off their balance in full each statement cycle. Since credit cards might be used as a
substitute for short-term loans used to meet unexpected or end of month expenses, their use might explain the
seemingly low reported use of new credit in high-income countries. In 2014, 53 percent of adults in high-income
OECD economies reported owning a credit card, as compared to only 10 percent in developing economies. Indeed,
if adults who reported having used a credit card in the past 12 months are included with those who originated a new
loan from a financial institution, the percentage of adults with a new formal loan in high-income OECD economies
would increase by 35 percentage points. In developing economies, the percentage of adults with a new formal loan
would increase by 6 percentage points.

                                                               13
 
Borrowing from a financial institution (when appropriate) has benefits over borrowing from
friends, family, or an informal lender. When people can only borrow from family and friends in
their community, they are restricted to the funds within their community. Borrowing from a
formal financial institution removes that constraint. This might be especially important for low-
income households who might not otherwise have access to sufficient funds to invest in
education or business opportunities. Moreover, by borrowing from a formal financial institution
they might have access to better credit terms than from informal lenders.

However, the evidence from the microfinance literature on the development impact of access to
credit is mixed at best. The early enthusiasm about microcredit in the 1990s and early 2000s was
fueled by mostly anecdotal evidence and descriptive statistics about dramatic economic and
social benefits (Morduch, 1999, Banerjee, 2013 and Banerjee et al. 2015b). More rigorous
impact evaluations in recent years have drawn much more modest conclusions.

The earliest attempt to rigorously examine the impact of microcredit is by Pitt and Khandker
(1998) who study the impact of microcredit provided by Grameen Bank – one of the pioneering
microcredit institutions – and two other microfinance institutions in Bangladesh. Comparing
outcomes for those eligible for microcredit and those who are not in villages where the
microcredit institutions had newly entered, they found that microcredit increased household
consumption expenditures, assets, labor supply and children’s school attendance, especially
when microcredit was provided to women. Morduch (1998) questions the empirical strategy of
the paper which Pitt (1999) rejects as misplaced criticism in a reply and which has led to a
number of follow-up replies from both sides.7 Overall, questions about the identification strategy
of Pitt and Khandker remain as it is not clear that the microcredit institutions entered villages
randomly. Subsequent studies using randomized controlled trials for evaluating the impact of
microcredit have drawn more modest conclusions. An introduction to and summary of six
prominent randomized evaluations of the impact of microcredit under different models and
modalities in Bosnia and Herzegovina (Augsburg et al., 2015), Ethiopia (Tarozzi et al., 2015),
India (Banerjee et al., 2015a), Mexico (Angelucci et al., 2015), Mongolia (Attanasio et al.,
2015), and Morocco (Crepon et al., 2015) published together in a volume of the American


                                                            
7
    See Pitt and Khandker (2012), Pitt (2014), Roodman and Morduch (2011) and Roodman and Murdoch (2014).

                                                               14
 
Economic Journal: Applied Economics finds “modestly positive, but not transformative, effects”
of microcredit as a development tool (Banerjee et al., 2015b). While businesses can benefit from
these loans, it is less clear that this translates into development impacts such as increased
incomes or broader welfare benefits for individuals.

In particular, the study in Bosnia and Herzegovina finds that extending microcredit for
entrepreneurial activities to individuals under an individual-lending program who would have
otherwise been marginally rejected led to increases in self-employment activity and business
ownership at the expense of wage employment. However, the evidence on increased business
profits was mixed and there was evidence of reduction in savings and consumption, possibly
because the loans were too small to make necessary lumpy business investments. There was no
evidence that the program increased overall income. The study in Mongolia extended
microcredit to low-income women in rural areas for entrepreneurial activities and randomly
introduced either group-lending or individual-lending programs across villages. This allowed the
study to test not only whether the introduction of microcredit had an impact compared to the
control group that received no credit but also whether the design of the microcredit program
mattered. Under the group-lending program, the study documents an increase in business
ownership as well as increased food and total consumption by 14 percent and 11 percent,
respectively, although there was no evidence of increased income. However, the study finds no
significant impact on business creation or consumption under the individual lending program.
The authors speculate that group-lending may be more effective in producing poverty impacts
because group-lending fosters self-discipline and leads to larger parts of the loan being invested
in entrepreneurial activity instead of being used for consumption or transfers for others.

The study in India is the first randomized evaluation of a typical group-lending microcredit
program that targets women in a setting where a microfinance institutions opened branches in
previously not served neighborhoods of Hyderabad. It evaluates the impact of microcredit after
15 to 18 months (short run) and after three years (longer term) when microcredit also became
available in the control areas. The study finds that microcredit did not lead to new
entrepreneurial activity although investments in existing business increased and the profitability
of these entrepreneurial ventures increased on average in the short term. However, the authors
note that this increase was driven by a small number of the most profitable businesses. Overall,

                                                 15
 
consumption did not increase for those with early access to microcredit in the short term and
longer term. However, microcredit shifted the consumption patterns of households: they invested
more in durable goods and spent less on so-called temptation goods and festivals. The study
finds no significant effect on other developmental outcomes such education, health, or women’s
empowerment in the short run and in the longer run. Similarly, the study in Mexico uses the
expansion of a microcredit provider using group-lending targeted to low-income women
entrepreneurs to study the impact of credit and its findings are in line with the results of other
studies. Two to three years after the expansion of microcredit, households in the treated areas
expanded their business but there are no effects on business entry, exit, or profits. There is no
impact on household income and labor supply. There is also no evidence of an impact on most
consumption measures although they observe a decline in the consumption of so-called
temptation goods and as well a decline in assets which the authors speculate might be related to
lumpy business investments that required additional financing beyond the size of the loan.
Unlike most of the other studies, the study finds that microcredit has a small but positive impact
on some broader social welfare indicators such as increases in female decision-making,
happiness and trust in each other and decreases in depression and need for aid.

In Morocco, the expansion of microcredit to previously unserved rural villages resulted in the
expansion of existing entrepreneurial activity in agriculture but did not result in new
entrepreneurial activity. And while income from entrepreneurial activities increased, that
increase appeared to have been offset by losses in income from wage work and the study finds
no impact on total household income or consumption two years after the introduction of
microcredit.

Evaluating the impact of microcredit at the district level instead of the individual level, the study
in Ethiopia found that the introduction of microcredit increased borrowing but resulted in no
clear significant improvements in socioeconomic indicators across 40 different outcomes.

While the evidence on the impact of classical microcredit for (implicitly) entrepreneurial activity
is mixed, a study documents that expanding access to individual consumer loans in South Africa
at high interest rates (200 percent APR) led to a clear increases in income (Karlan and Zinman,
2010). Randomly assigned loans to marginally rejected loan applicants resulted also in increases


                                                 16
 
for constructed indices capturing consumption, economic self-sufficiency/maintaining
employment, and optimism and perception of socioeconomic status although measures of stress
and depression increased as well.

There is also evidence on the impact of microcredit using natural experiments on the expansion
of credit. Using the natural experiment on bank expansion in India, research has documented a
1.52 percent decrease in rural poverty for every 1 percentage point increase in the share of credit
disbursed (Burgess and Pande 2005), although these findings have been contested (Panagariya
2006 and Kochar 2011). Another study uses Thailand’s Million Baht Village Fund Program to
assess the impact of microcredit (Kaboski and Townsend, 2011 and 2012). As part of the
program, every village in Thailand was given 1 million Baht (about $24,000) to start a village
bank that made loans available to villagers. Exploiting the fact that all villages receiving the
same amount of money regardless of population size led to large variation in how much credit
availability increased across villages, the study found that income and consumption increased
and assets decreased initially, but then return to trend within a couple of years. Given the initial
increase in income and consumption, the study surprisingly found no effect on new business
creation.




       3.4 Insurance

Insurance products can be a critical tool in managing financial risks related to large, unexpected
expenses such as those stemming from sudden illness, crop failures, natural disasters, or income
loss due to the death of a wage earner (for an overview see Karlan and Morduch, 2010). 8 While
many people use savings and credit to manage financial risks and may informally share risks
within their family or community, formal insurance offers additional benefits. Formal insurance
products can pool risk over a much larger population, which affords households broader
coverage than they would have if they relied on their own savings, credit, or community. This is
especially true for adults in low-income households with limited assets. Moreover, formal
insurance products can provide protection from common risks faced by individuals in the same

                                                            
8
 Unfortunately, the 2014 Global Findex database does not collect data on the use of insurance and, to the best of our
knowledge, no similar data exists for the use of insurance.

                                                               17
 
community, like extreme weather. Because such risks affect individuals in a community at the
same time, informal community mechanisms are often insufficient. In anticipation of potentially
significant income shocks and the absence of insurance, individuals might thus adopt a low risk,
low return technologies over high risk, high return technologies (Rosenzweig and Binswanger,
1993; Dercon et al., 2011).

The empirical evidence documents that individuals indeed adopt higher risk, higher return
technology if provided access to formal agricultural insurance. However, studies typically do not
assess the welfare implications of the adoption of higher return technology. A randomized
controlled trial studying the demand for and effect of offering index-based rainfall insurance in
the presence of informal risk sharing in India finds that insurance increased the cultivation of
riskier rice varieties (Mobarak and Rosenzweig, 2012). Similarly, research using randomized
controlled trials on weather-based index insurance in India (Cole et al., 2013) and Ghana (Karlan
et al., 2014b) shows that it encourages farmers to move from low return, low risk crops to high
return, high risk crops. In India, farmers who received free insurance against rainfall risk
significantly increased production of cash crops which have higher expected returns but are more
sensitive to rainfall. In Ghana, farmers who received free insurance invested more in cultivation
and also shifted their mix of crops to riskier, more rain sensitive crops. Insured farmers had
higher total revenue and liquid post-harvest assets. In terms of welfare outcomes, the households
of insured farmers were 8 percentage points less likely to report missed meals but the study
found no significant impact on select expenditures in other categories. There is also evidence
from field experiments in China that promotion of sow insurance increases investment in sows
(Cai et al., 2015) and weather insurance against yield losses increases tobacco production (Cai,
2016).




4. Challenges to achieving greater financial inclusion and directions for future research

Evidence shows that financial inclusion allows people to make many everyday financial
transactions more efficiently and safely and expand their investment and financial risk
management options by using the formal financial system. This is especially relevant for people
living in the poorest 40 percent of households. Yet not all financial products are equally effective

                                                 18
 
in reaching development goals, such as reductions in poverty and inequality. Current evidence
suggests that the biggest impacts come from savings accounts – provided that they are
inexpensive and serve a specific purpose – and digital payments. Research on microcredit’s
impact is mixed and shows modest, if any, effects. Some studies show that people with insurance
invest in riskier, higher return technologies, though little is known about its impact on welfare
measures.

The literature on measuring the impact of financial inclusion has been rapidly growing in the
past couple of years. But research on the impact of the different dimensions of financial inclusion
on economic development is still in many ways at its beginning. Especially when it comes to
payments, savings, and insurance few studies exist at the moment and more needs to be better
understood.

Experimental field experiments (randomized control trials) suffer from uncertainty about
whether positive findings are applicable to other countries and groups of people. For example,
would a savings product that benefitted market women in Kenya be helpful for a male farmer in
Brazil? Replicating successful interventions in different settings will address such questions and
clarify the circumstances under which financial inclusion improves livelihoods. Similarly, more
research is needed to understand why financial inclusion may have a beneficial impact in some
circumstances but not others. For example, the existing evidence suggests that product design,
including pricing, might have a significant effect on demand and development outcomes for
financial inclusion.

To fully realize the benefits of financial inclusion then, financial products first and foremost need
to be tailored to the needs of people to be relevant and make a difference in their financial lives.
This also includes consumer education and protection to build and ensure trust in the formal
financial system. On a more fundamental level, realizing the benefits of financial inclusion
depends on an adequate financial infrastructure and a regulatory environment that is conducive
to innovation, making small financial transactions economically viable and ensuring a safe,
stable, and reliable financial system.9 And it also relies on a financial infrastructure that is
complemented by an enabling general infrastructure, including an ID system and reliable ICT

                                                            
9
    For an overview, see BIS and World Bank, 2016.

                                                               19
 
connectivity throughout the country to ensure that financial services can reliably reach beyond
urban centers.

Advances in technology have made it possible to deliver financial services in new ways and will
continue to change how financial services will be delivered. As financial services change, so
might their potential link to economic development. In addition to deepening the research agenda
on the impact of financial inclusion on household income and vulnerability, another important
dimension will be linking the micro-level evidence of the benefits of financial inclusion to
macro-level goals, such as economic growth and a fall in inequality.




                                                20
 
References


Aker, J., R. Boumnijel, A. McClelland, and N. Tierney, 2013. “How Do Electronic Transfers
       Compare? Evidence from a Mobile Money Cash Transfer Experiment in Niger.” Tufts
       University Working Paper.

Allen, F., A. Demirguc-Kunt, L. Klapper, M.S. Martinez-Peria, 2016. "The Foundations of
       Financial Inclusion." Journal of Financial Intermediation, forthcoming.

Angelucci, M., D. Karlan, and J. Zinman. 2015. "Microcredit Impacts: Evidence from a
      Randomized Microcredit Program Placement Experiment by Compartamos Banco,"
      American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 7(1): 151-82.

Ashraf, N., D. Karlan, and W. Yin, 2010. “Female Empowerment: Further Evidence from a Com-
       mitment Savings Product in the Philippines.” World Development 28(3): 333–44.

Attanasio, O., B. Augsburg, R. de Haas, E. Fitzsimons, and H. Harmgart. 2015. "The Impacts of
       Microfinance: Evidence from Joint-Liability Lending in Mongolia." American Economic
       Journal: Applied Economics, 7(1): 90-122.

Augsburg, B., R. de Haas, H. Harmgart, and C. Meghir. 2015. "The Impacts of Microcredit:
      Evidence from Bosnia and Herzegovina." American Economic Journal: Applied
      Economics, 7(1): 183-203.

Babatz, G., 2013. “Sustained Effort, Saving Billions: Lessons from the Mexican Government’s
       Shift to Electronic Payments.” Better Than Cash Alliance Evidence Paper: Mexico Study.

Banerjee, A., E. Duflo, R. Glennerster and C. Kinnan. 2015a. "The Miracle of Microfinance?
       Evidence from a Randomized Evaluation." American Economic Journal: Applied
       Economics, 7(1): 22-53.

Banerjee, A. D. Karlan,, and J. Zinman. 2015b. “Six Randomized Evaluations of Microcredit:
       Introduction and Further Steps.” Americam Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 7(1):
       1-21.

Beck, T. 2015. “Microfinance – A Critical Literature Survey.” IEG Working Paper 2015/4.

Beck, T., A. Demirguc-Kunt, and R. Levine. 2007. “Finance, Inequality, and the Poor.” Journal
       of Economic Growth 12 (1): 27–49.

Beck, T., R. Levine, and N. Loayza. 2000. “Finance and the Sources of Growth.” Journal of
       Financial Economics 58 (1): 261–300.

Bruhn, M. and I. Love, 2014. “The Real Impact of Improved Access to Finance: Evidence from
       Mexico.” Journal of Finance, 69:3, 1347-1376.



                                              21
 
Brune, L., X. Gine, J. Goldberg, and D. Yang, 2016. "Facilitating Savings for Agriculture: Field
       Experimental Evidence from Malawi." Economic Development and Cultural Change,
       64:2, 187 - 220.

Burgess, R. and R. Pande. 2005. “Do Rural Banks Matter? Evidence from the Indian Social
      Banking Experiment.” American Economic Review, 95, 780–95.

Cai, H., Y. Chen, H. Fang, and L. Zhou. 2015. “The effect of microinsurance on economic
       activities: Evidence from a randomized natural field experiment.” Review of Economics
       and Statistics, 97, 287-300.

Cai, J. 2016. “The Impact of Insurance Provision on Household Production and Financial
       Decisions.” American Economic Journal: Economic Policy, 8:2, 44–88.

BTCA, 2015. “Thousands of Ebola workers paid in Liberia”. Mimeo.

Clarke, G., C. Xu, and H. Zou. 2006. “Finance and Inequality: What Do the Data Tell Us?”
       Southern Economic Journal 72 (3): 578–96.

CGAP (Consultative Group to Assist the Poor), 2011. “CGAP G2P Research Project: South Africa
     Report.” Washington, DC.

Cole, S., X. Gine, and J. Vickery, 2013. “How does risk management influence production
       decisions? Evidence from a field experiment.” World Bank Policy Research Working
       Paper Series 6546.

Collins, D., J. Morduch, S. Rutherford, and O. Ruthven. 2009. Portfolios of the Poor: How the
       World’s Poor Live on $2 a Day. Princeton University Press.

Cook, T. and C. McKay, 2015. “How M-Shwari Works: The Story So Far.” Consultative Group
      to Assist the Poor (CGAP) and Financial Sector Deepening (FSD) Kenya: Washington,
      DC.

Crépon, Bruno, Florencia Devoto, Esther Duflo, and William Parienté. 2015. "Estimating the
      Impact of Microcredit on Those Who Take It Up: Evidence from a Randomized
      Experiment in Morocco." American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 7(1): 123-
      50.

Cull, R., T. Ehrbeck, and N. Holle, 2014. “Financial Inclusion and Development: Recent Impact
       Evidence.” CGAP (Consultative Group to Assist the Poor) Focus Note 9/2014.

Demirguc-Kunt, A., L. Klapper, D. Singer and P. Van Oudheusden. 2015. The Global Findex
      Database 2014: Measuring Financial Inclusion Around the World. World Bank Group
      Policy Research Working Paper 7255.

Demirguc-Kunt, A., L. Klapper, P. Van Oudheusden, and L. Zingales. 2014. “Trust in Banks.”
      Mimeo.


                                              22
 
Demirguc-Kunt, A., and R. Levine. 2009. “Finance and Inequality: Theory and Evidence.”
      Annual Review of Financial Economics 1: 287–318.

Dercon, S. and L. Christiaensen, 2011. “Consumption risk, technology adoption and poverty traps:
      Evidence from Ethiopia.” Journal of Development Economics, 96:2, 159-173.

Duflo, E., 2012. “Women Empowerment and Economic Development.” Journal of Economic
       Literature 50(4), pp. 1051–1079.

Dupas, P., D. Karlan, J. Robinson, and D Ubfal, 2016. “Banking the Unbanked? Evidence from
       Three Countries”. NBER Working Paper No. 22463.

Dupas, P., and J. Robinson, 2013a. “Savings Constraints and Microenterprise Development:
      Evidence from a Field Experiment in Kenya.” American Economic Journal: Applied
      Economics, 5, 163–92.

Dupas, P., and J. Robinson, 2013b. “Why Don’t the Poor Save More? Evidence from Health
      Savings Experiments.” American Economic Review, 103, 1138–71

Duryea, S. and E. Schargrodsky, 2008. “Financial Services for the Poor: Savings, Consumption,
      and Welfare.” Mimeo.

Global Findex, 2014. http://www.worldbank.org/globalfindex.

GSMA, 2014. http://www.gsma.org.

King, R. G., and R. Levine. 1993. “Finance and Growth: Schumpeter Might Be Right.”
       Quarterly Journal of Economics 108 (3): 717–37.

Kaboski, J. P. and R. M. Townsend. 2011. “A structural evaluation of a large-scale quasi-
      experimental microfinance initiative.” Econometrica, 79, 1357–406.

Kaboski, J. P. and R. M. Townsend. 2012. “The impact of credit on village economies.” American
      Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 4(2), 98–133.

Karlan, D. and J. Morduch, 2010. “Access to Finance,” in Handbook of Development Economics,
       Volume 5, Elsevier.

Karlan, D., and J. Zinman, 2010. “Expanding Credit Access: Using Randomized Supply
       Decisions to Estimate the Impacts.” Review of Financial Studies, 23: 433–64.

Karlan, D., A.L. Ratan, and J. Zinman, 2014a. “Savings By and For the Poor: A Research Review
       and Agenda.” Review of Income and Wealth 60:1, 36–78.

Karlan, D., R. Osei, I. Osei-Akoto, and C. Udry, 2014b. “Agricultural Decisions after Relaxing
       Credit and Risk Constraints.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 129, No. 2, 597–
       652.



                                              23
 
Klapper, L., M. El-Zoghbi, and J. Hess. 2016. “Achieving the Sustainable Development Goals:
      The Role of Financial Inclusion.” CGAP.

Kochar, A., 2011. “The Distributive Consequences of Social Banking: A Microempirical
      Analysis of the Indian Experience.” Economic Development and Cultural Change, 59:2,
      251-280.

Mobarak, A.M., and M. Rosenzweig. 2012. Selling formal insurance to the informally insured.
      Working Paper, Yale University.

Morawczynski, O. and M. Pickens, 2009. “Poor people using mobile financial services:
     Observations on Customer Usage and Impact from M-Pesa.” World Bank: Washington,
     DC.

Morduch, J. 1998. “Does microfinance really help the poor? Evidence from flagship programs in
      Bangladesh.” Working Paper, Stanford University.

Morduch, J. 1999. “The Microfinance Promise.” Journal of Economic Literature, XXXVII:
      1569-1614.

Muralidharan, K., P. Niehaus, and S. Sukhtankar, 2014. “Payments Infrastructure and the Per-
       formance of Public Programs: Evidence from Biometric Smartcards in India.” National
       Bureau of Economic Research. NBER Working Paper 1999.

Panagariya, A., 2006. “Bank branch expansion and poverty reduction: A comment.” Working
      Paper, Columbia University.

Park, C.-Y., and R. V. Mercado. 2015. “Financial Inclusion, Poverty, Income Inequality in
       Developing Asia.” Asian Development Bank Economics Working Paper 426.

Pitt, M. M. 1999. “Reply to Jonathan Morduch’s “Does microfinance really help the poor? New
        evidence from flagship programs in Bangladesh.”” Mimeo, Brown University.

Pitt, M. M. 2014. Response to ‘The Impact of Microcredit on the Poor in Bangladesh: Revisiting
        the Evidence.” Journal of Development Studies, 50:4, 605-610.

Pitt, M. M. and S. R. Khandker. 1998. “The impact of group-based credit programs on poor
       households in Bangladesh: Does the gender of participants matter?” Journal of Political
       Economy, 106:9, 58–96.

Pitt, M. M. and S. R. Khandker. 2012. “Replicating replication: Due diligence in Roodman and
        Morduch’s replication of Pitt and Khandker (1998).” Working Paper 6273, World Bank:
        Washington, DC.

Prina, S., 2015. “Banking the poor via savings accounts: Evidence from a field experiment.”
       Journal of Development Economics, 115, 16-31.



                                              24
 
Rojas-Suarez, L., and V. Gonzales. 2010. “Access to Financial Services in Emerging Powers:
       Facts, Obstacles and Policy Implications.” OECD Development Center, Background
       Paper.

Rosenzweig, M., Binswanger, H., 1993. “Wealth, weather risk and the composition and
      profitability of agricultural investments.” Economic Journal, 103:416, 56–78.

Roodman, D. and J. Morduch. 2011. “Comment on Pitt’s responses to Roodman and Morduch.”
     Center for Global Development: Washington, DC.

Roodman, D. and J. Morduch. 2014. “The Impact of Microcredit on the Poor in Bangladesh:
     Revisiting the Evidence” Journal of Development Studies, 50:4, 583-604.

Sahay, R., M. Cihak, P. N’Diaye, A. Barajas, S. Mitra, A. Kyobe, Y. Nian Mooi, and S. Reza
       Yousefi. 2015. “Financial Inclusion: Can It Meet Multiple Macroeconomic Goals?” IMF
       Staff Discussion Note 15/ 17, September.

Tarozzi, A., J. Desai and K. Johnson. 2015. “The Impacts of Microcredit: Evidence from
       Ethiopia.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 7:1, 54-89.

Turner, M. P. Walker, C. Sukanya, and R. Varghese, 2012. “A New Pathway to Financial
       Inclusion: Alternative Data, Credit Building, and Responsible Lending in the Wake of the
       Great Recession.” PERC Press.

Turner, M. and R. Varghese, 2010. “The Economic Consequences of Consumer Credit Information
       Sharing: Efficiency, Inclusion, and Privacy.” PERC Press.

World Bank, 2014. Global Financial Development Report 2014: Financial Inclusion.
      Washington, DC.

Wright, R., E. Tekin, V. Topalli, C. McClellan, T. Dickinson, and R. Rosenfeld, 2014. “Less Cash,
       Less Crime: Evidence from the Electronic Benefit Transfer Program.” National Bureau of
       Economic Research. NBER Working Paper 19996.




                                               25
 
