                                                     WPS8001


Policy Research Working Paper                       8001




         Are Poor Individuals Mainly Found
                in Poor Households?
            Evidence Using Nutrition Data for Africa

                              Caitlin Brown
                             Martin Ravallion
                           Dominique van de Walle




Development Research Group
Human Development and Public Services Team
March 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 8001


  Abstract
 Antipoverty policies in developing countries often assume                          are not found in the poorest 20 percent of households, and
 that targeting poor households will be reasonably effec-                           around half are not found in the poorest 40 percent. The
 tive in reaching poor individuals. This paper questions                            mean joint probability of being an underweight woman
 this assumption, using nutritional status as a proxy for                           and living in the poorest wealth quintile is only 0.03.
 individual poverty. The comprehensive assessment for                               Countries with higher overall rates of undernutrition
 Sub-Saharan Africa reveals that undernourished women                               tend to have a higher share of undernourished individ-
 and children are spread widely across the distribution of                          uals in nonpoor households. The results are consistent
 household wealth and consumption. Roughly three-quar-                              with evidence of substantial intrahousehold inequality.
 ters of underweight women and undernourished children




  This paper is a product of the Human Development and Public Services Team, Development Research Group. It is part
  of a larger effort by the World Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy
  discussions around the world. Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org.
  The authors may be contacted at dvandewalle@worldbank.org.




         The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
         issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
         names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
         of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
         its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                       Produced by the Research Support Team
                Are Poor Individuals Mainly Found in Poor Households?
                            Evidence Using Nutrition Data for Africa


                 Caitlin Brown, Martin Ravallion and Dominique van de Walle1




                        Keywords: Undernutrition, health, poverty, targeting, Africa

                                                JEL: I14, I32, I38




1
  Brown and Ravallion are with the Department of Economics, Georgetown University, and van de Walle is with the
Development Research Group, World Bank. The authors are grateful to the World Bank’s Strategic Research Program for
funding assistance. Helpful comments were received from Harold Alderman, Arthur Alik-Lagrange, Emanuela Galasso,
Adam Wagstaff, and the World Bank’s Africa region. The authors are grateful to the World Bank’s Strategic Research
Program for funding assistance. These are the views of the authors and need not reflect those of their employers.
1.      Introduction

        While it is widely appreciated that poverty is an individual deprivation, household aggregate data
are almost invariably used to infer individual poverty. It is almost always assumed that each individual
within the household has the same level of economic welfare as measured by household aggregate
consumption per person (or per equivalent single adult). An array of antipoverty programs, now found
almost everywhere, are targeted on this basis, though typically using readily available proxies for
household consumption or income per person.2 Partly in response to concerns about high chronic
undernutrition in certain regions, including Africa, there is an expanding effort at social protection in
developing countries.3 This effort is typically focused on transfers targeted to poor families.4 For its part,
the World Bank has made reaching poor families—as often identified by the poorest two quintiles of
people based on household consumption per person—the main objective of its social protection
operations.
        Reaching deprived individuals using antipoverty programs that explicitly target poor households
is an attractive option for three reasons. First, there is a data constraint, namely that standard data
sources do not allow us to measure individual consumption. Second, interventions at the individual
level may be seen to be paternalistic and intrusive (as they require intervention within families) and may
well be costly (to the extent that they rely on fine targeting, constrained by the fact that individual
deprivations are not comprehensively observed in large populations). Third, a large literature has
documented that poorer households in terms of consumption, income or wealth are more likely to
include deprived individuals.5 Aggregate household resources constrain consumption for all household
members. For these reasons, it is not surprising that, in practice, many social policies hope to reach
deprived individuals by targeting poor households, or (more commonly) households with characteristics
known to be associated with poverty.6
        However, the existence of a household wealth effect on individual welfare does not imply that
targeting poor households will be very effective in reaching poor individuals. A growing body of



2
  On these programs in developing countries see Coady et al. (2004), Fiszbein and Schady (2010), Del Ninno and Mills
(2015), and Ravallion (2016, Chapter 10).
3
  For evidence on this point see Ravallion (2016, Chapter 10).
4
  See, for example, the various case studies in Del Ninno and Mills (2015). Many cash transfers aiming to improve child
nutrition are paid directly to women in targeted poor households.
5
  The evidence is reviewed in Ravallion (2016, Chapter 7). The present paper will return to the literature.
6
  An overview of the programs found in practice is given in Ravallion (2016, Chapter 10) and Ruel et al. (2013).

                                                             2
empirical evidence casts doubt on that assumption. Relevant evidence includes:7 (i) evidence that rejects
a unitary model of the household, suggesting new sources of inequality within households; (ii) studies
explaining the ‘missing women’ phenomenon; (iii) evidence of discrimination against certain household
members such as orphans and widows; and (iv) evidence of unequal exposure to transitory shocks.
Heterogeneity in factors influencing individual poverty can also mean that transfers to poor households
often miss deprived individuals. It is important for policy makers to know whether standard household
data sources can be relied upon to also reach poor individuals.
        This paper tries to throw light on how well widely-used household-based measures perform in
identifying disadvantaged individuals. Are we reaching such individuals adequately by simply targeting
“poor” households? Or do many of them live in households that are not identified as poor? Is it harder or
easier to reach vulnerable women and children using household data in settings in which the incidence
of individual level disadvantage is high or average income is low?
        Missing data on individual-level poverty present a significant hurdle to examining these issues.
However, there is one dimension of individual welfare that can be observed in many surveys, namely
nutritional status as indicated by anthropometric measures. Undernutrition can stem from inadequate
caloric intakes or deficiencies in protein or micronutrient intakes, or from illness that impedes nutritional
absorption. Such nutritional deprivations are of direct and immediate concern, and there is also evidence
of longer-term social and economic costs, especially of low birth weight and chronic undernutrition in
childhood. Although nutritional status admittedly represents only one dimension of individual poverty,
there can be no doubt that it is an important dimension. It is also frequently used as a proxy for
individual welfare.
        The paper uses undernutrition as the measure of individual welfare to explore the questions
posed above. We use data for 30 countries in Sub-Saharan Africa (SSA), where chronic undernutrition
among children is a major policy concern. The latest data at the time of writing indicate that the count of
stunted children in SSA has risen by 12.5 million since 1990. The incidence of child stunting in SSA
today is probably the highest of any of the standard geographic groupings of countries.8 We draw on
anthropometric data for 390,000 women and children from the Demographic and Health Surveys (DHS).


7
 We provide references on these points later.
8
 These observations are from the World Bank’s website on nutrition and the latest available estimates compiled by UNICEF.
Historically, South Asia has been the region with highest incidence but that region has been making greater progress than
SSA in this respect. Also see the discussion in Smith and Haddad (2015). Differences in population growth also affect this
shift to SSA of the global share of the undernourished.

                                                            3
These data can be used to identify nutritionally vulnerable women and children. The DHS also include a
household wealth index based on a household’s assets and living conditions. We use this index as a
proxy for household wealth. However, aggregate consumption may well be a better predictor of
individual welfare (and nutritional status) than the DHS wealth index, which (for example) may not
respond quickly to shocks. Wherever possible, we complement the DHS data with good-quality
nationally-representative household consumption surveys from the World Bank’s Living Standards
Measurement Study (LSMS).
           We acknowledge that nutritional status is not all that matters to individual welfare; our findings
may not hold for other dimensions of individual poverty. Yet, in the absence of better individual
poverty measures, and given considerable evidence of unequal intra-household allocation of resources, it
is important to investigate this issue. Our results are also relevant to policy makers who are specifically
interested in reaching undernourished individuals viewed as having a health deprivation. There are
various forms of direct interventions with the aim of improving nutrition, including direct nutrition
supplementation and promoting better health practices.9 Many of these are implemented through health
clinics and delivery points other than the household. However, there is a growing interest in doing so
more through household-based policies—by integrating nutrition programs within anti-poverty policies
more broadly. We throw light on whether this might work.
           Our principle finding is that, although the incidence of undernutrition tends to be higher in
poorer households, the nutritional deprivations are spread quite widely through both the wealth and
consumption distributions, such that the joint probability of being an underweight woman or child and
living in the poorest household wealth quintile is low. This also holds when we use an augmented
regression to control for various individual- and household-level factors which may influence nutritional
outcomes. Our results point to the need for broad coverage in efforts to address undernutrition and, by
extension, individual poverty, rather than subsuming this problem within household targeted antipoverty
interventions. Data availability limits how far we can go in explaining our findings, but we point to
evidence suggesting that intra-household inequality may well be a major factor.
           The following section considers relevant arguments and evidence from the literature. Section 3
outlines a simple theoretical model to help understand the relevant aspects of the joint distribution of
household poverty and individual undernutrition. Section 4 then reviews the data we shall be using.



9
    See for example the package of nutritional interventions described in Bhutta et al. (2013).

                                                                 4
Section 5 presents the main findings, while Section 6 tests robustness to allowing for a wider range of
covariates. Section 7 concludes.

2.       Insights from the literature

         Several strands of the literature have bearing on how effective household poverty data can be
expected to be in revealing the presence of poor individuals. Here we summarize relevant arguments and
evidence.
         A body of research on the economics of the household has focused on the wealth effect on
nutritional status, i.e., how much nutrition improves as a household’s economic welfare—income,
consumption or wealth—rises. One strand of this literature has estimated income elasticities of demand
for food and (hence) nutrition; an influential early example is Behrman and Deolalikar (1987). Rather
than focus on food consumption, as in consumer demand studies (such as Pitt, 1983), other work has
instead studied the income effect on nutritional adequacy, taking account of requirements for good
health and normal activities in society. A low income elasticity of demand for food can be consistent
with a high responsiveness of nutritional adequacy to income gains, since even small gains in nutritional
intakes can make a big difference at low levels (Ravallion 1990, 1992).10
         New evidence on this topic has emerged from analyses of the many micro data sets (including
the DHS) that have become available to researchers over the last 20 years or so. A limitation of the DHS
is that the surveys have not included the questions needed to measure consumption or income. (At the
same time, most surveys of the LSMS-type have not included anthropometrics.) The DHS wealth index
was developed to help address this deficiency (Filmer and Pritchett 2001). Some studies have argued
that the DHS wealth index is a good predictor of various human capital and other outcomes (Filmer and
Pritchett 1999, 2001; Filmer and Scott 2012; Sahn and Stifel 2003; Petrou and Kupek 2010). For
example, on comparing DHS wealth indices, Filmer and Scott (2012, p. 359) conclude that
“…inferences about inequalities in education, health care use, fertility and child mortality, as well as
labor market outcomes, are quite robust.” Similarly, Sahn and Stifel (2003, p. 463) argue that their
version of the wealth index “…is a valid predictor of a crucial manifestation of poverty—child health
and nutrition.” However, other studies have been less supportive and have found only seemingly modest


10
  While it is not an issue taken up here, it is now well recognized that nutritional intakes can also be too high from the point
of view of good health and normal activity levels. A strand of the literature has focused on obesity and its relationship to
wealth in both rich and poor countries; for a review see Ravallion (2016, Chapter 7).

                                                                5
correlations between nutritional, health and other outcomes and wealth indices (Hong and Hong 2007;
Zere and McIntyre 2003; Howe et al. 2009). Different data sets can tell different stories here, so a
comprehensive look at the evidence across multiple countries is needed.
         A strand of the literature has used the DHS wealth index to measure inequalities in child
nutritional status, mainly using the concentration curve which gives the share of undernourished children
living in the poorest x% of households based on the wealth index (Kakwani et al., 1997; Wagstaff and
Watanabe 2000; Wagstaff et al., 2014; Bredenkamp et al., 2014).11 A widely-used measure based on this
curve is the concentration index, given by twice the area between the curve and the diagonal (analogous
to the Gini index). A key finding from this literature of relevance here is that the concentration indices
for child stunting and wasting in developing countries are almost invariably negative. A typical
conclusion found in this literature is that “Unsurprisingly, in all countries, undernutrition is concentrated
among the poor.” (Bredenkamp et al., 2014, p.1330). Such assessments appear to support the common,
but often implicit, assumption among social policy makers that targeting poor households will be
effective in reaching undernourished individuals. However, the concentration indices are rarely more
negative than -0.3, with median values typically around -0.15 to -0.10 (depending on the measure of
undernutrition).12 While this confirms that children from wealthier households tend to be better
nourished (given that the index is negative), it also suggests that there is quite wide dispersion of
undernutrition across wealth strata. We study this dispersion, focusing on its implication in the context
of efforts to use household poverty data to target undernourished individuals.13
         A number of recent papers review the existing evidence on the nutritional impacts of income
growth and income support to poor households. On the first, as already noted, several papers find low
income effects, particularly in the short-term (Grogan and Moers 2016; Haddad et al. 2003; Smith and
Haddad 2015). With respect to the second, Alderman (2015) and Ruel and Alderman (2013) conclude
that social safety nets targeting poor households with food or cash transfers (whether conditional or
unconditional) have generally had limited impacts on children’s nutritional status. The papers speculate
that this may be because the targeted households are not those that have young children in the right age
range. They do not question the practice of targeting poor households to reach undernourished



11
   There has been far less focus on inequalities in malnutrition among women.
12
   The online addendum to Bredenkamp et al. (2014) provides concentration indices across 80 developing countries for child
undernutrition using the wealth index as the ranking variable. The median for stunting is -0.15.
13
   We do not use the concentration index here as there is greater interest in this context in points on the concentration curve.

                                                               6
individuals. Manley et al. (2013) undertake a systematic review and meta-analysis on conditional and
unconditional cash transfers and child nutrition and come to similar conclusions.
        A relevant concern is the existence of intra-household inequality. The unitary model of the
household (characterized by a single utility function) has found little support empirically, and various
alternatives have been proposed (as reviewed by Chiappori and Mazzocco, 2015, and Baland and
Ziparo, 2017). These alternative models permit new sources of inequality within households, such as in
reservation utility levels. An extensive literature details intra-household inequalities in resource
allocations and outcomes (as reviewed in World Bank 2012). There are two direct policy implications:
targeting poor households may well miss some significantly disadvantaged individuals and targeted
households may not allocate the benefits to the neediest within the household. This paper addresses the
first issue.
        It is well recognized in principle that household-level consumption or income-based measures do
not allow for inequality within the household. There is also (largely qualitative) evidence that certain
individuals are poor and/or vulnerable, but do not live in households that would normally be considered
poor and so are hidden from view in standard data sources on poverty. Differentiation between men and
women has been widely documented in human capital, legal protection, constraints stemming from
social norms, roles and responsibilities, and control over resources (Ezememari et al. 2002). For Africa,
there is evidence that household shocks affect men and women differentially, with women bearing the
brunt of negative shocks (Rose 1999; Dercon and Krishnan 2000). Such differentiation can be expected
to have consequences for measures of poverty and inequality. In an important early example, Haddad
and Kanbur (1990) find that such measures for the Philippines are appreciably underestimated using
standard household-level data, although the “profiles”—the comparisons of these measures across sub-
groups such as urban and rural areas—were found to be quite robust. Using a survey for Senegal that
(unusually) collected a relatively individualized measure of consumption, Lambert et al. (2014) find
significant inequalities within the household and a sizeable gender gap in consumption. Using the same
data, De Vreyer and Lambert (2016) estimate that about one in eight poor individuals live in non-poor
households. Using anthropometric data, Sahn and Younger (2009) find that about half of country-level
inequality in the Body-Mass Index is within households rather than between them.
        Other work has emphasized the poverty of specific types of individuals. Recent research on Mali
confirms that widows—most of whom are absorbed into male headed households and can be quite
young—experience significantly lower levels of individual (non-income) welfare indicators than women

                                                      7
of other marital statuses, and that the disadvantage persists through remarriage (van de Walle 2013).
There is also a large literature on orphans in the context of AIDS deaths, and the disadvantages they may
face, particularly in schooling (Bicego et al. 2003; Case et al. 2004; Evans and Miguel 2007). While it
may well be more likely that these disadvantaged groups live in relatively poor households, they may
also be spread quite widely across the wealth distribution.
        There are other sources of heterogeneity in individual health and nutrition at given levels of
household wealth. Wagstaff (2003) finds large differences across developing countries in the incidence
of underweight and stunted children even if one controls for wealth as best one can. Wagstaff found in
addition that these differences are negatively correlated with public health spending per capita. This is
consistent with other findings suggesting that cross-country differences in public health spending matter
more for the poor than for others (Bidani and Ravallion 1997). The well-off are better able to protect
their children’s nutrition and health status from weak public provisioning and poor health environments.
However, the powerful role of complementarities and externalities in water, sanitation and hygiene
means that the better off also remain vulnerable to these deficiencies (Duflo et al. 2015; Ngure et al.
2014). Cross- country comparisons of stunting incidence have also pointed to the role played by access
to health-related infrastructure (such as water and sanitation facilities) in addition to household
characteristics such as food availability and maternal schooling (Smith and Haddad 2015).
        In the light of these studies, prevailing methods of measuring poverty and designing antipoverty
policies using the household as the unit of observation may be inadequate. Economists and policy
makers have traditionally looked at poverty and vulnerability using the household as the unit of
observation. The gold standard for measuring poverty has long been household-based consumption
normalized for household size and (possibly) demographic composition. In the absence of data on such
poverty indicators and the costs of collecting them for the whole population, it has become common in
policy making to use proxy-means-testing (PMT) and other methods such as community-based targeting
to target anti-poverty programs.14 A number of studies have assessed how well PMT does in targeting
poor households (Brown et al. 2016; Alatas et al. 2012; Kidd and Wylde 2011). But there has been little
attention to how well such methods identify disadvantaged individuals.




14
  Using more easily observed correlates of consumption or income such as assets and household characteristics, PMT uses
the predicted values from multivariate regressions for consumption or income.

                                                            8
3.      An expository model

        An important point that has not received adequate attention in the literature on antipoverty
policies is that heterogeneity in individual economic welfare at any given level of aggregate household
welfare can restrict the scope for reaching vulnerable women and children using household poverty data.
And this is the case even when there is a strong household income effect on individual welfare. To
anticipate our empirical work, we shall identify individual welfare by nutritional status.
        We elaborate this point in a simple expository model. The nutritional attainments of an
individual (adult woman or child) are denoted n, while the wealth of the household to which that
individual belongs is w. To keep notation simple, we can assume that n and w are both normalized by
appropriate cut-off points (stipulated nutritional thresholds or poverty lines) such that a person is
undernourished if (and only if) n<1 and a household is poor if w<1. These two random variables have a
(continuous) joint density f ( n , w ) .
        As discussed in the prior section, the relationship between the two variables depends on a
number of factors, including intra-household inequality, the local health environment (including water
and sanitation), access to relevant health and nutritional knowledge, and child care. To keep our
expository model simple, we collapse the heterogeneity into one composite factor denoted  , which we
can take to be scaled such that it is bounded below by zero and above by unity. For concreteness, we
might suppose that  is the share of the household’s total nutritional intake devoted to other household
members. The expected value of individual nutritional status given w and  is:
                          E (n w,  ) n( w,  )                                                        (1)

It is assumed that the function n(.) is strictly increasing in w—the slope of this function with respect to w
is the aforementioned wealth effect on undernutrition—and that the function is strictly decreasing in 
at given w. (Continuing the previous example, we can have the special case n(.)  (1   ) ( w) where
(w) is aggregate household nutrition when wealth is w.)
        Motivated by the existence of a wealth effect on nutritional attainments, it is understandable that
a policy maker may be drawn to targeting wealth-poor households so as to reach nutritionally-deprived
individuals. However, the common finding in the literature reviewed in Section 2 that the expected value
of nutritional status rises with wealth does not necessarily mean that household wealth will provide a
reliable indicator of individual outcomes for the purposes of policy. It makes more sense to focus on the


                                                      9
conditional probability distribution Pr( w  1 n  1) , i.e., the probability of living in a wealth poor

household given that one is undernourished. By well-known properties of conditional probabilities:15
                                                        Pr( n  1, w  1)
                                 Pr( w  1 n  1)                                                                 (2)
                                                            Pr( n  1)

The numerator is the joint probability of being both undernourished and living in a poor household, and
the denominator is the marginal probability of being undernourished, i.e., the overall rate of
undernutrition.16 In Section 5 we study how the conditional probability in (2) varies across countries.
            Another question of interest is how the conditional probability varies with the overall rate of
undernutrition. Note that a higher Pr( n  1) can come with a change in the numerator of (2), so that it
cannot be presumed that the conditional probability will fall. To see why, suppose that there is a change
in the joint distribution f ( n , w ) , such that Pr( n  1) increases. Furthermore, suppose that the joint
probability increases for all points with n<1 and w<1, while the opposite happens at all other points in
the (n, w) space. In this case, it is clear that the joint conditional probability must also increase along
with the marginal, with a theoretically ambiguous implication for the conditional probability.
            We can now readily see how heterogeneity can confound a policy maker’s ability to reach
undernourished individuals using only household data. Let w * denote the minimum level of wealth that
is needed to not be undernourished given  , i.e., n( w* ,  )  1 . Plainly, w* is a strictly increasing function

of  , which we write as w* ( ) .17 Then we have:

                                 Pr( w  1 n  1)  Pr( w  1 w  w * ( ))                                        (3)

Now consider the lower and upper bounds of  . We assume that the wealth-poverty line is set such that
nutritional status is deemed to be adequate for someone at that line when   0 . For example, when
intra-household inequality is the source of heterogeneity, a fair division of food should allow all those
living in households around the poverty line to be adequately nourished. Then w* (0)  1 and




15
  Alternatively, one might calculate Pr( n  1 w  1) . However, focusing on Pr(w  1 n  1) seems to accord more directly
with the relevant question for policy purposes. Of course, the two conditional probabilities are linked by Bayes’ theorem.
Readers can back out Pr( n  1 w  1) from our results below.
                                            1 1                                    1
16
     More precisely Pr( n  1, w  1)      
                                            0 0
                                                  f ( n, w)dndw and Pr( n  1)      f (n, w)dwdn .
                                                                                   0 0
17
     For example, if n  (1   ) ( w ) then w *   1 [(1   ) 1 ] .

                                                                        10
Pr( w  1 w  w * ( 0 ))  1 . That is, targeting the wealth poor when there is no intra-household inequality

assures that one reaches all those households with undernourished individuals. By contrast, given that
w* is an increasing function of  , when  approaches its maximum value, a high level of household
wealth will be needed to assure that enough of the household’s resources “trickle down” to avoid
undernutrition in women and children. (This is clear if one considers again the example when 
represents intra-household inequality.) Specifically, w* (1)  wmax and Pr( w  1 w  w max )  Pr( w  1) .

By invoking continuity, it is clear that Pr( w  1 n  1) must be a non-increasing function of  over (0, 1)

and strictly decreasing for some sub-intervals. As  approaches its upper limit, the probability of
reaching undernourished individuals by targeting poor households is no higher than the overall poverty
rate.
          This model formalizes the intuition that heterogeneity, such as due to intra-household inequality
or the local health environment, diminishes the scope for reaching poor individuals by targeting poor
households. But how much does this matter empirically? Is the wealth effect on individual nutritional
status strong enough to allow satisfactory targeting of vulnerable women and children? The rest of this
paper addresses these questions.

4.        Data

          Our data are drawn from the Demographic Health Surveys (DHS) and the LSMS. We use the
most recent DHSs available.18 Table 1 lists the countries included in our analyses and the year of each
survey.
          Individual nutritional outcomes: We study the nutritional outcomes of women and children. For
women, the two variables we employ are the body mass index (BMI) (also known as the
Quetelet index), defined as a woman’s weight (in kilograms) divided by her height (in meters) squared,
and an indicator for being underweight, which is set equal to one if a woman’s BMI is lower than 18.5
and zero otherwise. The DHS excludes values of BMI that are smaller than 12 and greater than 60 on the
grounds that these are almost certainly measurement errors. We do the same for the consumption
surveys. BMI is computed by the DHS for samples of women aged 15 through 49. For the LSMS
surveys we restrict women to the same age range. We exclude all women who report being pregnant at

18
  Several countries had to be excluded due to older survey data that did not contain many of the key variables needed,
namely the Central African Republic, Chad, Comoros, Madagascar, Sao Tome and Principe, and South Africa.

                                                             11
the survey date.19, 20 On average, pregnant women represent approximately 10 percent of all women
aged between 15 and 49. The Addendum gives the pregnancy incidence for each country in the DHS
data set.
        For children, we use the z-scores for height-for-age (stunting) and weight-for-height (wasting).21
These anthropometric data are measured for all children aged under 5 in the DHS and LSMS surveys.
We then create our measure for stunting (low height-for-age) and wasting (low weight-for-height). A
child is deemed to be stunted if his height-for-age z-score is two standard deviations below the median
of the reference group; wasting is defined similarly using weight-for-height. Stunting and wasting,
while both considered indicators of undernutrition, have different causes and effects. Stunting is an
indicator of persistent, longer-term, chronic undernutrition from which it is much harder for a child to
recover. Compared to wasting, it is known that stunting has adverse longer term consequences for child
development.22 Wasting tends to be more responsive to short-term (possibly seasonal) food deprivations
or illnesses.
        Tables 2 and 3 give the summary statistics for the nutritional outcomes for women and children
using the DHS and LSMS.23 Focusing on the larger sample of countries available in the DHS and taking
population-weighted averages, we find that 11% of adult women are underweight, while 32% of
children are stunted and 9% are wasted (similar numbers are found for children in the LSMS). Across
countries, a higher incidence of underweight women is associated with a higher incidence of wasted
children (r=0.40, significant at the 5% level24). The correlation between women’s and children’s
nutritional status is weaker for stunting (r=0.14).25 This is what we would expect if a woman being
underweight and her children being wasted are caused by similar short-term shocks, while stunting is a
more long-term condition.


19
   Unfortunately, we are unable to exclude pregnant women for Tanzania’s consumption survey, as it did not ask women
whether they were pregnant.
20
   We also dropped observations with missing values for any variables used in the paper, such that sample sizes are
consistently the same and comparable throughout the paper. However, we tested the effect of relaxing this constraint and
found that it makes negligible difference to the results.
21
   These variables are already constructed in the DHSs. For the consumption surveys, we use the Stata command zscore06 to
convert height and weight values into a standardized value.
22
   See, for example, Walker et al. (2007) and Hoddinott et al. (2008).
23
   There are some discrepancies in the means between the two data sets, much of which is likely to do with the timing of the
surveys, although differences in sample selection and measurement may also be contributing.
24
   For prob.= 0.05, the critical value of the correlation coefficient is 0.306.
25
   This weak correlation between wasting and stunting is not surprising (Victora 1992). Although there is some evidence that
wasting in early childhood can cause subsequent stunting (Richard et al. 2012), the fact that stunting is a longer-term
condition while wasting tends to be more transient points to different causative factors.

                                                             12
         Table 4 provides summary statistics for selected other indicators that have been identified in past
work as relevant to nutritional outcomes, specifically GDP per capita, the national poverty rate, the
female literacy rate, and access to improved water and sanitation facilities. Table 5 gives the correlation
matrix for the three nutritional indicators from Table 2 and the five country-level indicators from Table
4. GDP and FLR are both negatively correlated with the nutritional indicators, as is access to water and
sanitation. For GDP, the correlation is only statistically significant for stunting (r= -0.54). The FLR has
a large and significant negative correlation with the wasting rate (r= -0.73), but the correlations are not
statistically significant for underweight women or stunted children. The poverty rate is strongly
correlated with stunting (r= 0.71). Water access is correlated with stunting (r= -0.33), while sanitation
access is correlated with wasting (r= -0.31). Of course, these are only simple (pair-wise) correlations and
may be deceptive. For example, if one regresses the stunting rates in Table 3 on both GDP and the
poverty rate, only the latter is statistically significant.26 In other words, the negative correlation between
stunting incidence and GDP is due to an omitted variable bias, given that GDP is (negatively) correlated
with poverty incidence, which is a strong covariate of the incidence of stunting.
         For a subset of countries, the DHS also collected data on adult male anthropometrics which
provide an insight into the extent of intra-household inequality. Table 6 provides summary statistics on
the incidence of undernutrition for women and children stratified according to whether the male head of
household is underweight or not. We see that the incidence of undernutrition among women and
children is lower when the male head is adequately nourished. However, substantial inequality in
nutritional status is also evident, and the gender inequality goes in both directions. The majority of
women in households where the male head is underweight are not undernourished, and there is a high
incidence of undernutrition among women and children in households where the male head is not
underweight. Table 6 also gives (in parentheses) the proportions of undernourished women and children
found in the two groups of households, identified by whether the male head is underweight or not. (Note
that the proportions sum to unity horizontally.) We see that the bulk of underweight women (74%) are
found in households where the male head is not underweight and similarly for stunted (80%) and wasted
(53%) children.
         Wealth and other covariates: When we say that a household is “wealth-poor” we are referring to
the DHS wealth index within a given country. The wealth index is constructed by taking variables


26
  Using our estimates from Tables 2 and 4 to regress the log of the stunting rate on the log of GDP plus the log of the poverty
rate, it is readily verified that the regression coefficients are -0.09 (s.e.= 0.06) and 0.42 (s.e.= 0.12) respectively.

                                                             13
relating to a household’s assets (including consumer durables) and amenities, including materials used
for housing construction and its access to water and sanitation. These variables are then aggregated into
an index using factor-analytic methods, with the wealth index being identified as the first principal
component of the data. The DHS wealth index comes as a z-score, i.e., standardized with mean zero and
standard deviation of unity. So the index is country specific—not intended to be comparable across
countries.
        We focus on the poorest 20% and 40% of households based on the wealth index. These are
arbitrary choices, although the 40% figure does coincide fairly closely with the overall poverty rate
found for SSA using the World Bank’s international line.27 The 20% figure allows us to focus more on
the lower part of the wealth distribution. We also provide key results for the full range of the
distribution.
        It should not be forgotten that the DHS wealth index is a proxy, not a direct measure of wealth.
The index focuses on durable and productive asset wealth rather than labor or education wealth,
arguably the main assets of many among the poor. When compared to the results of a full-blown
consumption survey, the DHS index will undoubtedly count as poor some who are not (often called
“inclusion errors”) and count as non-poor some of those who are in fact poor (“exclusion errors”). In
practice, policy makers targeting poor households almost never have access to accurate measures of
wealth or consumption for the population as a whole, and must rely instead on a relatively small number
of indicators, such as those embodied in the DHS index. Nonetheless, we also conduct the analysis using
household consumption per capita for the sub-set of countries for which this is feasible. Surveys that
contain detailed household consumption data as well as anthropometrics for women and children are not
common, but some do exist including within the LSMS (specifically the LSMS Integrated Surveys on
Agriculture) as listed in Table 1.28 The consumption variable is spatially deflated and expressed in per
capita terms.
        In an attempt to test whether controlling for additional information, including education and
labor assets, enhances predictive power, we draw on household and individual covariates from both
surveys. Variables based on the consumption surveys are constructed to be as similar as possible to
those used in the DHS data.



27
   Using the World Bank’s international line of $1.90 a day at 2011 purchasing power parity, 43% of the population of Sub-
Saharan Africa are found to be poor in 2013 (based on PovcalNet).
28
   Only the consumption survey from Ghana is not one of the Integrated Surveys on Agriculture within the LSMS.

                                                            14
       The statistical Addendum provides summary statistics for the wealth index and other key
variables that are typically included in the index or are standard in proxy-means-testing for each country.
Descriptive statistics for the variables from the consumption surveys are also shown in the Addendum.
Overall, means match reasonably well between the two data sets, though with some differences among
the asset variables.




                                                    15
5.     Individual outcomes and household wealth

       Wealth effects on nutritional status: Figure 1 plots the incidence of the three anthropometric
indices of undernutrition against percentiles of the household wealth-index distribution. For women, we
plot incidence for all women 15 to 49 years of age, and for women 20 to 49 years of age, given that
younger women typically have a lower BMI. The wealth effect—whereby nutritional status improves
with a higher DHS wealth index—is generally evident. However, aside from child stunting, the wealth
effect is clearly weak in most countries. The incidence of being underweight is slightly higher for
younger women, although the relationship with household wealth is very similar. Child wasting in some
countries shows little or no sign of the wealth effect (notably Gabon, Gambia, Senegal, Sierra Leone and
Swaziland). Figure 2 gives the corresponding graphs using household consumption per capita. Similar
comments apply.
       The overall strength of the household wealth effect for each country can be assessed by
regressing the standardized values for nutritional status (that is, the z-score for women’s BMI and
height-for-age and weight-for-height z-scores for children) on the wealth index, which (as noted) is also
a z-score. The regression coefficient gives the number of standard deviations of the nutritional indicator
attributed to a one standard deviation increase in wealth. Table 7 gives results using the DHS, and also
the analogous results using standardized consumption z-scores from the LSMS. Although the estimated
wealth effects are statistically significant in almost all cases (the exceptions are for child wasting in a
few countries), the coefficients appear to be generally quite low; for women’s BMI the mean regression
coefficient is 0.26, while it is 0.29 for the height-for-age z-score and only 0.09 for weight-for-height.
Even for the countries where the wealth effect on child stunting is highest (Burundi, Cameroon and
Nigeria), a one standard deviation increase in wealth is only associated with a 0.5 standard deviation
increase in the incidence of child stunting. And for about half the countries, the wealth effect on stunting
is less than 0.3 standard deviation.
       However, these results cannot tell us much about the efficacy of household wealth in predicting
the incidence of undernourished individuals. Low wealth effects such as evident in Table 7 need not
imply that the incidence of undernutrition is unresponsive to income or wealth differences (as
demonstrated in Ravallion, 1990). Also, as shown in Section 3, even if household wealth and individual
nutritional status are correlated, it does not follow that a large proportion of undernourished individuals
will be found in the lower ends of the wealth distribution.


                                                      16
        Conditional and joint probabilities: Figure 3 gives the cumulative share of undernourished
individuals by cumulative household wealth percentile ranked from the poorest up, i.e., the
concentration curves. The greater the degree of concavity (meaning that the concentration curve is
further above the 45-degree line) the more undernourished individuals tend to be concentrated in the
poorer strata of household wealth. Similarly, Figure 4 displays the concentration curves using household
consumption per person as the ranking variable.
        We see in Figure 3 that there is marked concavity for some countries, notably Cameroon (for all
three indicators), the Republic of Congo, Gabon and Ghana (for stunting), Gabon, Kenya, Uganda,
Zambia and Zimbabwe (for underweight women). However, in most cases the curves tend to be fairly
close to the diagonal line. The curve for underweight women tends to be above that for children in about
half the countries, though otherwise there is little sign of a clear ranking of the three indicators.
        For the rest of this discussion we focus on the points on the concentration curves corresponding
to the poorest 20% and 40% of the household wealth index. Table 8 presents the proportion of
undernourished women and children who fall into the bottom 20 and 40 percent. Given the wealth effect
on nutritional status, the values for underweight women and stunted children are generally bounded
below by Pr( w  1) (either 0.2 or 0.4). The only exceptions are for child wasting in Gambia, Senegal,
Sierra Leone and Swaziland, where the wealth effect is not evident (Figure 1).
        What is striking about the results in Table 8 is how close the conditional probabilities are to
Pr( w  1) . For 20 of the 30 countries less than 30% of underweight women are found in the poorest 20%
of households. This is true for 25 and 26 countries with regard to stunted and wasted children
(respectively). On average, roughly three-quarters of underweight women and undernourished children
are not found in the poorest 20% of households when judged by household wealth. And about half of
underweight women and under-nourished children are not found in the poorest 40% of households.
        The countries with a higher percentage of undernourished women in the poorest strata of
households tend to also have a higher proportion of wasted children in that group; the correlation
coefficients are 0.50 and 0.41 for the poorest 20% and 40% respectively. However, this is not the case
for stunted children; the corresponding correlation coefficients are -0.01 and 0.07. There is only one
country (Cameroon) where more than 30% of individuals are found in the poorest 20% for all three
nutritional indicators.
        Table 9 provides the same statistics using the consumption indicator, with very similar results.
Overall, about two-thirds of undernourished women are not found in the poorest 20% of households

                                                      17
based on consumption per person, while about half of them are not found in the poorest 40%. For
children, we find that about three-quarters of stunted children are not found in the poorest 20%, and
similarly for wasted children. More than half of wasted and stunted children are not found in the poorest
40%.
       On combining Tables 2 and 8, we can use equation (2) to infer the joint probabilities of being
both undernourished and wealth-poor, Pr( n  1, w  1) . The empirical values for the DHS data are given
in Table 10. For underweight women and the poorest 20%, the joint probability is under 0.04 for 22
countries. The mean joint probability of a woman being underweight and living in the poorest 20% of
households is only 0.03, rising to 0.06 for the poorest 40%. For child wasting the probabilities are even
lower than for underweight women, at under 0.02 for two-thirds of all countries. The joint probabilities
are higher for stunting, with a mean of 0.08 and 0.16 for the poorest 20% and 40%, respectively. While
for child stunting the probabilities span a wider range, it remains that all but two are under 0.1 for the
poorest 20%.
       As expected, the joint probabilities tend to be positively correlated with the marginals; the
bottom row of Table 10 gives the correlation coefficients. The table also gives the OLS elasticities
across countries (regression coefficients of the log joint probability on the log marginal probabilities).
The elasticities are all less than unity. So a higher rate of undernutrition should reduce the conditional
probability. On balance, we find that countries with a higher overall incidence of women’s
undernutrition or a higher incidence of child undernutrition (whether stunting or wasting) tend to have a
higher share of these disadvantageous outcomes among the “non-poor” based on wealth. Table 11
shows the correlations between the conditional probabilities. For women’s undernutrition, the
correlation coefficient between the share of undernourished women in the poorest 20% of households
and the overall incidence of underweight women is -0.31, while for the poorest 40% it is -0.22. For child
stunting the corresponding correlations are -0.47 and -0.56, while for wasting they are -0.24 and -0.26.
However, not all of these correlations can be considered statistically significant at a reasonable level.
The correlations are only significant at the 5% level for the share of underweight women in the poorest
20% and for stunting. Figures 5, 6 and 7 plot the values from Tables 2 and 8 for the incidence of
underweight women, stunting and wasting respectively, highlighting the negative relationship between
the joint and marginal probabilities.
       These results suggest that when relatively few women or children are undernourished in a
country one tends to find them more concentrated in relatively poorer households. Conversely, when

                                                     18
there are many undernourished women and children one tends to find them more widely spread across
the household wealth distribution. From a policy perspective, these results suggest that targeting
relatively poor households will tend to work less well in reaching vulnerable women and children in
countries where the overall problem of undernutrition is greater.29
         Covariates of the conditional probabilities: We examine the correlations with three variables,
GDP per capita, the female literacy rate (Table 2) and the wealth-index effect (Table 7). We can think of
these as shift parameters of the joint probability density of wealth and nutrition. GDP and the FLR are
of obvious interest. The wealth effect is less obvious. In this context, the wealth-index effect can be
interpreted as a measure of the extent of nutritional inequality by wealth, and the expectation is that a
steeper wealth effect would be associated with a greater concentration of undernutrition in wealth-poor
households.
         Table 11 gives the correlation coefficients among the conditional probabilities as well as those
with the other social and economic indicators from Table 4. The conditional probabilities are positively
correlated with the relevant wealth effects. For underweight women, we find that r= 0.64 and 0.71 for
20% and 40% respectively. For stunting, the corresponding correlations with the wealth effects for
height-for-age are 0.39 and 0.44, while for wasting they are 0.47 and 0.64. The positive correlation of
the conditional probabilities with the wealth effects is also found on using regressions to control for the
other summary statistics in Table 4, and these partial correlations are statistically significant in most
cases.30
         We find that the shares of stunted children found in wealth-poor households are quite strongly
positively correlated with GDP per capita (r=0.77 for the poorest 20% and r=0.67 for 40%), but this is
not the case for underweight women (r=-0.01 and r=-0.17 respectively) or wasted children (r=-0.20 and
r=-0.21 respectively). All six measures of the shares of nutritionally vulnerable women and children are
positively correlated with the female literacy rate, though not all are statistically significant; r=0.31 and
0.30 for underweight women and the poorest 20% and 40% respectively, while r=0.42 and 0.34 for
stunted children and r=0.20 and 0.15 for wasted children. There are no significant correlations with
access to water and sanitation. Nor did the regressions reveal any sign of significant partial correlations


29
   This is also evident in the data for stunting in Africa assembled by Bredenkamp et al. (2014) (see the Africa data points in
their Figure 1), although across all developing countries Bredenkamp et al. find that inequalities in stunting are greater in
countries where stunting is more prevalent. Evidently Africa is different in this respect, though the reason is unclear.
30
   For the shares of underweight women and stunted children in the poorest 20% the partial correlations are only significant at
about the 10% level, while they are significant at the 5% level in all other cases.

                                                              19
with water and sanitation, holding constant either the marginal probability, the wealth-index effect or the
combination of the other non-nutritional variables in Table 4. This suggests that other factors besides the
health environment may well be playing a more important role, including intra-household inequalities.

6.           Augmented regressions

             Introducing other household-level factors may enhance power for predicting individual
outcomes. There may also be a problem with the weights used in constructing the wealth index; for
example, the index may not adequately adjust for economies of scale in consumption. Finally, adding
basic individual-level variables such as age and marital status for women may enhance targeting
capability.31 To test these conjectures we augment wealth with such household- (and individual-) level
variables. The augmented regressions can be expected to perform similarly to the widely-used PMT
method based on the predicted values of regressions calibrated to survey data (Section 2).
             To motivate the augmented regressions, we can start by thinking of a simple regression of
nutritional outcomes on the wealth index:
                                           	      	        	                                                 (4)
where                is the nutritional indicator for individual in household in country      and       is the
household wealth index. Call this Model 1. Since the expected value of nutritional status tends to
improve with wealth (the aforementioned wealth effect) rankings in terms of the predicted values from
these regressions are very similar to those we have seen already. Model 2 augments (4) to contain
household-level variables                  , giving:
                                           	      	                  	                                       (5)
The vector                  includes the separate components of the wealth index (essentially to allow a re-weighting
of the index), as well as other household-level variables such as size and composition, and
characteristics of the head. Dummies for survey month and region of residence are also entered as
controls. Finally, Model 3 adds the observable individual-level variables,                :
																																								   	     	                             	                             (6)
For the incidence of underweight women, the individual-level attributes include the woman’s age (BMI
tends to increase as women age), education and marital status. For children, age, gender, and


31
  Recent research has argued that widows and remarried women often fare poorly when compared to married once women
(Anderson and Ray 2016; Djuikom and van de Walle 2017).

                                                               20
characteristics of the child’s mother are included. To avoid ad hoc functional form assumptions, age
and education variables as well as household size are broken into categories each of which is entered as
a dummy variable. OLS is used to estimate each model, with standard errors clustered at the PSU. (The
Addendum gives the actual regressions.)
       As discussed above, in the event that household wealth is simply a poor indicator of nutritional
outcomes, we also use household per capita consumption. For the relevant subset of countries, we
estimate the regressions using household consumption per person (with, as noted in Section 4, some
slight variations in the variables included in   and      ). The results were similar; details are found in
the Addendum.
       Tables 12 and 13 present the results for Models 2 and 3 for underweight women and
undernourished children respectively. The tables give the proportion of undernourished individuals who
fall into the poorest 20% and 40% of the distribution of the predicted values based on wealth and (unlike
prior tables) the additional covariates. We find that, on average, 32% of underweight women are found
in the poorest 20% based on the predicted values from Model 2 (Table 12), as compared to 28% using
only the household wealth index (Table 8). Focusing instead on the poorest 40%, the proportion rises to
56% using Model 2, as compared to 51% using wealth alone. Adding the individual variables (Model 3)
we now find that (on average) 37% of underweight women are found in the poorest 20% in terms of the
predicted values, rising to 61% for the poorest 40%. Similar improvements are evident for both stunting
and wasting in children (comparing Tables 13 and 8).
       However, it is clear that these augmented regressions still do a poor job at identifying
undernourished individuals within households. While the predictive power is improved, it is not enough
to change our conclusion that targeting based on the available household poverty data misses a large
share of undernourished women and children.

7.     Conclusions

       There are multiple constraints on effective policy interventions in practice. Here we have focused
on a key informational constraint, and asked whether household poverty might provide a reliable guide
for policy efforts trying to reach deprived individuals, as indicated by anthropometric measures of
undernutrition, recognizing that poverty is an individual characteristic. We do not claim that
information is the only constraint. Even if undernourished women and children are almost solely found


                                                    21
in wealth- or consumption-poor households, other factors such as the local health environment can play
an important role in determining policy effectiveness.
       We have focused on just one dimension of individual deprivation. Individual welfare clearly
depends on more than nutritional status, and we cannot rule out the possibility that household-level data
are more revealing for other non-nutrition dimensions. That said, undernutrition is an undeniably
important dimension of individual poverty and it has long played a central role in the measurement of
poverty using aggregate household data. This dimension of welfare is also emphasized by policy makers
concerned with reducing both current and longer-term poverty. The mounting evidence on the longer-
term costs of stunting in young children adds force to that emphasis.
       A great deal has been learnt about the socioeconomic differentials in individual health and
nutrition from micro data, typically using cross-tabulations or regressions. This knowledge is valuable.
However, there is a risk that the differentials in mean attainments often found between rich and poor
households lead policy makers to be overly optimistic about the scope for reaching vulnerable
individuals using only household-level data. Standard poverty data make ad hoc assumptions about
equality within households. Persistent effects of intra-household inequality on health and nutrition may
not be evident in these measures. Just how adequate household-level data are for the policy purpose of
reaching vulnerable women and children has been unclear.
       To help improve our knowledge about this constraint on policy, the paper has provided a
comprehensive study for 30 countries in Sub-Saharan Africa. We find a reasonably robust household-
wealth effect on individual undernutrition indicators for women and children. Nonetheless, on
aggregating across the 30 countries studied here, about three-quarters of underweight women and under-
nourished children are not found in the poorest 20% of households when judged by the household
wealth index in the Demographic and Health Surveys. A similar pattern is found in the available
household surveys that allow a comparison of individual nutritional measures with an estimate of the
household’s consumption per person, which is clearly the most widely used welfare metric in measuring
poverty in developing countries. Adding other household variables—interpreted as either a re-weighting
of the DHS wealth index or as supplementary variables—improves the performance of household data in
this respect, but we still find that a large share of undernourished individuals are not among those
predicted to be undernourished based on household variables. It is clear from this study that to have any
hope of reaching undernourished women and children, policy interventions in this setting will either



                                                    22
require much more individualized intra-household information or they will need to be nearly-universal
in coverage.
       This dispersion of undernourished individuals across the distributions of household wealth and
consumption entails that countries with a higher overall incidence of undernutrition tend to be countries
where a larger share of the undernourished are found in non-poor families. This suggests that the need
for broad coverage in social policies (rather than policies finely targeted to poor households) is
especially great in countries with a high incidence of undernutrition. Rather than folding nutrition
schemes into household-targeted antipoverty programs in such countries, emphasis should be given to
nutritional interventions with near universal coverage, such as comprehensive school feeding (with
explicit nutrition supplementation), maternal health care and universal sanitation services.
       In addition to documenting the limitations of relying on household poverty data to reach
nutritionally deprived individuals, we throw some light on why those limitations are so severe. For the
subset of countries for which we also know adult male BMI, we have shown that the extent of intra-
household inequality entails that the bulk of underweight women and undernourished children are found
in households where the male head appears to be adequately nourished. In exploring the cross-country
patterns, we find that richer countries (in terms of GDP per capita) within Africa tend to have child
stunting more concentrated among the wealth-poor, suggesting greater scope in those countries for
targeting wealth-poor households as a means of reaching children with longer-term nutritional
deficiencies. But this is not so for child wasting. In countries with a higher female literacy rate one tends
to find a greater concentration of underweight women in poor wealth strata. By contrast, female literacy
has little power for predicting whether children’s undernutrition is more concentrated among the wealth
poor. There is no sign that countries with lower average access to improved water and sanitation tend to
have undernourished women and children more concentrated among the wealth poor; while there is little
doubt that improved water and sanitation makes for better nourished people, intra-household inequalities
appear to be a more plausible explanation for our main findings on the relationship with household
wealth than these aspects of the health environment. In all cases, the size of the wealth effect—how
much undernutrition falls as the wealth index rises—is a significant predictor of how effectively one can
expect to identify nutritionally-disadvantaged individuals by targeting poor households. However, as we
have also emphasized, it is better to focus directly on the relevant conditional probabilities for this
purpose, rather than the wealth effect.



                                                     23
References

Alatas, Vivi, Abhijit Banerjee, Rema Hanna, Benjamin Olken and Julia Tobias. 2012. “Targeting the
       Poor: Evidence from a Field Experiment in Indonesia,” American Economic Review 102(4):
       1206-1240.
Alderman, Harold. 2015. “Leveraging Social Protection Programs for Improved Nutrition: Summary of
       Evidence Prepared for the Global Forum on Nutrition-Sensitive Social Protection Programs,
       2015,” Available at SSRN 2831575 (2015).
Anderson, Siwan, and Debraj Ray. 2010. “Missing Women: Age and Disease,” Review of Economic
       Studies 77(4): 1262-1300.
_____________ and _________. 2015. “Missing Unmarried Women,” NBER Working Paper 21511.
Baland, Jean-Marie, and Roberta Ziparo, 2017, “The (In)-efficiency of Intra-household Bargaining in
       Poor Countries,” mimeo, University of Namur.
Behrman, Jere, and Anil Deolalikar. 1987. “Will Developing Country Nutrition Improve with Income?
       A Case Study for Rural South India,” Journal of Political Economy 95: 108-138.
Bhutta Zulfiqar, Jai Das, Arjumand Rizvi, Michelle Gaffey, Neff Walker, Susan Horton, Patrick Webb,
       Anna Lartey, and Robert Black. 2013. “Evidence-Based Interventions for Improvement of
       Maternal and Child Nutrition: What Can be Done and at What Cost?” Lancet 382(9890): 452-77.
Bicego, George, Shea Rutstein, and Kiersten Johnson. 2003. “Dimensions of the Emerging Orphan
       Crisis in Sub-Saharan Africa,” Social Science and Medicine 56(6): 1235-1247.
Bidani, Benu and Martin Ravallion. 1997. “Decomposing Social Indicators Using Distributional Data,”
       Journal of Econometrics 77(1): 125-140.
Bredenkamp, Caryn, Leander R Buisman and Ellen Van de Poel. 2014. “Persistent Inequalities in Child
       Undernutrition: Evidence from 80 Countries, from 1990 to Today,” International Journal of
       Epidemiology 43(4): 1328–1335
Brown, Caitlin, Martin Ravallion and Dominique van de Walle. 2016. “A Poor Means Test?
       Econometric Targeting in Africa,” NBER Working Paper 22919.
Case, Anne, Christina Paxson and Joseph Ableidinger. 2004. “Orphans in Africa: Poverty and School
       Enrollment,” Demography 41(3): 483-508.
Chiappori, Pierre-Andre, and Maurizio Mazzocco. 2015. “Static and Intertemporal Household
       Decisions,” mimeo, Department of Economics, Columbia University.


                                                  24
Coady, David, Margaret Grosh and John Hoddinott, 2004, Targeting Transfers in Developing Countries:
       Review of Lessons and Experience, Washington D.C.: World Bank.
Del Ninno, Carlo and Bradford Mills. 2015 (Eds.). Safety Nets in Africa: Effective Mechanisms to
       Reach the Poor and Most Vulnerable. The World Bank, Washington D.C.
Dercon, Stefan and Pramila Krishnan. 2000. “In Sickness and in Health: Risk Sharing within
       Households in Rural Ethiopia,” Journal of Political Economy 108(4): 688-727.
De Vreyer, Philippe, and Sylvie Lambert. 2016. “Intra-household Inequalities and Poverty in Senegal,”
       mimeo, Paris School of Economics.
Djuikom, Marie Albertine and Dominique van de Walle. 2017. “Marital Shocks and Women’s Welfare
       in Africa,” mimeo, World Bank, Washington, DC
Duflo, Esther, Michael Greenstone, Raymond Guiteras and Thomas Clasen. 2015. “Toilets can Work:
       Short and Medium Run Health Impacts of Addressing Complementarities and Externalities in
       Water and Sanitation,” NBER Working Paper 21521.
Evans, David and Edward Miguel. 2007. “Orphans and Schooling in Africa: A Longitudinal Analysis,”
       Demography 44(1): 35-57.
Ezememari, Kene, Nazmul Chaudhury and Janet Owens. 2002. “Gender and Risk in the Design of
       Social Protection Interventions,” Social Protection Discussion Paper Series No. 0231, World
       Bank, Washington, DC.
Filmer, Deon and Lant Pritchett. 2001. “Estimating Wealth Effects Without Expenditure Data—or
       Tears: An Application to Educational Enrollments in States of India.” Demography 38(1): 115-
       132.
Filmer, Deon and Lant Pritchett. 1999. “The Effect of Household Wealth on Educational Attainment:
       Evidence from 35 Countries.” Population and Development Review 25(1): 85-120.
Filmer, Deon and Kinnon Scott. 2012. “Assessing Asset Indices.” Demography 49(1): 359-392.
Fiszbein, Ariel, and Norbert Schady, 2010, Conditional Cash Transfers for Attacking Present and
       Future Poverty, World Bank, Washington DC.
Grogan, Louise and Luc Moers. 2016. “Wealthier is not Healthier in Sub-Saharan Africa.” Mimeo,
       University of Guelph.
Haddad, Lawrence and Ravi Kanbur. 1990. “How Serious is the Neglect of Intra-Household
       Inequality?” Economic Journal 100: 866-881.



                                                  25
Haddad, Lawrence, Harold Alderman, Simon Appleton, Lina Song, and Yisehac Yohannes. 2003.
       “Reducing Child Malnutrition: How Far Does Income Growth Take Us?” World Bank Economic
       Review 17(1): 107-131.
Hoddinott, John, John Maluccio, Jere Behrman, Rafael Flores, and Reynaldo Martorell, 2008, “Effect of
       a Nutrition Intervention During Early Childhood on Economic Productivity in Guatemalan
       Adults,” Lancet 371:411–6.
Hong, Rathavuth and Rathmony Hong. 2007. “Economic Inequality and Undernutrition in Women:
       Multilevel Analysis of Individual, Household, and Community Levels in Cambodia.” Food and
       Nutrition Bulletin 28(1): 59-66.
Howe, Laura, James Hargreaves, Sabine Gabrysch, and Sharon Huttly. 2009. “Is the Wealth Index a
       Proxy for Consumption Expenditure? A Systematic Review.” Journal of Epidemiology and
       Community Health 63(11): 871-877.
Kakwani, Nanak, Adam Wagstaff and Eddy van Doorslaer. 1997. “Socioeconomic Inequalities in
       Health: Measurement, Computation and Statistical Inference,” Journal of Econometrics 77(1):
       87-103.
Kidd, Stephen and Emily Wylde. 2011. “Targeting the Poorest: An Assessment of the Proxy Means Test
       Methodology,” AusAid Research Paper, AusAid, Canberra.
Lambert, Sylvie, Martin Ravallion and Dominique van de Walle. 2014. “Intergenerational Mobility and
       Interpersonal Inequality in an African Economy,” Journal of Development Economics 110: 327-
       344.
Madise, Nyovani, Zoe Matthews, and Barrie Margetts. 1999. “Heterogeneity of Child Nutritional Status
       between Households: A Comparison of Six Sub-Saharan African Countries.” Population Studies
       53(3): 331-43.
Manley, James, Seth Gitter, and Vanya Slavchevska. 2013. "How Effective are Cash Transfers at
       Improving Nutritional Status?" World Development 48: 133-155.
Ngure, Francis, Brianna Reid, Jean Humphrey, Mduduzi Mbuya, Gretel Pelto and Rebecca Stoltzfus.
       2014. “Water, Sanitation and Hygiene (WASH), Environmental Enteropathy, Nutrition, and
       Early Child Development: Making the Links,”" Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences
       1308(1): 118-128.
O’Donnell, Owen, Eddy van Doorslaer, Adam Wagstaff and Magnus Lindelow. 2008. Analyzing Health
       Equity Using Household Survey Data, World Bank.

                                                 26
Petrou, Stavos, and Emil Kupek. 2010. “Poverty and Childhood Undernutrition in Developing
       Countries: A Multi-National Cohort Study,” Social Science and Medicine 71: 1366-1373.
Pitt, Mark. 1983. “Food Preferences and Nutrition in Rural Bangladesh,” Review of Economics and
       Statistics LXV: 105-114.
Ravallion, Martin. 1990. “Income Effects on Undernutrition,” Economic Development and Cultural
       Change 38: 490-515.
Ravallion, Martin. 1992. “Does Undernutrition Respond to Incomes and Prices?: Dominance Tests for
       Indonesia,” World Bank Economic Review 6: 109-124.
Ravallion, Martin. 2009. “How Relevant is Targeting to the Success of the Antipoverty Program?”
       World Bank Research Observer 24(3): 205-231.
Richard, Stephanie, Robert Black, Robert Gilman, Richard Guerrant, Gagandeep Kang, Claudio Lanata,
       Ka˚re Mølbak, Zeba Rasmussen, Bradley Sack, Palle Valentiner-Branth, William Checkley, and
       Childhood Infection and Malnutrition Network. 2012. “Wasting is Associated with Stunting in
       Early Childhood,” Journal of Nutrition: Nutritional Epidemiology 142: 1291–1296.
Rose, Elaina. 1999. “Consumption Smoothing and Excess Female Mortality in Rural India,” Review of
       Economics and Statistics 81(1): 41-49.
Ruel, Marie, Harold Alderman, and Maternal and Child Nutrition Study Group. 2013. "Nutrition-
       sensitive Interventions and Programmes: How can they Help to Accelerate Progress in
       Improving Maternal and Child Nutrition?" The Lancet 382: 536-551.
Sahn, David and David Stifel. 2003. “Exploring Alternative Measures of Welfare in the Absence of
       Expenditure Data.” Review of Income and Wealth 49: 463–489.
Sahn, David and Stephen Younger. 2009. “Measuring Intra-Household Health Inequality: Explorations
       Using the Body Mass Index.” Health Economics 18: S13-S36.
Smith, Lisa and Lawrence Haddad. 2015. “Reducing Child Undernutrition: Past Drivers and Priorities
       for the Post-MDG Era,” World Development 68: 180-204.
van de Walle, Dominique. 2013. “Lasting Welfare Effects of Widowhood in Mali.” World Development
       51: 1-19.
Victora, Cesar. 1992. “The Association between Wasting and Stunting: An International Perspective.”
       Journal of Nutrition 122(5): 1105–10.
Wagstaff, Adam. 2003. “Child Health on a Dollar a Day: Some Tentative Cross-country Comparisons.”
       Social Science and Medicine 57(9): 1529-38.

                                                 27
Wagstaff, Adam, Caryn Bredenkamp, and Leander Buisman. 2014. “Progress on Global Health Goals:
       Are the Poor Being Left Behind?” World Bank Research Observer 29(2): 137-162.
Wagstaff, Adam and Naoko Watanabe. 2000. “Socioeconomic Inequalities in Child Malnutrition in the
       Developing World.” Policy Research Working Paper 2434, World Bank.
Walker, Susan, Theodore Wachs, Julie Gardner, Betsy Lozoff, Gail Wasserman, Ernesto Pollitt, and
       Julie Carter. 2007. “Child Development: Risk Factors for Adverse Outcomes in Developing
       Countries.” Lancet 369 (9556): 145–57.
World Bank. 2012. World Development Report 2012: Gender Equality and Development. Washington,
       DC
Zere, Eyob, and Diane McIntyre. 2003. “Inequities in Under-five Child Malnutrition in South Africa.”
       International Journal for Equity in Health 2 (1): 1.




                                                   28
Figure 1: Nutritional outcomes and household wealth




                                              29
Note: The graphs show the proportion of women who are underweight and the proportion of children who are stunted and wasted at each
wealth percentile. Data are drawn from DHS. Observations with missing values and pregnant women have been dropped. Women between
15 and 49 years of age are included in the construction of the solid line. Woman between 20 and 49 years of age are included in the
construction of the dashed line. Children aged between 0 and 5 are included in the stunted and wasted lines. The household wealth index is
used to construct the wealth percentiles. Wealth percentiles are constructed separately for women and children. A lowess regression is used
to fit the lines.



                                                                    30
Figure 2: Nutritional outcomes and household consumption




Note: The graphs show the proportion of women who are underweight, and children who are stunted and wasted at each wealth percentile.
Data are drawn from LSMS surveys. Observations with missing values and pregnant women in Ghana have been dropped. Women
between 15 and 49 years of age and children between 0 and 5 years of age are included in the sample. Household consumption, which is
spatially deflated and in per capita terms, is used to construct the consumption percentiles. Consumption percentiles are constructed
separately for women and children. A lowess regression is used to fit the lines.




                                                                 31
Figure 3: Concentration curves for undernutrition and household wealth




                                              32
Note: The graphs show the concentration curves for cumulative proportion of women who are underweight, and children who are stunted
and wasted at each wealth percentile. Data is drawn from the DHS. Observations with missing values and pregnant women have been
dropped. Women between 15 and 49 years of age and children between 0 and 5 years of age are included in the sample. The household
wealth index is used to construct the wealth percentiles. Wealth percentiles are constructed separately for women and children. The Stata
command glcurve is used to construct the lines.

                                                                    33
Figure 4: Concentration curves for undernutrition and household consumption




Note: The graphs show the concentration curves for cumulative proportion of women who are underweight, and children who are stunted
and wasted at each consumption percentile. Data is drawn from the LSMS surveys. Observations with missing values have been dropped.
Women between 15 and 49 years of age and children between 0 and 5 years of age are included in the sample. Household consumption is
used to construct the consumption percentiles. Consumption percentiles are constructed separately for women and children. The Stata
command glcurve is used to construct the lines.




                                                                 34
Figure 5: Countries with fewer underweight women tend to have a higher proportion of those
women in wealth-poor households

                                                          .7
                  Proportion of underweight women found
                                                          .6


                                                          .5
                            in poor households



                                                                                                                Poorest 40%
                                                          .4                                                    (r=-0.22)


                                                          .3


                                                          .2                                                    Poorest 20%
                                                                                                                (r=-0.31)

                                                          .1


                                                          .0
                                                               .00   .05     .10      .15      .20      .25   .30
                                                                       Share of women who are underweight

Note: The graph plots the joint probability of a woman being both underweight and in a poor household against the share of
women who are underweight for each country. The actual values are given in Tables 2 and 8.




                                                                                     35
Figure 6: Countries with fewer stunted children tend to have a higher proportion of those children
in wealth-poor households

                                                         .7


                                                         .6
                  Proportion of stunted children found
                      in wealth-poor households



                                                         .5

                                                                                                             Poorest 40%
                                                         .4                                                  (r=-0.56)

                                                         .3


                                                         .2                                                  Poorest 20%
                                                                                                             (r=-0.47)

                                                         .1


                                                         .0
                                                              .0   .1        .2         .3         .4   .5

                                                                        Incidence of stunted children

Note: The graph plots the joint probability of a child being both stunted and in a poor household against the share of children
who are stunted for each country. The actual values are given in Tables 2 and 8.




                                                                                   36
Figure 7: Countries with fewer wasted children tend to have a higher proportion of those children
in wealth-poor households


                  Proportion of wasted children found   .7


                                                        .6
                     in wealth-poor households



                                                        .5

                                                                                                                             Poorest 40%
                                                        .4                                                                   (r=-0.26)

                                                        .3


                                                        .2                                                                   Poorest 20%
                                                                                                                             (r=-0.24)

                                                        .1


                                                        .0
                                                             .00   .02   .04   .06   .08    .10   .12   .14    .16   .18   .20
                                                                                Incidence of wasted children

Note: The graph plots the joint probability of a child being both wasted and in a poor household against the share of children
who are wasted for each country. The actual values are given in Tables 2 and 8.




                                                                                           37
                                 Table 1: List of countries and survey years

                            Demographic and Health Surveys            Consumption surveys with anthropometric data
                                          Observations in DHS                          Observations in the survey
 Country                 Year           Women           Children         Year          Women           Children
 Benin                   2011            13,626           7,193
 Burkina Faso            2010            7,218            6,223          2014            n.a.            9,134
 Burundi                 2010            3,751            3,190
 Cameroon                2011            6,431            4,585
 Congo, Rep.             2011            4,543            4,127
 Côte d'Ivoire           2011            3,950            2,967
 Congo, Dem.
 Rep.                    2013            7,872            7,791
 Ethiopia                2011            13,830           9,144         2013/14          n.a.            2,731
 Gabon                   2012            4,195            3,043
 Gambia                  2013            3,843            2,828
 Ghana                   2014            4,153            2,589          2009           2,165            1,968
 Guinea                  2012            3,996            2,969
 Kenya                   2008            7,286            4,852
 Lesotho                 2009            1,895             731
 Liberia                 2013            4,015            3,075
 Malawi                  2010            6,409            4,283         2013/14          n.a.            2,400
 Mali                    2012            4,402            4,134
 Mozambique              2011            11,186           8,622
 Namibia                 2013            3,393            1,649
 Niger                   2012            3,896            4,285
 Nigeria                 2013            30,900          22,499         2012/13          n.a.            2,742
 Rwanda                  2010            5,491            3,507
 Senegal                 2010            2,188            1,139
 Sierra Leone            2013            7,023            3,938
 Swaziland               2006            4,190            1,883
 Tanzania                2010            8,528            6,402         2012/13         6,170            3,633
 Togo                    2013            4,153            3,023
 Uganda                  2011            2,297            1,987         2011/12          n.a.            1,494
 Zambia                  2013            13,872          10,769
 Zimbabwe                2010            7,382            4,071
  Total                   2011             205,914          147,498                        8,335           24,102
Note: Observations with missing values and for pregnant women have been dropped. Women between 15 and 49 years of age
and children between 0 and 5 years of age are included. The LSMS surveys used are Burkina Faso’s 2014 Multisector
Survey; the 2013-14 Ethiopian Rural Socioeconomic Survey; Ghana’s 2009 Socioeconomic Panel Survey; Malawi’s 2013-14
Third Integrated Household Survey; Nigeria’s 2012-13 General Household Survey; Tanzania’s 2012-13 National Panel



                                                         38
Survey and Uganda’s 2011-12 National Panel Survey. It is not possible to determine whether a woman is pregnant at the time
of measurement in the Tanzania survey.
                    Table 2: Summary statistics for nutritional indicators using DHS


                                     Underweight women           Stunted children      Wasted children
                  Benin                      0.064                    0.407                 0.144
                  Burkina Faso               0.154                    0.298                 0.139
                  Burundi                    0.160                    0.516                 0.051
                  Cameroon                   0.068                    0.279                 0.050
                  Congo, Rep.                0.144                    0.187                 0.051
                  Côte d'Ivoire              0.078                    0.238                 0.071
                  Congo, Dem.
                  Rep.                       0.144                    0.366                 0.072
                  Ethiopia                   0.266                    0.388                 0.086
                  Gabon                      0.074                    0.131                 0.032
                  Gambia                     0.167                    0.200                 0.110
                  Ghana                      0.061                    0.134                 0.053
                  Guinea                     0.122                    0.269                 0.099
                  Kenya                      0.122                    0.293                 0.058
                  Lesotho                    0.058                    0.302                 0.030
                  Liberia                    0.073                    0.257                 0.058
                  Malawi                     0.087                    0.413                 0.038
                  Mali                       0.114                    0.337                 0.119
                  Mozambique                 0.086                    0.371                 0.049
                  Namibia                    0.140                    0.176                 0.081
                  Niger                      0.154                    0.355                 0.153
                  Nigeria                    0.111                    0.326                 0.163
                  Rwanda                     0.070                    0.365                 0.025
                  Senegal                    0.222                    0.159                 0.090
                  Sierra Leone               0.090                    0.327                 0.082
                  Swaziland                  0.033                    0.226                 0.020
                  Tanzania                   0.113                    0.355                 0.040
                  Togo                       0.070                    0.214                 0.062
                  Uganda                     0.117                    0.281                 0.039
                  Zambia                     0.102                    0.343                 0.055
                  Zimbabwe                   0.070                    0.256                 0.028
                  Mean                        0.114                      0.321                  0.086
        Note: Observations with missing values and pregnant women are dropped. Means are population weighted. Women
        between 15 and 49 years of age and children between 0 and 5 years of age are included. A woman is underweight if
        she has a BMI less than or equal to 18.5. A child is stunted if she is two standard deviations below median height-
        for-age and wasted if she is two standard deviations below median weight-for-height. GDP and literacy are taken
        from the World Bank’s World Development Indicators. Literacy rate for 2011 or closest available year to 2011 in
        2007-15; more recent year for ties.


                                                            39
           Table 3: Summary statistics for nutritional indicators using LSMS
                                       Underweight        Stunted          Wasted
                                         women            children         children
                      Burkina Faso          n.a.            0.342           0.110
                      Ethiopia              n.a.            0.406           0.121
                      Ghana                0.081            0.385           0.202
                      Malawi                n.a.            0.260           0.079
                      Nigeria               n.a.            0.234           0.106
                      Tanzania             0.095            0.120           0.048
                      Uganda                n.a.            0.280           0.036
                      Mean                n.a.            0.288             0.093
Note: Data are drawn from LSMS surveys. Observations with missing values have been dropped. Means are
population weighted. Women between 15 and 49 years of age and children between 0 and 5 years of age are
included in the sample. A woman is underweight if she has a BMI less than or equal to 18.5. A child is stunted if she
is two standard deviations below median height-for-age and wasted if she is two standard deviations below median
weight-for-height.




                                                     40
                           Table 4: Summary statistics on selected other indicators
                            GDP per                   Poverty                                                 Access to
                             capita,                                                          Access to       improved
                             2011,           Poverty        Year for           Female         improved        sanitation
                           $PPP/year         rate (%)      poverty rate     literacy rate     water (%)          (%)
   Benin                      1762             53.1             2011           0.184             75.3            17.8
   Burkina Faso               1470             55.3             2009           0.216             80.0            18.0
   Burundi                    713              77.7             2006           0.846             75.0            47.2
   Cameroon                   2614             29.3             2007           0.648             73.1            44.9
   Congo, Rep.                5632             28.7             2011           0.729             51.1            27.2
   Côte d'Ivoire              2547             29.0             2008           0.305             74.8            14.4
   Congo, Dem.
   Rep.                         617            773              2012           0.629             80.9            21.3
   Ethiopia                    1165            33.5             2010           0.289             49.7            23.0
   Gabon                      17101             8.0             2005           0.799             91.6            41.2
   Gambia                     1532             45.3             2003           0.446             89.5            58.8
   Ghana                       3431            25.3             2005           0.653             84.3            14.0
   Guinea                      1184            35.3             2012           0.122             73.8            18.4
   Kenya                       2623            33.6             2005           0.669             60.8            29.4
   Lesotho                     2297            59.7             2010           0.850             81.0            28.9
   Liberia                      733            68.6             2007           0.270             72.0            15.8
   Malawi                      1079            70.9             2010           0.513             82.9            39.2
   Mali                        1863            49.3             2009           0.246             68.9            22.9
   Mozambique                   952            68.7             2008           0.365             49.3            19.3
   Namibia                    8626             22.6             2009           0.784             88.0            32.7
   Niger                        807            50.3             2011           0.089             55.1             9.8
   Nigeria                     5231            53.5             2009           0.414             64.5            30.2
   Rwanda                      1397            60.3             2010           0.647             73.7            58.2
   Senegal                     2159            38.0             2011           0.404             75.6            45.6
   Sierra Leone                1415            52.3             2011           0.350             58.5            12.7
   Swaziland                   7620            42.0             2009           0.824             72.3            57.0
   Tanzania                    2207            46.6             2011           0.744             55.3            13.6
   Togo                       1255             54.3             2011           0.480             60.5            11.5
   Uganda                      1649            33.2             2012           0.620             74.2            18.3
   Zambia                     3343             64.4             2010           0.518             62.2            43.0
   Zimbabwe                   1524             n.a.              n.a.          0.801             77.7            37.5
   Mean                       2806             42.7             2012           0.472             71.1            29.1
Note Poverty rates are for $1.90 per person per day at 2011 PPP; estimates from PovcalNet, accessed 8/18/2016. Mean
poverty rate is for Sub-Saharan Africa as a whole. GDP, literacy, access to improved water and sanitation are all taken from
the World Bank’s World Development Indicators. Literacy rate for 2011 or closest available year to 2011 in 2007-15; more
recent year for ties. Water and sanitation for 2011.


                                                             41
                      Table 5: Correlation matrix for nutritional and other indicators

                              Under-                                                     Female
                              weight      Stunted     Wasted        GDP per    Poverty   literacy   Access to   Access to
                              women       children    children       capita     rate        rate     water      sanitation 

  Underweight women           1.000        0.126       0.384         -0.208    -0.066    -0.232      -0.214       0.000

  Stunted children            0.126        1.000       0.114         -0.540    0.712     -0.167      -0.331      -0.060

  Wasted children             0.384        0.114       1.000         -0.215    0.047     -0.729      -0.071      -0.307

  GDP per capita              -0.208       -0.540     -0.215         1.000     -0.613    0.462       0.326        0.291

  Poverty rate                -0.066       0.712       0.047         -0.613    1.000     -0.147      -0.144       0.007

  Female literacy rate        -0.232       -0.167     -0.729         0.462     -0.147    1.000       0.260        0.475

  Access to water             -0.214       -0.331     -0.071         0.326     -0.144    0.260       1.000        0.377

  Access to sanitation         0.000        -0.060    -0.307         0.291     0.007     0.475       0.377        1.000
Note: The critical value for prob.=0.05 is r=0.306.




                                                               42
                 Table 6: Incidence of undernutrition for countries with data on male BMI

                   Underweight                Male head is underweight                     Male head is not underweight
                                        Underweight      Stunted       Wasted          Underweight      Stunted     Wasted
                Men        Women          women          children      children          women          children    children
 Ethiopia       0.371       0.266           0.301            0.392         0.122          0.249           0.355        0.066
                                           (0.300)          (0.291)       (0.408)         (0.700)        (0.709)      (0.592)
 Ghana          0.104       0.061           0.171            0.183         0.083          0.050           0.126        0.056
                                           (0.146)          (0.069)       (0.070)         (0.854)        (0.931)      (0.930)
 Lesotho        0.188       0.062           0.084            0.406         0.041          0.043           0.240        0.029
                                           (0.154)          (0.185)       (0.156)         (0.846)        (0.815)      (0.844)
 Namibia        0.232       0.137           0.270            0.183         0.070          0.097           0.169        0.067
                                           (0.289)          (0.142)       (0.137)         (0.711)        (0.858)      (0.863)
 Rwanda         0.158       0.073           0.116            0.375         0.053          0.057           0.360        0.016
                                           (0.166)          (0.092)       (0.246)         (0.834)        (0.908)      (0.754)
 Senegal        0.275       0.216           0.278            0.184         0.088          0.219           0.181        0.062
                                           (0.184)          (0.145)       (0.190)         (0.816)        (0.855)      (0.810)
 Sierra
 Leone          0.155       0.091           0.138            0.247         0.102          0.083           0.279        0.062
                                           (0.118)          (0.060)       (0.106)         (0.882)        (0.940)      (0.894)
 Mean           0.240       0.159           0.259            0.358         0.108          0.141           0.296        0.053
                                            (0.256)           (0.196)        (0.291)         (0.744)        (0.804)    (0.709)
Note: The table shows the proportion of undernourished women and children in male headed households separated by the
nutritional status of the household head. The figures in parentheses are the shares of those women or children who are
undernourished found in each of the two groups of households according to whether the male head is underweight. Men and
women are between 15 and 49 years of age. Male heads of household are also restricted to 15 and 49 years of age. Children
are between 0 and 5 years of age.




                                                            43
 Table 7: Regression coefficients of individual nutritional outcomes on the DHS household wealth
                          index and household consumption per person

                                           DHS                                                 LSMS
                                         Height-for-      Weight-for-                        Height-for-       Weight-for-
                           BMI              age            height              BMI              age             height
 Benin                   0.194***         0.189***          0.080***
 Burkina Faso            0.279***         0.281***          0.097***            n/a           0.377***           -0.016
 Burundi                 0.242***         0.505***          0.115***
 Cameroon                0.285***         0.451***          0.257***
 Congo, Rep.             0.265***         0.292***          0.051**
 Côte d'Ivoire           0.203***         0.279***           0.043
 Congo, Dem. Rep.        0.276***         0.378***          0.073***
 Ethiopia                0.352***         0.374***          0.229***            n/a             0.037             0.025
 Gabon                   0.182***         0.397***          0.056**
 Gambia                  0.208***         0.297***          0.061**
 Ghana                   0.385***         0.299***          0.070***         0.120***          0.178**            0.172
 Guinea                  0.284***         0.285***           0.023
 Kenya                   0.331***         0.257***          0.210***
 Lesotho                 0.263***         0.182***           0.091*
 Liberia                 0.182***         0.183***           -0.024
 Malawi                  0.197***         0.224***          0.072***            n/a            0.103**            0.004
 Mali                    0.025***         0.039***           0.002              n/a             0.044             0.006
 Mozambique              0.344***         0.372***          0.156***
 Namibia                 0.289***         0.323***          0.217***
 Niger                   0.268***         0.254***          0.119***
 Nigeria                 0.291***         0.566***          0.042***            n/a           0.450***          0.200***
 Rwanda                  0.211***         0.395***           0.026
 Senegal                 0.157***         0.110***           -0.025
 Sierra Leone            0.189***         0.253***           0.027
 Swaziland               0.174***         0.305***          0.115***
 Tanzania                0.295***         0.303***           -0.022          0.213***          0.111**            0.036
 Togo                    0.323***         0.319***          0.073**
 Uganda                  0.364***         0.278***          0.175***
 Zambia                  0.284***         0.255***          0.070***
 Zimbabwe                0.311***          0.147***          0.151***
Note: The table gives coefficients from a regression of standardized nutritional outcomes on the wealth index or standardized
consumption per capita. Robust standard errors are used; * prob.<.10 ** prob.<.05 *** prob.<.01.




                                                             44
 Table 8: Proportion of undernourished individuals who fall into the poorest 20% and 40% of the
                                 household wealth distribution

                                   Poorest 20% of households                           Poorest 40% of households

                       Underweight          Stunted         Wasted         Underweight         Stunted           Wasted
                         women              children        children         women             children          children
 Benin                     0.248             0.233             0.223           0.444             0.446             0.464
 Burkina Faso              0.307             0.242             0.224           0.551             0.458             0.433
 Burundi                   0.276             0.249             0.281           0.464             0.451             0.506
 Cameroon                  0.396             0.326             0.364           0.637             0.594             0.630
 Congo, Rep.               0.221             0.310             0.232           0.460             0.534             0.465
 Côte d'Ivoire             0.226             0.289             0.240           0.414             0.516             0.447
 Congo, Dem. Rep.          0.252             0.247             0.209           0.521             0.482             0.442
 Ethiopia                  0.235             0.218             0.259           0.461             0.445             0.534
 Gabon                     0.246             0.434             0.206           0.422             0.634             0.388
 Gambia                    0.212             0.262             0.178           0.474             0.486             0.385
 Ghana                     0.355             0.317             0.256           0.614             0.597             0.448
 Guinea                    0.295             0.200             0.283           0.499             0.491             0.496
 Kenya                     0.329             0.262             0.396           0.599             0.497             0.614
 Lesotho                   0.304             0.238             0.374           0.595             0.447             0.475
 Liberia                   0.285             0.229             0.253           0.481             0.443             0.475
 Malawi                    0.230             0.237             0.259           0.448             0.462             0.495
 Mali                      0.218             0.252             0.252           0.434             0.486             0.492
 Mozambique                0.283             0.242             0.312           0.548             0.476             0.554
 Namibia                   0.324             0.248             0.279           0.537             0.529             0.475
 Niger                     0.260             0.215             0.236           0.498             0.445             0.418
 Nigeria                   0.294             0.307             0.225           0.531             0.565             0.440
 Rwanda                    0.259             0.252             0.256           0.492             0.494             0.499
 Senegal                   0.241             0.249             0.165           0.462             0.484             0.339
 Sierra Leone              0.241             0.235             0.147           0.460             0.458             0.365
 Swaziland                 0.285             0.256             0.118           0.494             0.502             0.443
 Tanzania                  0.316             0.243             0.277           0.539             0.459             0.441
 Togo                      0.339             0.252             0.234           0.607             0.521             0.410
 Uganda                    0.377             0.211             0.264           0.634             0.419             0.534
 Zambia                    0.296             0.241             0.230           0.528             0.456             0.454
 Zimbabwe                  0.315             0.219             0.260           0.564             0.430             0.433
  Mean                     0.275            0.255            0.240            0.508             0.487             0.461
Note: Data are drawn from DHSs. Means are population weighted. The table lists the proportion of underweight women,
stunted children and wasted children who fall below the bottom 20th and 40th percentiles of the wealth index distribution.
For example, 24.8 percent of underweight women fall below the bottom 20th percentile of wealth in Benin.



                                                               45
 Table 9: Proportion of undernourished individuals who fall into the poorest 20% and 40% of the
                         household consumption per capita distribution

                            Poorest 20% of households                            Poorest 40% of households
                    Underweight       Stunted         Wasted             Underweight       Stunted         Wasted
                      women           children        children             women           children       children
 Burkina Faso                             0.222            0.184                              0.449            0.420
 Ethiopia                                 0.250            0.230                              0.463            0.465
 Ghana                  0.297             0.217            0.184             0.467            0.448            0.378
 Malawi                                   0.184            0.182                              0.414            0.419
 Nigeria                                  0.222            0.275                              0.424            0.526
 Tanzania               0.322             0.319            0.284             0.529            0.565            0.442
 Uganda                                   0.214            0.265                              0.466            0.496
  Mean                  0.318            0.241             0.228            0.519              0.465           0.448
Note: Data are drawn from LSMS surveys. Means are population weighted. The table lists the proportion of underweight
women, stunted children and wasted children who fall in the bottom 20th and 40th percentiles of the consumption per capita
distribution.




                                                            46
                   Table 10: Joint probabilities of being undernourished and wealth poor

                                Poorest 20% of Households                            Poorest 40% of Households
                         Underweight       Stunted        Wasted             Underweight        Stunted        Wasted
                           women           children      children              women            children       children
 Benin                      0.016           0.095         0.032                 0.028            0.181          0.067
 Burkina Faso                0.047             0.072          0.031              0.085             0.136           0.060
 Burundi                     0.044             0.129          0.014              0.074             0.233           0.026
 Cameroon                    0.027             0.091          0.018              0.043             0.166           0.031
 Congo, Rep.                 0.032             0.058          0.012              0.066             0.100           0.023
 Côte d’Ivoire               0.018             0.069          0.017              0.032             0.123           0.032
 Congo, Dem. Rep.            0.036             0.090          0.015              0.075             0.177           0.032
 Ethiopia                    0.063             0.085          0.022              0.123             0.173           0.046
 Gabon                       0.018             0.057          0.007              0.031             0.083           0.012
 Gambia                      0.035             0.052          0.020              0.079             0.097           0.042
 Ghana                       0.022             0.042          0.014              0.038             0.080           0.024
 Guinea                      0.036             0.054          0.028              0.061             0.132           0.049
 Kenya                       0.040             0.077          0.023              0.073             0.146           0.035
 Lesotho                     0.018             0.072          0.011              0.034             0.135           0.014
 Liberia                     0.021             0.059          0.015              0.035             0.114           0.027
 Malawi                      0.020             0.098          0.010              0.039             0.191           0.019
 Mali                        0.025             0.085          0.030              0.049             0.164           0.058
 Mozambique                  0.024             0.090          0.015              0.047             0.177           0.027
 Namibia                     0.045             0.044          0.022              0.075             0.093           0.038
 Niger                       0.040             0.076          0.036              0.077             0.158           0.064
 Nigeria                     0.033             0.100          0.037              0.059             0.184           0.072
 Rwanda                      0.018             0.092          0.006              0.034             0.181           0.013
 Senegal                     0.053             0.040          0.015              0.102             0.077           0.031
 Sierra Leone                0.022             0.077          0.012              0.041             0.150           0.030
 Swaziland                   0.009             0.058          0.002              0.016             0.114           0.009
 Tanzania                    0.036             0.086          0.011              0.061             0.163           0.018
 Togo                        0.024             0.054          0.014              0.042             0.111           0.025
 Uganda                      0.044             0.059          0.010              0.074             0.118           0.021
 Zambia                      0.030             0.083          0.013              0.054             0.157           0.025
 Zimbabwe                    0.022             0.056          0.007              0.040             0.110           0.012
 Mean                        0.031             0.082          0.021              0.058             0.156           0.040
 Corre. coeff.               0.914             0.912          0.928              0.965             0.961           0.969
 Elasticity of joint          0.888             0.765          0.953               0.950            0.824           0.947
 to marginal                 (0.057)           (0.096)        (0.109)             (0.045)          (0.045)         (0.033)
Note: Data are drawn from the DHS. Means are population weighted. The correlation coefficient is that between the joint
probability and the relevant undernutrition rate from Table 7. Elasticities estimated by double-log regression. Robust standard
errors in parentheses.

                                                              47
                      Table 11: Correlation coefficients for conditional probabilities

                                    Poorest 20% of Households                        Poorest 40% of Households
                              Underweight     Stunted      Wasted               Underweight    Stunted      Wasted
                                women         children    children                women        children    children
  Poorest 20%
  Underweight women               1.000            0.013           0.503            0.911            0.191          0.450
  Stunted children                0.013            1.000           -0.039          -0.072            0.884          -0.103
  Wasted children                 0.503           -0.039           1.000            0.531            0.016          0.790
  Poorest 40%
  Underweight women               0.911           -0.072           0.531            1.000            0.102          0.422
  Stunted children                0.191            0.884           0.016            0.102            1.000          -0.025
  Wasted children                 0.450           -0.103           0.790            0.422           -0.025          1.000
  Marginal
  probabilities
  Underweight women               -0.312          -0.236           -0.073          -0.222           -0.241          -0.036
  Stunted children                -0.150          -0.467           0.226           -0.133           -0.561          0.367
  Wasted children                 -0.266          -0.160           -0.236          -0.237           -0.069          -0.255
  Other indicators
  Wealth-index effect             0.640            0.390           0.469            0.713            0.439          0.640
  GDP per capita                  -0.013           0.766           -0.195          -0.165            0.674          -0.213
  Poverty rate                    -0.173          -0.525           -0.011          -0.049           -0.598          -0.001
  Female literacy rate            0.311            0.417           0.199            0.302            0.335          0.145
  Access to water                 0.029            0.293           -0.106          -0.046            0.282          -0.214
  Access to sanitation            -0.149           0.257           -0.143          -0.155            0.200          0.031
Note: The critical value for prob.=0.05 is r=0.306. The wealth-index effect is for BMI in the case of underweight women,
while it is height-for-age and weight-for-height in the case of the conditional probabilities for stunting and wasting.




                                                            48
     Table 12: Proportion of underweight women who fall into the bottom 20 and 40 percent of
                                 predicted values for all women

                                                      Model 2                                         Model 3

                                      Bottom 20%              Bottom 40%               Bottom 20%              Bottom 40%

        Benin                             0.271                   0.482                    0.369                   0.620
        Burkina Faso                      0.351                   0.597                    0.368                   0.610
        Burundi                           0.287                   0.562                    0.318                   0.579
        Cameroon                          0.494                   0.746                    0.481                   0.749
        Congo, Rep.                       0.287                   0.537                    0.358                   0.631
        Côte d'Ivoire                     0.254                   0.459                    0.346                   0.569
        Congo, Dem. Rep.                  0.389                   0.654                    0.416                   0.669
        Ethiopia                          0.283                   0.515                    0.302                   0.511
        Gabon                             0.228                   0.513                    0.433                   0.755
        Gambia                            0.293                   0.528                    0.389                   0.618
        Ghana                             0.374                   0.624                    0.447                   0.673
        Guinea                            0.314                   0.553                    0.326                   0.575
        Kenya                             0.363                   0.629                    0.389                   0.654
        Lesotho                           0.408                   0.601                    0.484                   0.639
        Liberia                           0.301                   0.530                    0.350                   0.612
        Malawi                            0.302                   0.514                    0.378                   0.572
        Mali                              0.274                   0.490                    0.314                   0.541
        Mozambique                        0.303                   0.565                    0.365                   0.591
        Namibia                           0.350                   0.589                    0.397                   0.667
        Niger                             0.320                   0.582                    0.379                   0.630
        Nigeria                           0.335                   0.577                    0.418                   0.682
        Rwanda                            0.327                   0.584                    0.402                   0.608
        Senegal                           0.307                   0.537                    0.376                   0.629
        Sierra Leone                      0.280                   0.510                    0.333                   0.577
        Swaziland                         0.354                   0.588                    0.451                   0.759
        Tanzania                          0.346                   0.587                    0.360                   0.601
        Togo                              0.399                   0.652                    0.388                   0.645
        Uganda                            0.406                   0.636                    0.380                   0.629
        Zambia                            0.325                   0.549                    0.331                   0.573
        Zimbabwe                          0.343                   0.585                    0.432                   0.635
        Mean                              0.322                   0.562                    0.369                   0.611
Note: Data are drawn from DHSs. Means are population weighted. The table lists the proportion of underweight women who fall into the
bottom 20th and 40th percentiles of predicted values from the regressions with log BMI as the dependent variable. For example, 27.1 percent
of underweight women in Benin have predicted BMI values that fall into the bottom 20 percent of all predicted values for women.




                                                                   49
  Table 13: Proportion of undernourished children who fall into the bottom 20 and 40 percent of
                                predicted values for all children

                                              Stunting                                                         Wasting
                            Model 2                              Model 3                     Model 2                             Model 3

                Bottom 20%      Bottom 40%         Bottom 20%        Bottom 40%    Bottom 20%    Bottom 40%        Bottom 20%        Bottom 40%

Benin               0.267             0.496              0.288             0.515     0.278             0.486             0.280             0.512
Burkina
Faso                0.268             0.504              0.310             0.583     0.331             0.564             0.402             0.661
Burundi             0.252             0.483              0.289             0.522     0.298             0.497             0.434             0.596
Cameroon            0.352             0.605              0.407             0.663     0.527             0.768             0.561             0.802
Congo, Rep.         0.355             0.571              0.419             0.633     0.335             0.536             0.352             0.616
Côte d'Ivoire       0.340             0.608              0.401             0.639     0.239             0.460             0.342             0.549
Congo,
Dem. Rep.           0.303             0.543              0.346             0.603     0.320             0.563             0.314             0.566
Ethiopia            0.262             0.481              0.283             0.554     0.297             0.547             0.421             0.630
Gabon               0.416             0.713              0.431             0.635     0.294             0.575             0.303             0.504
Gambia              0.311             0.553              0.378             0.598     0.306             0.543             0.354             0.592
Ghana               0.374             0.646              0.453             0.706     0.203             0.484             0.443             0.679
Guinea              0.297             0.544              0.351             0.620     0.352             0.599             0.435             0.638
Kenya               0.274             0.520              0.324             0.588     0.448             0.641             0.419             0.628
Lesotho             0.355             0.586              0.379             0.668     0.645             0.812             0.634             0.655
Liberia             0.287             0.514              0.319             0.581     0.269             0.521             0.441             0.679
Malawi              0.253             0.478              0.283             0.526     0.291             0.541             0.284             0.526
Mali                0.283             0.514              0.313             0.588     0.289             0.495             0.351             0.574
Mozambique          0.286             0.498              0.301             0.537     0.352             0.558             0.442             0.626
Namibia             0.341             0.601              0.388             0.621     0.361             0.656             0.382             0.602
Niger               0.289             0.531              0.328             0.579     0.271             0.469             0.359             0.568
Nigeria             0.346             0.624              0.375             0.649     0.325             0.552             0.370             0.595
Rwanda              0.299             0.529              0.328             0.599     0.353             0.567             0.445             0.589
Senegal             0.392             0.593              0.474             0.689     0.401             0.637             0.273             0.599
Sierra Leone        0.250             0.471              0.264             0.511     0.218             0.492             0.278             0.545
Swaziland           0.337             0.556              0.387             0.646     0.370             0.594             0.362             0.636
Tanzania            0.274             0.517              0.327             0.581     0.383             0.645             0.415             0.566
Togo                0.361             0.607              0.390             0.650     0.338             0.575             0.445             0.641
Uganda              0.325             0.586              0.400             0.625     0.473             0.681             0.455             0.668
Zambia              0.254             0.477              0.291             0.536     0.337             0.555             0.342             0.537
Zimbabwe            0.276             0.486              0.321             0.579     0.355             0.525             0.389             0.546
 Mean                0.294            0.533          0.329           0.584           0.320           0.548          0.372          0.595
Note: Data are drawn from DHSs. Means are population weighted. The table lists the proportion of stunted and wasted children who fall
into the bottom 20th and 40th percentiles of predicted values from the regressions with height-for-age and weight-for-height respectively as
the dependent variable. For example, 26.7 percent of stunted children in Benin have predicted values that fall into the bottom 20 percent of
all predicted values for children in the Model (2) regression with height-for-age as the dependent variable.


                                                                           50
51
