                                                         WPS8108


Policy Research Working Paper                           8108




                  Cyclicality of Fiscal Policy
                   in Sub-Saharan Africa
                       Magnitude and Evolution

                                    César Calderón
                                 Punam Chuhan-Pole
                                Rafael M. López-Monti




Africa Region
Office of the Chief Economist
June 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 8108


  Abstract
 This paper studies the cyclical aspects of fiscal policy in                        the level of cyclicality being larger when the level of real
 Sub-Saharan Africa countries during 1970–2014. It com-                             economic activity is above the trend relative to when it is
 pares the cyclical properties of real government consumption                       below the trend. Mirroring the pattern in other developing
 in the region with those in other developing regions and                           regions, the degree of cyclicality has changed since 2002 in
 high-income countries, and examines whether there has                              Sub-Saharan Africa, with incipient signs of a shift toward
 been a change in the cyclical nature of fiscal policy in recent                    acyclical or more countercyclical policies. The evidence does
 years. The analysis finds that government consumption                              not suggest that resource wealth or fragility increases the
 is procyclical in Sub-Saharan African countries, more so                           procyclicality of government consumption in Sub-Saharan
 than in other regions, and that accounting for endogeneity                         Africa. Official development assistance is found to exacer-
 increases the degree of cyclicality. The cyclical properties of                    bate the procyclical stance of fiscal policy in the region, but
 government spending vary along the business cycle, with                            the result depends on the relative size of foreign aid received.




  This paper is a product of the Office of the Chief Economist, Africa Region. It is part of a larger effort by the World
  Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions around the world.
  Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The authors may be contacted
  at ccalderon@worldbank.org.




         The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
         issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
         names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
         of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
         its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                       Produced by the Research Support Team
    Cyclicality of Fiscal Policy in Sub-Saharan Africa: Magnitude and Evolution 1


           César Calderón                   Punam Chuhan-Pole                   Rafael M. López-Monti
           The World Bank                      The World Bank                George Washington University
    Office of the Chief Economist       Office of the Chief Economist          Department of Economics
         of the Africa Region                of the Africa Region




JEL classification: E62; C13
Key words: Fiscal Policy; Cyclicality; Sub-Saharan Africa; Developing Countries




1
 We are grateful to participants at the CSAE Conference 2017: Economic Development in Africa for their
comments and suggestions. The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors, and do not necessarily
reflect those of the World Bank or its Boards of Directors.
1. Introduction

Fiscal policies in the short run are typically geared toward the stabilization of economic activity. In general,
a countercyclical fiscal policy is a desirable feature to counterbalance economic cycles. For example,
countercyclical government spending is needed to stimulate real economic activity, given shortfalls in
aggregate demand, or to transfer resources to less favored individuals.2 In other words, during “bad
times” (contractions) an above-the-trend increase in the government consumption expenditure might be
a useful tool to boost the economy. However, the other side of the countercyclical behavior is often
forgotten, that is, during the “good times” (expansion) government consumption expenditure should
increase below the trend, not only as a mechanism to avoid overheating the economy, but also to gain
room by saving the extra income for future smoothing of adverse demand-side shocks.

There is vast evidence that advanced countries have the ability to conduct countercyclical fiscal policies
(Mélitz 2000, Galí and Perotti 2003). Countercyclical fiscal policies in advanced countries are triggered by
automatic increases in social security and welfare spending as the economy moves into a recession. Darby
and Mélitz (2008) find that, on average, a reduction of one percentage point in the rate of growth is
compensated by a 0.36 percentage point increase in social expenditures among OECD economies.
Furthermore, well-targeted transfers in the US (which do not distort incentives to work) help stabilize
output fluctuations (McKay and Reis 2013).

The cyclical behavior of fiscal policy among developing countries is a much more disputed issue. Earlier
research suggests that fiscal policy in developing countries—and especially in Latin America—is procyclical
(Gavin and Perotti 1997, Talvi and Végh 2005, Kaminsky, Reinhart and Végh 2004, Ilzetzki and Végh 2008).
Historically, developing country governments have cut taxes and increased spending during booms and
they have retrenched outlays and raised taxes during busts. This destabilizing behavior of fiscal policy is
attributed, according to the literature, to either: (a) limited access to (external) funding (of policy actions)
or (b) political economy distortions.

The procyclical bias of fiscal policy among developing countries is attributed to the failure of governments
to support aggregate demand in the event of adverse shocks, as these countries are unable to tap either
global or domestic financial markets (Gavin, Hausman, Perotti, and Talvi 1996). During booms, on the
other hand, governments find it easier to finance rising public expenditure (Gavin and Perotti, 1997; Catao
and Sutton, 2002). Overall, the procyclical access to external borrowing among developing countries
drives the procyclical fiscal responses, leading to greater macroeconomic volatility (Kaminsky, Reinhart
and Végh 2004).

Others have pointed out that a country’s institutional framework plays a crucial role in the design of
countercyclical policy responses. Destabilizing fiscal policies are executed in countries with weak
institutions; say, widespread corruption, repudiation of contracts, lack of property rights enforcement
and, more generally, the predominance of political institutions that fail to constrain their officials
(Acemoglu, Johnson, Robinson and Thaicharoen, 2003). In this strand of the literature, institutional
theories that focus on political economy distortions such as common pool problems, fragmentation, and
agency problems explain the inability of governments to run surpluses or rein in spending in good times.
For instance, windfall revenues may not be saved by governments and are spent instead in favor of

2
 Countercyclical social spending and timely stimulus packages are important to protect individuals during periods
of hardship and stimulate employment.

                                                                                                                    2
powerful groups (Velasco 1998, Tornell and Lane 1999, Perotti and Kontopoulos 2002). Procyclical policy
responses may also result from rent-extractive governments that appropriate revenues to serve special
interests rather than the public welfare (Alesina, Campante and Tabellini, 2008; Ilzetzki, 2011).3

Historically, the evidence shows that fiscal policy has been pro-cyclical for most developing countries;
including countries in Sub-Saharan Africa. Frankel, Végh and Vuletin (2013) found that more than 90
percent of developing countries show procyclical government spending during the period 1960-2009
while 80 percent of industrial countries exhibit countercyclical government spending. Zooming in on Sub-
Saharan Africa shows, on average, that: (a) government consumption is pro-cyclical, (b) the degree of
procyclicality in the region is higher than that of other developing countries, and (c) the procyclical bias is
greater among countries in the region that are highly dependent on foreign aid inflows (Thornton 2008,
Lledó, Yackovlev and Gadenne, 2011).

The evidence on Sub-Saharan Africa also shows that structural and policy factors may have an influence
on the cyclical behavior of government expenditure across countries and over time. Lledó and coauthors
(2011) find that foreign aid inflows and fiscal space (as measured by the public debt burden and the
achievement of decision point among HIPC countries) played a significant role in reducing the extent of
procyclicality among African nations. However, they fail to find a robust effect of political institutions on
the cyclical stance of fiscal policy. Calderón and Nguyen (2016), however, find that the cyclical behavior
of government expenditure depends strongly on structural features of African economies (e.g.
institutional quality) and policy factors (e.g. the margins of monetary and fiscal space). They find that the
impact of institutions is not only attributed to deep roots about the formation of institutions but also to
the improvement of institutions supporting macroeconomic policy frameworks.4 Having an ample margin
of maneuver for the government is crucial. In line with Lledó et al. (2011) and World Bank (2015), fiscal
space (as proxied by the public debt burden) helps reduce the procyclicality of government expenditure.
Financial openness, on the other hand, exacerbates the degree of procyclicality of government
expenditure. The latter result is correlated to that of Thornton (2008) where fiscal policy is more
procyclical in countries that rely heavily on foreign aid inflows. Overall, Calderón and Nguyen (2016) shows
that fiscal policies can play a stabilizing role during times of crisis. However, much of the work has to be
undertaken in good times. Withdrawing policy stimulus and replenishing fiscal buffers in good times has
proven to be a challenge for most governments.

Finally, Konuki and Villafuerte (2016) investigates the extent and the drivers of fiscal policy pro-cyclicality
among countries in Sub-Saharan Africa from 2000 to 2014. The paper finds not only that fiscal policy is
more procyclical among oil exporters (2010-14) but also it has become more procyclical after the global
financial crisis. Next, the authors find a causal relationship from deeper financial markets and greater
reserve coverage to lower fiscal policy procyclicality. This finding implies that having space (by either
having access to external borrowing or built-up buffers) will help reduce the procyclical bias.



3
 These papers empirically find that less corrupt governments are able to implement counter-cyclical policies.
4
  Recent evidence shows that the strengthening of the institutional framework has enabled some developing
countries to escape the pro-cyclicality trap (Frankel, Végh and Vuletin 2013). Some aspects of this institutional
progress include: (a) sound fiscal rules that deliver countercyclical, credible and sustainable fiscal plans, (b)
transparency in the formulation of medium-term expenditure frameworks, and (c) the ability of the government to
carry out announced programs and being held accountable.

                                                                                                                3
This paper revisits the issue of cyclicality of fiscal policy in large sub-set of Sub-Saharan African countries.
It measures the cyclical behavior of real government consumption over a long time period (1970-2014),
employing an identification strategy to correct for possible endogeneity in the cyclical components of
spending and GDP. It also directly tests whether the cyclical stance of government consumption has
changed over time. The paper extends the empirical literature in several important dimensions. First,
unlike other papers in the literature, we estimate fully heterogeneous fiscal policy reaction functions (i.e.,
all coefficients and variance-covariance matrices) for SSA countries with different structural features (say,
resource abundance, financial openness, extent of ODA inflows, and fragility). When applicable, the
cyclical properties of government consumption expenditure in the region are compared with those in
other developing regions and in high-income countries. Second, it examines asymmetries in the cyclicality
of government spending during different phases of the economic cycle. Specifically, it assesses how
cyclical properties vary with fluctuations in the level of real economic activity—that is, when the level of
real economic activity is below the trend relative to when it is above the trend. The rest of the paper is
organized as follows. Section 2 presents the model and empirical strategy for analyzing the cyclical
behavior of fiscal policy. Section 3 reports the results of the quantitative analysis, and Section 4 concludes.



2. Methodology and Empirical Strategy
2.1 Model and Empirical Strategy

To examine the cyclical stance of fiscal policy, we focus on the expenditure side—and, more specifically,
real government consumption. We should note that expenditure rather than revenue indicators measure
more accurately policy rather than outcomes or targets. On the other hand, public investment (or
development expenditure) is not included in this analysis of the stance of fiscal policy—as it is the case of
Blanchard and Giavazzi (2004), Buiter and Grafe (2004), and Fatás (2005). Government investment is
perceived as being quite different from consumption expenditures. First, investment decisions generally
have a multi-year horizon (as there are often very few shovel ready projects), so the reaction to the
business cycle might not be contemporaneous and might potentially affect the government budget in
several periods. Second, the benefits resulting from public investment (for example, services) are spread
over many years, with the possibility to increase private output and tax revenues. This paper also does
not distinguish between discretionary and non-discretionary (automatic stabilizers) components of
government expenditure, because what really matters for our analysis is the aggregate response of
government consumption to the cycle as opposed to identifying the source.5

Unlike most papers in the literature, the government consumption expenditure is not expressed as a
percentage of GDP given that the ratio might be directly affected by the cyclical behavior of the GDP.6
Thus, in order to capture the cyclical behavior of fiscal policy, we specify the following general policy
reaction function:



5
  In addition, there is evidence that automatic stabilizers are in general weak among developing countries —and,
especially, Sub-Saharan African countries (World Bank 2014).
6
  See the discussion in Kaminsky, Reinhart and Vegh (2004), and Ilzetzki and Vegh (2008).

                                                                                                                   4
                                 =       +           +               +              +                       (1)

where       is the cyclical component of the log of government consumption expenditure (constant national
currency) in country at time ,         is the cyclical component of the log of real GDP (constant national
currency) in country at time . Additionally, we control for the lagged stock of the general government
gross debt as percentage of GDP (         ) in each country and the lagged level of the cyclical component of
the government consumption. Note that the regression coefficients of the policy reaction function are
initially assumed to vary either across groups, country and over time--i.e.        for i=0,1,2,3 and G being a
group of countries to be specified. Equation (1) captures how government consumption expenditure
responds to changes in contemporaneous output, where              represents the cyclicality coefficient. This
coefficient can be positive (procyclical), negative (countercyclical), or not statistically different from zero
(acyclical).

Baseline Specification (Case 1). We assume that      = for i=0,1,2,3. This implies that the regression
coefficients of equation (1) are homogeneous across groups of countries and for the entire sample period.

Asymmetric behavior along the business cycle (Case 2). We consider that the behavior of government
consumption expenditure might be different when the level of real economic activity is below the trend
relative to when it is above the trend. In this context, the specification that we estimate using the
instrumental variable (IV) approach assumes that        =      (i=0,1,2,3) when real economic activity is
above trend ( > 0) and that        =     (i=0,1,2,3) when real economic activity is below trend ( < 0).
Hence, in good times, we run the following specification:

                             =       +           +           +           +    ; if      >0                  (2)

while in bad times, we run the regression:

                            =     +          +               +           +   ; if       <0                  (3)

Note that our least squares and fixed effect estimation runs the following nested regression:

                            =     +          +           .       +       +              +

where       takes the value of 1 if   > 0 (good times) and 0 otherwise (bad times). We should note that
the specification above assumes heterogeneity in the coefficient associated to the business cycles
whereas the specifications in (2) and (3) assumes full heterogeneity of the fiscal policy reaction function
parameters when distinguishing between periods when real GDP is above or below the trend.

Time-varying parameters (Case 3). This paper tests directly whether the cyclical stance of government
consumption expenditure has changed over time. First, we conduct a test to detect endogenously
whether there is a time break in the fiscal policy reaction function. We use a Wald-type test statistic for
changes in the vector of parameters at unknown break points in the same spirit of the test developed by
Andrews (1993). Specifically, we recursively test the joint equality of the vector of coefficient estimates in
the periods pre- and post-break. After running all regressions, the turning point (year) corresponds to the
regression with the lowest root-mean-square error (RMSE). As can be seen in Figure 1, different breaking
points were found in each developing region, providing evidence in favor of a structural break in 2002 for


                                                                                                             5
Sub-Saharan Africa. Hence, we test whether the cyclical behavior in the period 2002-14 was different to
that of the period 1970-2001. Specifically, we assume that     =      (i=0,1,2,3) for the period 1970-2001
(P1) and that     =      (i=0,1,2,3) for the period 2002-2014 (P2). Analogous to equations (2) and (3), we
have:

                        =         +            +                +                 +      ; for the period 1970-2001

                                                                                                                                              (4)

                        =         +            +                +                 +      ; for the period 2002-2014

Similar regression analysis is performed for Latin America and Developing Asia, but with their
corresponding breaking points (years).

Figure 1. Root mean square errors from multiple panel regressions with different breaking points (years).
                     (a) Sub-Saharan Africa                                                    (b) Latin America
 0.0420                                                                 0.0182
                                              2002                                                                          2005
 0.0419                                                                 0.0182

 0.0418                                                                 0.0181

 0.0418                                                                 0.0181

 0.0417                                                                 0.0180

 0.0416                                                                 0.0180

 0.0415                                                                 0.0179
          1985
          1986
          1987
          1988
          1989
          1990
          1991
          1992
          1993
          1994
          1995
          1996
          1997
          1998
          1999
          2000
          2001
          2002
          2003
          2004
          2005
          2006
          2007
          2008




                                                                                 1985
                                                                                 1986
                                                                                 1987
                                                                                 1988
                                                                                 1989
                                                                                 1990
                                                                                 1991
                                                                                 1992
                                                                                 1993
                                                                                 1994
                                                                                 1995
                                                                                 1996
                                                                                 1997
                                                                                 1998
                                                                                 1999
                                                                                 2000
                                                                                 2001
                                                                                 2002
                                                                                 2003
                                                                                 2004
                                                                                 2005
                                                                                 2006
                                                                                 2007
                                                                                 2008
                                                          (c) Developing Asia
                                    0.0234
                                                                           1999
                                    0.0234

                                    0.0234

                                    0.0234

                                    0.0233

                                    0.0233

                                    0.0233
                                             1985
                                             1986
                                             1987
                                             1988
                                             1989
                                             1990
                                             1991
                                             1992
                                             1993
                                             1994
                                             1995
                                             1996
                                             1997
                                             1998
                                             1999
                                             2000
                                             2001
                                             2002
                                             2003
                                             2004
                                             2005
                                             2006
                                             2007
                                             2008




Note: The unknown turning point (year) of fiscal cyclicality in each region is found through running multiple panel regressions with country fixed
effect, testing the possible breaking points (dummies) from 1985 to 2008. To assess the performance of each regression (year), the Root-Mean-
Square Error (RMSE) is stored. After running all regressions, the turning point (year) corresponds to the regression with the lowest RMSE



Access to external borrowing (Case 4). It is documented in the literature that the procyclical bias of fiscal
policy —and, more specifically, government spending— among developing countries (and, notably,
among SSA countries) might be attributed to their procyclical access to global capital markets. This implies
that African countries might not be able to fund fiscal stimulus packages during downturns through
external borrowing. At the same time, access to global capital markets might be directly related to the
extent of international financial integration of the country. Hence, we define countries with low (high)
degree of financial openness as those countries where the average value of the Chinn-Ito index of financial

                                                                                                                                                6
openness is below (above) the world median by decade.7 Hence, we assume that        =     (i=0,1,2,3) for
countries with low financial openness, and   =    (i=0,1,2,3) for countries with high levels of financial
openness.

Resource-rich vs. nonresource-rich countries (Case 5). Further analysis leads us to analyze whether the
cyclical behavior of the government consumption expenditure differs between nonresource-rich and
resource-rich countries among Sub-Saharan African countries. Our prior is that, in the event of commodity
windfalls, resource rich countries will be more prone to conduct expansionary fiscal policies (say, increase
government spending). To distinguish between resource and nonresource-rich countries, we need to
define criteria to classify countries in the region. First, we define resource rich countries (RNR) as those
with rents from natural resources (excluding forests) that exceed 10 percent of their GDP (World Bank
2011).8 Our econometric specification then assumes that            =      (i=0,1,2,3) for countries where
exceeds 10 percent of GDP in the decade, and          =      (i=0,1,2,3) for countries that are not abundant in
natural resources. Finally, to avoid exceptional observations, we average the rents coming from the
natural resources (excluding forest) as a percentage of GDP by decade (see footnote 7). A second criterion
to classify SSA countries by resource abundance requires their average net commodity exports exceeding
25 percent of total exports throughout the sample period. Again,                 =      (i=0,1,2,3) for countries
surpassing the 25% value of exports threshold and             =      (i=0,1,2,3) for those countries unable to
surpass that threshold. A final method to characterize (although imperfectly) resource abundance is to
test whether SSA countries have established a sovereign wealth fund (which is typically commodity-based
in the region). The list of countries with SWF (and their corresponding year of inception) is obtained from
the Sovereign Wealth Fund Institute. In this case,           =      (i=0,1,2,3) for countries with a sovereign
wealth fund and        =      (i=0,1,2,3) for those countries without one.9

Foreign aid (Case 6). Net official development assistance (net-ODA) is an important source of funds for
many cash-strapped countries in Sub-Saharan Africa.10 The size of ODA flows to the region have increased
from a median value of 6.8 percent of the gross national income (GNI) in the 1970s to 13.3 percent in the
1990s (Figure 4.a). After 2000, the median value of net ODA has declined to 9.3 percent of GNI, reflecting
the faster pace of economic growth of the region’s countries with respect to the nineties (see Figure 4.b).

To examine how the relative size of ODA inflows affect the cyclicality of fiscal behavior, we need a
threshold to determine the impact of net ODA on a country’s fiscal policy. Given that the median net-
ODA to GNI ratio among Sub-Saharan African countries is 9.5 percent over the period 1970-2014, it seems
reasonable to classify countries into low (high) recipients of net ODA if it received the corresponding
country receives foreign aid (net of repayments of principal) of at least 10 percent of its GNI. All Sub-
Saharan African countries in our sample have received some type of ODA during the last forty-five years,


7
  After 2000, we take the average and median for the 2000-2014 period.
8
  Total natural resources rents are the sum of oil rents, natural gas rents, coal rents (hard and soft), mineral rents,
and forest rents.
9
  Note that we use to different ways to code countries with sovereign wealth fund: (a) we assume constancy over
time, and (b) we code a fund only for the years since it was established.
10
   ODA is concessional finance from bilateral and multilateral donors. It does not include non-concessional
development financing from these donors.

                                                                                                                     7
including South Africa. The question then is whether the relative magnitude of the assistance provided
changes the cyclical stance of government consumption expenditure. We assume that                    =
(i=0,1,2,3) for countries where       exceeds 10 percent of GNI in the decade, and       =      (i=0,1,2,3)
for countries that have received less than 10 percent of GNI or that have not received foreign aid over
several years. For robustness purposes, we repeat analysis for low and high-ODA recipients but assuming
a higher threshold: 13 percent of GNI, which is the 67th percentile of the SSA distribution of net-ODA to
GNI ratio.

Fragility and Conflict (Case 7). Fragile and conflict states are those nations with a harmonized Country
Policy and Institutional Assessment (CPIA) rating lower than or equal to 3.2, or with presence of peace-
keeping or peace-building missions (World Bank 2011). The definition of fragile country has evolved over
time from the classification of low income countries under stress (2006-9) to the harmonized list of fragile
situations (from 2011). In this context, we will use the polity score data from Polity IV data set, which
characterizes the qualities of democratic and autocratic authority in governing institutions. This polity
score ranges from -10 (hereditary monarchy) to +10 (consolidated democracy). It also includes
exceptional cases of foreign interruption, interregnum or anarchy and transition (that takes special values
of -66, -77 and -88). Using this database, we define fragile countries as those countries with
failed/occupied scores (special values of -66, -77 and -88) and autocracies (values from -10 to -6 in the
polity score). For robustness purposes, we expand the previous definition to include closed anocracies
(values greater than or equal to -5 and smaller than 0 in the polity score).11

Estimation procedure. We estimate Equation 1 through the Pooled OLS and Fixed-Effect regressions.
Since we are using deviations from a potential trend, the means of the cyclical components,         and ,
tend to zero. Therefore, the Pooled OLS and Fixed Effect techniques will give similar coefficients, because
the “within” estimation uses deviations from the country means. Second, we extend the analysis to
account for possible endogeneity between the fiscal policy and GDP by using an IV/2SLS method to
estimate the cyclicality coefficient ( ).12 Following the approach used in Galí and Perotti (2003), Lane
(2003), Jaimovich and Panizza (2007), and Calderón and Nguyen (2016), the cyclical component of real
GDP ( ) is instrumented using its own lags and the weighted average of the GDP growth of each country’s
export partners. The idea is that external trade shocks do not affect government spending except through
the business cycle channel. Similarly, there is no reason to think that government spending in small
economies directly affects the growth rates of their trading partners. In the case of large economies,
however, fiscal policy might affect the growth rates of trading partners.



2.2 Data

The sample includes 37 Sub-Saharan African countries (SSA), 20 countries from Latin America (LAC), 20
from developing Asia, and 22 industrial economies. In the Appendix, Tables A.1 and A.2 contain the
complete list of countries and the classification of resource-rich and nonresource-rich countries for SSA

11
   Anocracies are government regimes with inherent qualities of political instability and ineffectiveness, as well as
an incoherent mix of democratic and autocratic traits and practices (Marshall, Gurr and Jaggers 2016).
12
   See the discussion about the endogeneity problems in Rigobón (2004).

                                                                                                                        8
respectively. Annual data from 1970 to 2014 are used in the analysis. The government consumption
expenditure and real GDP in constant national currency are from the United Nations’ National Accounts
Database. In general, most papers on fiscal cyclicality use the IMF’s databases, however, the UN statistics
provide a more complete and consistent national accounts data for the time period covered. We apply
the Hodrick-Prescott filter (HP) and use a value of λ equal to 6.25 in order to derive the cyclical
components of the government consumption expenditure and real GDP (both in logs). General
government gross debt as a percentage of GDP is from Abbas et al. (2010) and updated with the IMF’s
World Economic Outlook. Natural resources rents (% of GDP) and net ODA received (% of GNI) are from
the World Bank’s World Development Indicators (WDI). The instrumental variable is calculated with
bilateral export values from the IMF’s Direction of Trade Statistics and UN COMTRADE, while the growth
rates of trading partners are from the United Nations’ National Accounts Database updated with the WDI.



3. Results
3.1 Cyclical behavior of government consumption in 1970-2014

Before we conduct our regression analysis, we compute the degree of association between the cyclical
components of real government consumption and real GDP from 1970 to 2014. The behavior of
government consumption along the business cycle is defined as follows: government consumption
expenditure is countercyclical (procyclical) if the correlation coefficient between the cyclical components
of real government consumption expenditure and real GDP is negative (positive) and statistically
significant at 5 percent. It is acyclical if that correlation is not statistically different from zero. Figure 2
shows that government consumption expenditure is procyclical for nearly 40 percent of SSA countries in
our sample. Over the period 1970-2014, no country in the region exhibits countercyclical fiscal policies.
The proportion of countries with a procyclical bias in fiscal policy is even larger in Latin America (60
percent). By contrast, 77 percent of industrial countries have exhibited an acyclical stance and 9 percent
conducted countercyclical policies. The Appendix (Figure A.1) presents the correlation coefficients by
region and country for the whole sample period.




                                                                                                              9
Figure 2. Cyclical properties of Government Consumption Expenditure: proportion of countries by groups.
                                                             1970-2014
 100%
                                                                                              9%
                                                                                                               Coutercyclical
  80%                                      40%
                  62%                                                60%
  60%
                                                                                              77%
                                                                                                               Acyclical
  40%
                                           60%
  20%             38%                                                40%
                                                                                              14%              Procyclical
   0%
          Sub-Saharan Africa          Latin America           Developing Asia        Industrial Countries
Note: The government final consumption expenditure and GDP are expressed in local currency at constant prices (source: UN-Statistics database).
Their cyclical components are obtained using the Hodrick-Prescott filter. Countercyclical government consumption means that the correlation
coefficient is negative and statistically significant at 5% level. It is procyclical when it is positive and significant, and acyclical when the coefficient
is not statistically different from zero.



Next, we estimate the fiscal policy reaction function defined in equation (1) using least squares. The
relationship between the cyclical components of the government consumption expenditure and real GDP
is positive and statistically significant in all developing regions. The coefficient of real GDP cycle, however,
is larger in Sub-Saharan Africa (Table 1). On the other hand, least squares estimates point to a non-
significant relationship between government consumption and the business cycle.

The results are qualitatively similar when we account for the likely endogeneity of (the cyclical component
of) real output. Our instrumental variables (IV) estimation shows that government consumption is still
procyclical in Sub-Saharan Africa and Latin America —with the former group having the larger coefficient
estimate. For developing Asia, the coefficient estimate of real GDP is still positive but fails to be statistically
significant. When we account for endogeneity, the extent of procyclicality of government consumption in
Sub-Saharan Africa is greater and twice as large as that in Latin America. Note that the estimates for the
SSA region are the only ones where least squares exhibits a downward bias. This suggests that government
consumption expenditure among SSA countries is ineffective in boosting short-run aggregate demand.

The lagged debt-to-GDP indicator has a negative coefficient across all regions, implying that higher debt
levels tend to constrain fiscal policy. However, the coefficient is only significant for Latin American and
industrial countries. The coefficient on the lagged cyclical component of government consumption has a
positive sign for all country groups, except Sub-Saharan Africa. But after correcting for the potential
endogeneity problem, this coefficient is only significant in the group of industrial countries. In Sub-
Saharan Africa, this coefficient on the lagged dependent variable is negative and not significant. Note that
we are working with deviation of government consumption expenditure with respect to its trend, thus a
negative coefficient for its lagged variable would suggest an oscillating behavior of fiscal policy. That is,
when the cyclical component of government consumption is below its trend in the previous period, it is
more likely to be above the trend in the current period, suggesting variability in government spending.




                                                                                                                                                        10
3.2 Cyclical properties during good times and bad times

Does the cyclicality of fiscal policy vary during good times and bad times? In order to capture possible
asymmetries during the economic cycle, we split the sample based on the values of the cyclical component
of real GDP —that is, positive (above the trend) and negative (below the trend). Table 2 tests whether
the behavior of the cyclical component of government consumption differs when real economic activity
is above or below the trend (i.e. expansions and recessions).

The least squares estimates show that government consumption tends to be procyclical in both good
times and bad times in developing countries. For industrial countries, on the other hand, government
consumption is slightly procyclical only during expansions. However, Sub-Saharan Africa is the only region
where the degree of pro-cyclicality during recessions is larger than the one during expansions.

Accounting for the likely endogeneity of the business cycles, fiscal policy tends to be procyclical during
expansions across all developing country groups. Among these groups, Sub-Saharan Africa exhibits the
largest degree of procyclicality. The coefficient is positive, significant and greater than one —which implies
that government consumption expands more than proportionally in good times. During downturns, Sub-
Saharan Africa is the only region with a positive —although not statistically significant— coefficient
estimate for the business cycle. In other regions, government consumption behaves countercyclically
during bad times —although the coefficient estimate is statistically significant only for industrial
countries.13

Asymmetries along the business cycles emerge from implementing fiscal policies in an environment that
is also affected by short-sighted considerations. In the case of Sub-Saharan Africa, we find procyclicality
during expansions and acyclicality during recessions. Additionally, the magnitude of the sensitivity of fiscal
policy to business cycles is greater during expansions than during recessions (1.593 vs. 0.918).
Fluctuations in the business cycle are accompanied by a rising government consumption to output ratio
over time. The quantitative importance of this mechanisms, as pointed out by Hercowitz and Michel
Strawczynski (2004), is proxied by the ratcheting coefficient 0.675 (=1.593 -0.918).

It is likely that different factors shape a procyclical fiscal policy response during good times and bad times.
In an expansion, political pressures and social needs boost government expenditures, particularly in
countries with low levels of development. In downturns, the government needs funding to conduct
countercyclical policies —either from its own savings or from financial markets— in a context of declining
revenues. Industrial countries, emerging market economies, and some developing countries have access
to international financial markets, which means that these countries can borrow to partially offset the
economic consequences during the contraction periods. The pattern of fiscal policy cyclicality observed
in Sub-Saharan Africa might respond to the higher demands during the expansion periods and non-
negligible borrowing constraints in downturns.

3.3 How has the cyclical stance of fiscal policy changed in recent years?

This section tests whether the cyclical behavior of fiscal policy in Sub-Saharan Africa has changed over
time —notably, in recent years. We conduct a recursive test of structural break along the fiscal policy


13
  These are preliminary results that may suffer from the weak instrument problem since the Kleibergen-Paap-F
statistic is relatively low in some developing regions for certain periods.

                                                                                                               11
reaction function and identify 2002 as a turning point in Sub-Saharan Africa. Similar test was conducted
for Latin America and Developing Asia. For these regions, the time break is 2005 and 1999, respectively.

All developing regions, including Sub-Saharan Africa, have made some progress towards more acyclical
(and countercyclical in some cases) fiscal policies after the breaking point (year). In fact, there were no
countries with negative and statistically significant correlation coefficients (countercyclical fiscal policies)
in the pre-break period in all regions (Figure 3). However, after the breaking year, the proportion of
countries with countercyclical fiscal policies have increased to 8% in Sub-Saharan Africa and 10% in both
Latin America and developing Asia. At the same time, the proportion of countries with positive and
statistically significant correlation coefficient (procyclical fiscal policies) have decreased considerably.


Figure 3. Cyclical properties of Government Consumption Expenditure by region
 100%
                                       8%                                         10%                                        10%
                                                            30%
     80%
                                                                                                       55%
                68%
     60%
                                      84%                                                                                    75%
                                                                                  85%
     40%
                                                            70%

     20%                                                                                               45%
                32%
                                                                                                                             15%
                                       8%                                         5%
     0%
            1970-2001             2002-2014             1970-2004             2005-2014            1970-1998             1999-2014
            SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA (2002)                      LATIN AMERICA (2005)                      DEVELOPING ASIA (1999)

                                       Procyclical                Acyclical                Countercyclical

Note: The government final consumption expenditure and GDP are expressed in local currency at constant prices (source: UN-Statistics database).
Their cyclical components are obtained using the Hodrick-Prescott filter. Countercyclical government consumption means that the correlation
coefficient is negative and statistically significant at 5% level. It is procyclical when it is positive and significant, and acyclical when the coefficient
is not statistically different from zero.



The analysis of the correlation coefficient between the cyclical components of government consumption
and GDP in Sub-Saharan African countries in the sub-periods of 1970-2001 and 2002-2014 suggests that
the region still has considerable margin to improve in terms of the cyclical stance of fiscal policy. Figure 4
shows that only 9 out of 37 countries in the region have moved from a procyclical stance (positive
correlation) to a more countercyclical one (negative correlation).14 Only 4 countries (Guinea, Malawi,
Zambia, and Zimbabwe) have registered a negative correlation between the cyclical components of
government consumption and GDP in both periods. Government consumption in the majority of countries
(24) continue to exhibit a procyclical behavior. As was noted before, regardless of the dynamic between
periods, most of region’s countries are still classified as having acyclical fiscal policies in the recent period
2002-2014, since their correlation coefficients are not statistically different from zero.



14
  These countries are: Angola, Cabo Verde, Chad, Kenya, Liberia, Mauritius, Nigeria, Rwanda, and South Africa.
However, only Angola, Kenya, and Mauritius have exhibited negative and statistically significant correlation
coefficients in 2002-2014.

                                                                                                                                                        12
We conduct a regression analysis to estimate the cyclical behavior of government consumption
expenditure before and after 2002 (our estimated time break). Our coefficient estimates suggest a shift
in the stance of fiscal policy along the business cycle across developing regions. The instrumental variable
(IV) regression estimates in Table 3 show that, on average, fiscal policy has become counter-cyclical in
Latin American (after 2005) and Asia (1999) —although the negative coefficient is statistically not different
from zero in the latter group. In Sub-Saharan Africa, the magnitude of the fiscal policy procyclicality bias
has decreased over time. After 2002, the coefficient estimates of (the cyclical component of real output)
is still positive but it is smaller (in magnitude) and no longer statistically significant. The reduction in the
degree of procyclicality across developing regions in recent years has been the result of better fiscal
management, particularly during the strong global growth experienced in 2000-08, which better prepared
many developing countries (including those in in Sub-Saharan Africa) to face the 2008-09 global financial
crisis. In sum, there has been an overall change to more acyclical behavior of the government
consumption expenditure in developing regions in recent years, a phenomenon that does not exclude
African countries.


Figure 4. Sub-Saharan Africa: change in the correlation coefficients between the cyclical components of
Government Consumption Expenditure and GDP by country, 1970-2001 vs. 2002-2014
               1.0
                         Change to more                                                                                                      Still in Procyclical
                           Procyclical                                                                                                               region
               0.8
                                                                                               BDI                       SLE
               0.6                                                                                                             GMB
                                                                                                                     UGA                   CIV
                                                                                                       MLI

               0.4                                                                   BFA COD GHA
                                                                                                GNB
                                                                                         TGO                                   MDG
                                                                                                 SEN BEN
                                                                                       TZA                         NER
               0.2                                                                 COM     CMR
                                                                                             COG     CAF                                     GAB
   2002-2014




                                                                                               MOZ
                                                                                     MRT
               0.0
                                                                                        BWA
                                                                                                                                                  RWA
                                                                                           NGA
                                                                      ZMB   MWI
               -0.2                                          ZWE                                                                            LBR
                                                                          GIN
                                                                                              ZAF            CPV
               -0.4                                                                                                                    TCD

                                                                                                      AGO

               -0.6                                                                             KEN           MUS


               -0.8
                         Still in Countercyclical                                                                                                Change to more
                                   region                                                                                                        Countercyclical
               -1.0
                      -1.0        -0.8         -0.6   -0.4         -0.2           0.0           0.2            0.4                   0.6             0.8            1.0
                                                                            1970-2001

                             Classification for the 2002-2014 period:           Procyclical           Acyclical                 Countercyclical



Note: The government final consumption expenditure and GDP are expressed in local currency at constant prices (source: UN-Statistics
database). Their cyclical components are obtained using the Hodrick-Prescott filter. Countercyclical government consumption means that the
correlation coefficient is negative and statistically significant at 5% level. It is procyclical when it is positive and significant, and acyclical when
the coefficient is not statistically different from zero.



3.4 The effect of financial openness on the fiscal cyclical stance

Table 4 examines whether the degree of cyclicality of fiscal policy is different between countries with low
and high levels of financial openness. Our IV estimates show that government consumption expenditure
is procyclical among countries with low financial openness and acyclical among countries with high

                                                                                                                                                                          13
financial openness. This finding suggests that the likely access to foreign borrowing during downturns may
lower the degree of procyclicality of fiscal policy. The same finding holds for Latin America. For developing
Asia and industrial countries, on the other hand, government consumption expenditure is acyclical in
countries with both low and high financial openness.



3.5 The effect of natural resources rents on the fiscal cyclical stance

Table 5 tests whether the fiscal policy reaction function is different between natural resource abundant
countries from those that are not. We use two different criteria to classify natural resource abundance:
(i) having an average ratio of natural resource rents (excluding forests) to GDP that exceeds 10 percent,
and (ii) having an average ratio of net commodity exports to total exports that is greater than 25 percent.15
Our discussion will focus on the estimations from column [5] through [12] in Table 5.

Regardless of the criterion used to define resource abundant countries, our IV estimates show that the
coefficient of fiscal cyclicality is statistically not significant for resource rich countries in Sub-Saharan
Africa. On the other hand, the coefficient is positive and significant for non-resource rich countries in the
region. In other terms, our regression results suggest that government consumption expenditure tends
to be procyclical in non-resource rich countries and acyclical among resource rich ones.

Overall, the results need to be interpreted with caution because of the small sample of resource-rich
countries in the analysis. At the same time, the results for Sub-Saharan Africa could indicate that resource-
rich countries are using stabilization funds to smooth consumption. In recent years, several of the region’s
resource-rich countries have established stabilization funds with windfalls from the commodity price
boom that began in the early 2000s. If well implemented, these stabilization funds can provide access to
extra-budgetary funds in bad times, making them a useful tool to reduce the procyclical bias of
government consumption spending. Further analysis will be useful here.

Table 6 adds to our analysis the quality of institutions. Some have argued that the quality of institutions
from resource to non-resource rich countries may affect differently the cyclical component of government
consumption expenditure. When using the natural resource rents criteria, the coefficient of cyclical output
is positive for both resource and non-resource rich countries. It is larger for the latter group but they fail
to be statistically significant. On the other hand, when using the net commodity export criterion,
government consumption expenditure is procyclical for non-resource rich countries while it is acyclical for
resource rich ones. Note that institutional quality has a negligible impact on the cycle of government
consumption.

A final look at the influence of natural resource abundance involves testing whether having a sovereign
wealth (SWF) or stabilization fund has an impact on the cyclicality of fiscal policy. The IV results are
reported in Table 7. We find that countries with a SWF have an acyclical stance (i.e. the coefficient of
business cycle is positive but not significant). On the other hand, countries without SWF exhibit the typical
procyclical fiscal bias —that is, the coefficient of business cycle is positive and statistically significant. This
finding is similar to that in Table 5.


15
  The first criterion has also two different groups that are differentiated by the inclusion of other natural resource
abundant nations; namely, Botswana (diamonds) and Niger (uranium).

                                                                                                                    14
3.6 How has ODA affected the cyclical nature of fiscal policy in Sub-Saharan Africa?

Figures 4a shows that the median size of official development assistance (ODA) flows to GNI remains large
in Sub-Saharan Africa, although it is below the peaks levels in 1990-99. Importantly, in many poor
developing countries, ODA supports over half of public spending. Net official development assistance
(net-ODA) is an important source of funds for many cash-strapped countries in Sub-Saharan Africa.


Figure 4. Sub-Saharan Africa: Net Official Development Assistance
                   (a) Net ODA received as % of GNI,                     (b) Growth rate of net ODA and GNI w.r.t. the previous decade,
                                (Median by period)                       (Based on median by period of net-ODA and GNI indexes, 1970-1979=100)
     14                                13.3                               200%
                                                                                                    Net ODA       GNI
     12
                                                                          160%
                         10.1
     10                                              9.3        9.5

                                                                          120%
     8
             6.8
     6
                                                                           80%

     4
                                                                           40%
     2

     0                                                                     0%
          1970-1979    1980-1989     1990-1999   2000-2014   1970-2014                1980s               1990s              2000-2014
Source: Authors’ calculations based on the WDI database




Table 8 tests whether the cyclical stance of fiscal policy changes between countries that receive a greater
amount of foreign aid from those that do not. In this context, we use two different criteria to classify SSA
countries: first, countries receiving net ODA equivalent to 10 percent or more of their gross national
income (GNI), which is the median of the SSA country-year distribution for this variable. Second, we also
consider countries receiving net ODA equivalent to 13 percent or more of their GNI —about the top tercile
of the SSA foreign aid distribution. The results are reported in Table 8.

Our results show that government consumption of high-ODA countries (when using the threshold of 10
percent of GNI) is procyclical while low-ODA countries is acyclical. When we increase the threshold to 13
percent, the result is the opposite: government consumption of high-ODA countries is acyclical while that
of low-ODA countries is procyclical.16 Note that the coefficient of business cycle is not significant when we
control for the quality of institutions. Other studies (Thornton 2008, Lledó, Yackovlev and Gadenne, 2011)
also find that the procyclical bias is greater among countries in the region that are highly dependent on
foreign aid inflows. In our analysis, this finding is obtained when we use the lower threshold of ODA and
we do not account for the quality of institutions of SSA countries. It is important to caveat here that
although most of ODA is given to promote a country’s development and welfare, we are not capturing the
effect on government investments (developing expenditure). Our finding might suggest that when a


16
  Note that lifting the threshold from 10 to 13 percent reduces the sample of SSA countries from 27 to 22 (see
Appendix-Table A.3). The countries excluded are: Benin, Rep. of Congo, Guinea, Senegal, and Togo. Note that the
average ratio of foreign aid to GDP for high-ODA countries is 16.5%.

                                                                                                                                         15
country is receiving above-average assistance, the government consumption expenditure overreacts to
the cycle. That is, in good times ODA flows might reinforce the current expenditure cycle, resulting in
stronger adjustments during bad times. In any case, a further analysis is needed to properly assess the
real impact of ODA flows on the cyclicality of fiscal policy.



3.7 Fragility and the cyclical stance of government consumption expenditure

Table 9 examines whether the behavior of government consumption expenditure along the business cycle
is different for fragile and non-fragile countries. We have two different criteria: (a) country-years where
there is a failed/occupied government or an autocracy, and (b) includes closed anocracies to (a). The first
criterion shows that government consumption expenditure is procyclical for both fragile and non-fragile
countries —although the extent of procyclicality is larger among non-fragile countries. For non-fragile
countries, the response of government consumption to output fluctuations in more than proportional.

When our definition of fragility includes anocracies, the results are qualitatively similar: the coefficient
estimate of real output fluctuations is positive and significant in most cases. The magnitude of the
coefficient is larger among non-fragile countries. If we do not account for the lagged ratio of public debt
to GDP, government consumption expenditure reacts more than proportionally to oscillations in real
economic activity.



4. Conclusions
This paper shows that, historically, government consumption has been more procyclical in Sub-Saharan
Arica vis-à-vis other developing regions over the period 1970-2014. When we account for the likely
endogeneity of fluctuations in real economic activity, the degree of procyclicality in the region is higher.
Our findings also show that the procyclical bias of fiscal policy in Sub-Saharan Africa has decreased in
recent years. Government consumption has shifted from a procyclical stance (in 1970-2001) to an acyclical
one (2002-2014).

We also find the behavior of government consumption expenditure in SSA is asymmetric along the
business cycle: it is procyclical during upturns and acyclical in downturns. Given that the magnitude of the
coefficient estimate of business cycle is positive and larger during expansions. Hence, the ratio of
government spending to GDP is rising during expansions.

Finally, we also test whether the fiscal policy reaction function is different across SSA countries depending
upon: the abundance of natural resources, extent of financial openness, reliance on foreign aid, and
condition of fragility. Our results show that government consumption expenditure tends to behave: (a)
acyclically among resource rich countries, (b) procyclically among low financial openness countries, and
(c) more procyclically among non-fragile countries. Finally, the evidence is mixed on the role of foreign
aid in explaining fiscal policy cyclicality.




                                                                                                          16
References
Abbas, S. M., Belhocine, N., ElGanainy, A. A., & Horton, M. 2010. “A historical public debt database.” IMF
working papers, 1-26.

Andrews, Donald W.K. (1993) “Tests for Parameter Instability and Structural Change With Unknown
Change Point.” Econometrica 61(4): 821-856.

Blanchard, Olivier J. and Giavazzi, F. 2004. “Improving the SGP Through a Proper Accounting of Public
Investment.” CEPR Discussion Paper No. 4220.

Buiter, W. H., & Grafe, C. 2004. “Patching up the Pact. Economics of Transition.” 12(1), 67-102.

Calderón, C., & Nguyen, H. 2016. “The Cyclical Nature of Fiscal Policy in Sub-Saharan Africa.” Journal of
African Economies.

Fatás, A. 2005. “Is there a case for sophisticated balanced-budget rules?” OECD Economics Department,
Working Paper No.466.

Frankel, Jeffrey A., Carlos A. Végh, and Guillermo Vuletín. 2013. “On graduation from fiscal procyclicality.”
Journal of Development Economics 100: 32-47.

Galí, J., & Perotti, R. 2003. “Fiscal policy and monetary integration in Europe.” Economic Policy, 18(37),
533-572.

Gavin, Michael, Ricardo Hausmann, Roberto Perotti, and Ernesto Talvi. 1996. “Managing Fiscal Policy in
Latin America and the Caribbean: Volatility, Procyclicality, and Limited Creditworthiness.” Inter-American
Development Bank, Office and the Chief Economist, Working Paper 326, March.

Gavin, Michael and Roberto Perotti. 1997. “Fiscal Policy in Latin America.” In: Bernanke, Ben and Julio
Rotemberg (eds.), NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1997, MIT Press, Cambridge and London, pp. 11-61.

Hercowitz, Zvi and Michel Strawczynski (2004) “Cyclical ratcheting in government spending: Evidence
from the OECD.” Review of Economics and Statistics 86(1): 353–361

Ilzetzki, Ethan and Carlos A. Végh (2008) “Procyclical fiscal policy in developing countries: Truth or fiction?”
NBER Working Paper 14191, July.

Jaimovich, D. and Panizza, U. (2007). “Procyclicality or Reverse Causality?.” IDB Working Paper No. 501.

Kaminsky, Graciela, Carmen Reinhart and Carlos A. Végh (2004) “When It Rains It Pours: Procyclical Capital
Flows and Macroeconomic Policies.” In: Gertler, Mark, and Kenneth S. Rogoff (eds.), NBER
Macroeconomics Annual 2014, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Konuki, Tetsuya and Mauricio Villafuerte (2016) “Cyclical Behavior of Fiscal Policy among Sub-Saharan
African Countries.” Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund, The African Department Paper Series.

Lane, P. R. (2003). The cyclical behaviour of fiscal policy: evidence from the OECD. Journal of Public
Economics, 87(12), 2661-2675.

Lledó, Victor, Irene Yackovlev, and Lucie Gadenne. 2009. “Cyclical Patterns of Government Expenditures
in Sub-Saharan Africa: Facts and Factors.” IMF Working Paper WP/09/274.

                                                                                                             17
Marshall, Monty G., Ted Robert Gurr, and Keith Jaggers (2016) “Polity IV Project: Political Regime
Characteristics and Transitions, 1800-2015 - Dataset Users’ Manual.” Center for Systemic Peace and
Societal-Systems Research Inc, Vienna, VA.

Rigobon, R. (2004). [When It Rains, It Pours: Procyclical Capital Flows and Macroeconomic Policies]:
Comment. NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 19, 62-79.

Talvi, Ernesto and Carlos A. Végh, 2005. “Tax base variability and pro-cyclical fiscal policy in developing
countries.” Journal of Development Economics 78: 156-190.

Thornton, John (2008) Explaining Procyclical Fiscal Policy in African Countries.” Journal of African
Economies 17(3), 451-464.

Tornell, Aaron, and Philip R. Lane (1999) “The voracity effect.” American Economic Review 89, 22-46.

Velasco, Andrés (1998) “The Common Property Approach to Fiscal Policy.” In: Tommasi, Mariano, and
Federico Sturzenegger (eds.), The Political Economy of Reform. Cambridge: MIT Press. Pp. 165-84.

World Bank (2015). Africa's pulse (October 2015). Washington, D.C.: World Bank Group.
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/258281467991904972/Africas-pulse-October-2015.




                                                                                                        18
                                                                                                             TABLES

Table 1. Cyclicality of Fiscal Policy, 1970-2014
Dependent Variable: Cyclical component of government consumption expenditure (GovCons_Cycle), Sample Period 1970-2014 (Annual data)

                                         Sub-Saharan Africa                                 Latin America                                     Developing Asia                                    Industrial Countries
                                (1)              (2)             (3)              (4)             (5)              (6)               (7)             (8)             (9)               (10)               (11)             (12)
VARIABLES                   Pooled OLS       Fixed Effect      IV/2SLS        Pooled OLS      Fixed Effect       IV/2SLS         Pooled OLS      Fixed Effect      IV/2SLS          Pooled OLS        Fixed Effect       IV/2SLS

RGDP_Cycle                   0.580***         0.582***         0.769**         0.468***        0.467***         0.368***          0.533***        0.532***         0.0378             0.0817            0.0807          -0.00511
                              (0.139)          (0.139)         (0.331)         (0.0931)        (0.0924)          (0.114)           (0.112)         (0.113)         (0.251)           (0.0508)          (0.0503)         (0.0457)

GovCons_Cycle (t-1)          -0.0305          -0.0319           -0.0211        0.0624*         0.0636*            0.0695           0.118*          0.116*           0.127            0.226***          0.225***         0.218***
                             (0.0488)         (0.0485)         (0.0685)        (0.0371)        (0.0378)          (0.0716)         (0.0647)        (0.0646)         (0.118)           (0.0559)          (0.0560)         (0.0419)

PublicDebt/GDP (t-1)        -0.00133           -0.00154        -0.00144       -0.00157**     -0.00189***         -0.00189*        -0.00167        -0.00231         -0.00266          -0.000648         -0.00106*         -0.00123*
                            (0.00287)         (0.00303)       (0.00406)       (0.000621)      (0.000559)        (0.000996)       (0.00382)       (0.00389)        (0.00433)         (0.000430)        (0.000561)        (0.000746)

Observations                  1,450            1,450               1,403         854              854              823              708              708            690                957                957              915
R-squared                     0.043                                0.043        0.088                             0.084            0.063                           0.024              0.060                               0.052
Number of Countries             37               37                  37           20              20                20               20              20              20                 22                22                22

Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald                                            32.6                                           60.3                                              36.5                                                  149.9
F statistic
Country FE                                       YES                YES                           YES              YES                               YES             YES                                  YES              YES

Notes: Government Final Consumption Expenditures and GDP in real local currencies filtered using the Hodrick-Prescott Filter. The cyclical component of GDP is instrumented with its own lags and the weighted average
of the GDP growth of each country’s export partners. Trade-partner growth is weighted by the share of the country’s total exports to each of its trading partners, each country’s weighted-trade-partner growth is multiplied
by the country’s average exports/GDP. Constants are not reported. Standard errors in parentheses. Pooled and Fixed-Effect regressions with Driscoll-Kraay standard errors, while IV/2SLS with HAC standard errors.

***significant at 1%, ** significant at 5%, * significant at 10%




                                                                                                                                                                                                                             19
Table 2. Cyclical Properties of Fiscal Policy during Expansions and Recessions
Dependent Variable: Cyclical component of government consumption expenditure (GovCons_Cycle), Sample Period 1970-2014 (Annual data)

                                          Sub-Saharan Africa                                               Latin America                                                 Developing Asia                                              Industrial Countries
                             (1)           (2)           (3)                   (4)         (5)           (6)           (7)                   (8)          (9)          (10)           (11)                  (12)         (13)         (14)           (15)                   (16)
                                                                  IV/2SLS                                                       IV/2SLS                                                         IV/2SLS                                                        IV/2SLS
                          Pooled OLS   Fixed Effect                                     Pooled OLS   Fixed Effect                                      Pooled OLS   Fixed Effect                                      Pooled OLS   Fixed Effect
VARIABLES                                             Bad Times             God Times                               Bad Times             God Times                                Bad Times              God Times                                Bad Times             God Times

RGDP_Cycle                0.699***      0.697***        0.918                1.593*      0.404***     0.409***       -0.0434               0.835**      0.517**      0.489**          -1.156               0.712*       0.0190       0.0122        -0.608***               0.145
                           (0.180)       (0.187)       (0.628)               (0.821)     (0.0898)     (0.0954)       (0.314)               (0.381)      (0.208)      (0.211)         (1.081)               (0.414)     (0.0784)     (0.0734)        (0.122)               (0.119)
  +
DC x (RGDP_Cycle)          -0.247        -0.240                                           0.138         0.123                                           0.0314        0.0839                                            0.122         0.133
                           (0.334)       (0.343)                                         (0.192)       (0.206)                                          (0.255)       (0.271)                                          (0.125)       (0.121)

PublicDebt/GDP (t-1)       -0.00102     -0.00113       0.00113               -0.00747   -0.00155**   -0.00186***     -0.00450              -0.00123     -0.00162     -0.00225        -0.00109              -0.00136    -0.000577   -0.000939*      -0.00115               0.000288
                          (0.00259)    (0.00272)      (0.00441)             (0.00774)   (0.000620)    (0.000542)    (0.00497)             (0.000996)   (0.00385)    (0.00386)       (0.00790)             (0.00511)   (0.000403)   (0.000530)      (0.00131)             (0.000841)

GovCons_Cylce (t-1)         -0.0284     -0.0296       -0.0400                -0.0317      0.0616       0.0627        0.00158                0.0872       0.118*       0.116*        0.294**                -0.0612     0.225***     0.224***       0.220***               0.204***
                           (0.0494)     (0.0492)      (0.0886)                (0.108)    (0.0371)     (0.0377)       (0.102)               (0.0950)     (0.0648)     (0.0646)       (0.132)                (0.164)     (0.0552)     (0.0554)       (0.0619)               (0.0666)

Memo:
Cyclical Pattern
   RECESSIONS             0.699***      0.697***        0.918                            0.404***     0.409***       -0.0434                            0.517**      0.489**         -1.156                            0.0190        0.0122        -0.608***
   EXPANSIONS              0.452*        0.457*                              1.593*      0.542***     0.532***                             0.835**      0.548***     0.572***                              0.712*       0.141        0.145*                                0.145

Observations                1,450         1,450         702                    701         854           854           399                   424          708           708           335                   355          957           957            467                   448
Number of Countries          37            37           37                     37          20            20            20                    20           20            20            20                    20           22            22             22                    22

Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald                                 12.1                   9.6                                    11.5                   11.4                                     4.8                   10.4                                     36.1                  36.9
F statistic
Country FE                                 YES           YES                   YES                       YES           YES                   YES                        YES           YES                    YES                       YES            YES                   YES

Notes: Government Final Consumption Expenditures and GDP in real local currencies filtered using the Hodrick-Prescott Filter. The cyclical component of GDP is instrumented with its own lags and the weighted average
of the GDP growth of each country’s export partners. Trade-partner growth is weighted by the share of the country’s total exports to each of its trading partners, each country’s weighted-trade-partner growth is multiplied
by the country’s average exports/GDP. DC+ is the dummy for positive cycles. Constants are not reported. Standard errors in parentheses. Pooled and Fixed-Effect regressions with Driscoll-Kraay standard errors, while
IV/2SLS with HAC standard errors.

***significant at 1%, ** significant at 5%, * significant at 10%




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                20
Table 3. Fiscal Cyclicality Before and After the Turning Point (year) by Region
Dependent Variable: Cyclical component of government consumption expenditure (GovCons_Cycle), Sample Period 1970-2014 (Annual data)

                                               Sub-Saharan Africa (Turning Point = 2002)                              Latin America (Turning Point = 2005)                             Developing Asia (Turning Point = 1999)
                                         (1)               (2)             (3)                  (4)         (5)                 (6)             (7)                  (8)         (9)             (10)            (11)                 (12)
                                                                                   IV/2SLS                                                              IV/2SLS                                                           IV/2SLS
                                     Pooled OLS        Fixed Effect      Before              After       Pooled OLS         Fixed Effect      Before              After       Pooled OLS      Fixed Effect      Before              After
VARIABLES                                                             Turning Point      Turning Point                                     Turning Point      Turning Point                                  Turning Point      Turning Point

RGDP_Cycle                            0.814***          0.818***        0.922***               0.395      0.550***           0.549***        0.546***             -0.447**     0.655***        0.655***          0.108               -0.127
                                      (0.0823)          (0.0836)         (0.292)              (0.849)     (0.0860)           (0.0854)         (0.132)              (0.205)      (0.122)         (0.124)         (0.363)             (0.312)
     TurningPoint
Break           x (RGDP_Cycle)       -0.866***          -0.876***                                        -0.692***          -0.696***                                          -0.501**         -0.504*
                                      (0.176)            (0.179)                                          (0.119)            (0.120)                                            (0.242)         (0.255)

PublicDebt/GDP (t-1)                 -0.00188           -0.00237       -0.00216              -0.000240   -0.00154**        -0.00183***      -0.00189*              0.00444     -0.00173        -0.00246        -0.00240             -0.00914
                                     (0.00256)          (0.00260)      (0.00348)             (0.00592)   (0.000621)         (0.000570)      (0.00102)             (0.00959)   (0.00382)       (0.00393)       (0.00440)             (0.0127)

GovCons_Cylce (t-1)                    -0.0280          -0.0296         -0.00946              -0.0371     0.0622*            0.0635*           0.103                -0.142      0.115*          0.113*          0.0563               0.199**
                                      (0.0487)          (0.0483)        (0.0769)              (0.141)     (0.0366)           (0.0371)        (0.0774)              (0.146)     (0.0633)        (0.0631)         (0.187)             (0.0949)

Memo:
Cyclical Pattern
   BEFORE Turning Point (year)        0.814***          0.818***        0.922***                          0.573***           0.571***        0.546***                          0.643***        0.644***         0.108
   AFTER Turning Point (year)          -0.052            -0.058                                0.395       -0.142*            -0.147*                             -0.447**       0.154           0.151                               -0.127

Observations                           1,450              1,450           923                  480          854                 854            623                  200          708              708            372                  318
Number of Countries                     37                 37             37                   37           20                  20             20                   20           20               20             20                   20

Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald F                                                 27.4                  7.5                                            41.3                 38.6                                         20.4                24.9
statistic
Country FE                                                 YES            YES                   YES                             YES            YES                  YES                           YES            YES                  YES

Notes: Government Final Consumption Expenditures and GDP in real local currencies filtered using the Hodrick-Prescott Filter. The cyclical component of GDP is instrumented with its own lags and the weighted average
of the GDP growth of each country’s export partners. Trade-partner growth is weighted by the share of the country’s total exports to each of its trading partners, each country’s weighted-trade-partner growth is multiplied
by the country’s average exports/GDP. BreakTurningPoint is the dummy variable for observations after turning point (year). Constants are not reported. Standard errors in parentheses. Pooled and Fixed-Effect regressions with
Driscoll-Kraay standard errors, while IV/2SLS with HAC standard errors.

***significant at 1%, ** significant at 5%, * significant at 10%



                                                                                                                                                                                                                              21
Table 4. Cyclicality of Fiscal Policy and Financial Openness, 1970-2014
Dependent Variable: Cyclical component of government consumption expenditure (GovCons_Cycle), Sample Period 1970-2014 (Annual data)

                                              Sub-Saharan Africa                                                     Latin America                                                    Developing Asia                                               Industrial Countries
                                (1)           (2)             (3)                   (4)          (5)           (6)                   (7)                 (8)          (9)           (10)           (11)                  (12)          (13)          (14)           (15)                   (16)
                                                                       IV/2SLS                                                              IV/2SLS                                                          IV/2SLS                                                          IV/2SLS
                                                         Low Financial       High Financial                                  Low Financial        High Financial                               Low Financial       High Financial                               Low Financial       High Financial
                             Pooled OLS   Fixed Effect                                        Pooled OLS   Fixed Effect                                            Pooled OLS   Fixed Effect                                        Pooled OLS   Fixed Effect
VARIABLES                                                  Openness            Openness                                        Openness             Openness                                     Openness            Openness                                     Openness            Openness

RGDP_Cycle                   0.601***      0.604***        0.894**                -0.0898     0.620***      0.624***           0.524***                 0.190      0.675***      0.674***         -0.121                 0.229        0.137         0.137          0.0939                 -0.0428
                              (0.136)       (0.136)        (0.383)                (0.711)     (0.0827)      (0.0835)            (0.177)                (0.138)      (0.123)       (0.121)         (0.492)               (0.234)      (0.138)       (0.137)         (0.122)               (0.0498)

RGDP_Cycle x Finan.Open       -0.0719       -0.0765                                           -0.298***     -0.309***                                                -0.338       -0.338                                             -0.0783       -0.0792
                              (0.339)       (0.335)                                            (0.110)       (0.108)                                                (0.218)       (0.221)                                            (0.133)       (0.132)

GovCons_Cycle (t-1)            -0.0299     -0.0313          -0.0534                0.184        0.0576       0.0588              0.136                 -0.0271       0.116*       0.114*          0.0706               0.191***      0.224***     0.223***         0.0866               0.258***
                              (0.0490)     (0.0485)        (0.0755)               (0.137)      (0.0380)     (0.0387)            (0.112)               (0.0773)      (0.0640)     (0.0639)         (0.162)              (0.0733)      (0.0537)     (0.0538)        (0.0881)              (0.0493)

PublicDebt/GDP (t-1)          -0.00136    -0.00157          -0.00123             -0.000890    -0.00154**   -0.00189***        -0.00279***              -0.00347     -0.00172    -0.00247          -0.00280              -0.00527     -0.000648   -0.00106*        -0.00312               -0.00121
                             (0.00287)    (0.00302)        (0.00356)             (0.00583)    (0.000622)    (0.000568)         (0.00107)              (0.00328)    (0.00384)    (0.00390)        (0.00498)             (0.00859)    (0.000436)   (0.000574)       (0.00371)             (0.000771)

Memo:
Cyclical Pattern
   Low Financial Openness    0.601***      0.604***        0.894**                            0.620***      0.624***           0.524***                             0.675***     0.674***         -0.121                             0.137         0.137           0.0939
   High Financial Openness     0.529         0.528                                -0.0898     0.322***      0.315***                                   0.190         0.337*       0.336*                                0.229        0.0587        0.0578                                -0.0428

Observations                   1,450         1,450          1,123                  280           854           854               335                    487           708           708            449                   241           957           957            130                    785
Number of Countries              37            37             36                    23            20            20                19                     19            20            20             20                    12            22            22             12                     22

Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald F                                    28.8                   7.5                                          24.2                   37.4                                       17.2                  18.2                                       27.5                  124.1
statistic
Country FE                                    YES             YES                   YES                        YES                YES                    YES                        YES             YES                   YES                        YES             YES                   YES
Notes: Government Final Consumption Expenditures and GDP in real local currencies filtered using the Hodrick-Prescott Filter. The cyclical component of GDP is instrumented with its own lags and the weighted average
of the GDP growth of each country’s export partners. Trade-partner growth is weighted by the share of the country’s total exports to each of its trading partners, each country’s weighted-trade-partner growth is multiplied
by the country’s average exports/GDP. Low (high) financial openness is defined when the average value of the Chinn-Ito index of financial openness is below (above) the world median by decade. Constants are not
reported. Standard errors in parentheses. Pooled and Fixed-Effect regressions with Driscoll-Kraay standard errors, while IV/2SLS with HAC standard errors.

***significant at 1%, ** significant at 5%, * significant at 10%

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                22
Table 5. SSA: The Effect of Natural Resources on Fiscal Cyclicality with different identification techniques of resource-rich countries
Dependent Variable: Cyclical component of government consumption expenditure (GovCons_Cycle), Sample Period 1970-2014 (Annual data)


                                           The average of natural-resources-rents (excl. forest)               The average of natural-resources-rents (excl. forest)                   The average of net-exports of commodities
                                                 exceeds 10% of GDP over each decade                       exceeds 10% of GDP over each decade, including BWA & NER             exceeds 25% of total exports throughout the sample period

                                         (1)              (2)               (3)                   (4)         (5)             (6)               (7)                   (8)         (9)             (10)             (11)                  (12)
                                                                                     IV/2SLS                                                             IV/2SLS                                                             IV/2SLS
                                      Pooled OLS      Fixed Effect                                         Pooled OLS     Fixed Effect                                         Pooled OLS     Fixed Effect
VARIABLES                                                            Non-Resource-Rich     Resource-Rich                                 Non-Resource-Rich     Resource-Rich                                 Non-Resource-Rich     Resource-Rich

RGDP_Cycle                             0.597***        0.598***           0.843**                0.818      0.609***       0.610***           0.825**                0.776      0.868***       0.868***          0.772***                0.769
                                        (0.148)         (0.147)           (0.358)               (0.650)      (0.158)        (0.157)           (0.384)               (0.585)      (0.143)        (0.143)           (0.250)               (0.494)

RNR x (RGDP_Cycle)                     -0.0799          -0.0785                                              -0.107          -0.106                                              -0.484          -0.482
                                       (0.194)           (0.197)                                            (0.173)         (0.172)                                             (0.323)         (0.323)

PublicDebt/GDP (t-1)                   -0.00135        -0.00155          0.000456               -0.00767    -0.00135       -0.00155          0.000418               -0.00715    -0.00144        -0.00168         -0.000307              -0.00183
                                      (0.00289)        (0.00306)         (0.00411)             (0.00986)   (0.00290)      (0.00307)          (0.00415)             (0.00908)   (0.00274)       (0.00285)         (0.00314)             (0.00528)

GovCons_Cylce (t-1)                    -0.0310          -0.0324           0.0188                -0.121      -0.0313         -0.0327           0.0172                -0.112      -0.0326         -0.0340           0.0453               -0.0416
                                       (0.0493)         (0.0490)         (0.0663)               (0.152)     (0.0493)       (0.0490)          (0.0676)               (0.147)     (0.0491)        (0.0489)         (0.0656)              (0.0857)

Memo:
Cyclical Pattern
   Non-Resource-Rich                  0.597***         0.598***           0.843**                           0.609***       0.610***           0.825**                           0.868***       0.868***          0.772***
   Resource-Rich                      0.5171**         0.5195**                                 0.818       0.502***       0.504***                                 0.776        0.384*         0.386*                                  0.769

Observations                            1,450            1,450             1,171                 232         1,450           1,450             1,087                 316         1,450           1,450             680                   723
Number of Countries                      37               37                33                    10          37              37                 31                   12          37              37                18                    19

Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald F statistic                                        22.7                  12.6                                          19.8                  15.8                                          17.8                  18.9
Country FE                                                YES              YES                    YES                         YES               YES                   YES                         YES               YES                   YES

Notes: Government Final Consumption Expenditures and GDP in real local currencies filtered using the Hodrick-Prescott Filter. The cyclical component of GDP is instrumented with its own lags and the weighted average
of the GDP growth of each country’s export partners. Trade-partner growth is weighted by the share of the country’s total exports to each of its trading partners, each country’s weighted-trade-partner growth is multiplied
by the country’s average exports/GDP. In columns (1)-(8), RNR is the dummy variable for those countries where the average of natural-resources-rents (excl. forest)/GDP > 10% over each decade (except for Botswana
and Niger that are considered resource-rich throughout the sample period). In columns (9)-(12), RNR is the dummy variable for those countries where the average net-exports of commodities exceeds 25% of total exports
(based on UNCTAD’s database for the period 1995-2014). Constants are not reported. Standard errors in parentheses. Pooled and Fixed-Effect regressions with Driscoll-Kraay standard errors, while IV/2SLS with HAC
standard errors.

***significant at 1%, ** significant at 5%, * significant at 10%




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         23
Table 6. Robustness check by including Institutional Quality on the Effect of Natural Resources on Fiscal Cyclicality in SSA, based on different definitions
Dependent Variable: Cyclical component of government consumption expenditure (GovCons_Cycle), Sample Period 1970-2014 (Annual data)

                                                                                                        The average of natural-resources-rents                    The average of net-exports of commodities
                                             The average of natural-resources-rents
                                                                                                (excl. forest) exceeds 10% of GDP over each decade,                      exceeds 25% of total exports
                                      (excl. forest) exceeds 10% of GDP over each decade
                                                                                                                 including BWA & NER                                    throughout the sample period
                                                  (1)                             (2)                        (3)                            (4)                          (5)                             (6)
                                                           IV/2SLS with IQ                                           IV/2SLS with IQ                                              IV/2SLS with IQ
VARIABLES                                 Non-Resource-Rich                  Resource-Rich           Non-Resource-Rich                 Resource-Rich             Non-Resource-Rich                  Resource-Rich

RGDP_Cycle                                       0.411                           0.958                      0.361                          0.855                       0.566*                           0.454
                                                (0.419)                         (0.744)                    (0.463)                        (0.656)                      (0.304)                         (0.548)

LogIQ                                           0.00926                         -0.0121                   0.00997                        -0.00720                     -0.00558                         0.0141
                                                (0.0243)                        (0.147)                   (0.0254)                       (0.0993)                     (0.0240)                        (0.0398)

PublicDebt/GDP (t-1)                           0.000241                         -0.0113                  0.000172                         -0.0106                     -0.000195                        -0.00256
                                               (0.00433)                       (0.0119)                  (0.00432)                       (0.0109)                     (0.00411)                       (0.00522)

GovCons_Cylce (t-1)                             -0.0348                          -0.139                   -0.0361                         -0.133                      0.00802                          -0.0959
                                                (0.0814)                        (0.156)                   (0.0828)                        (0.152)                     (0.0821)                        (0.0968)

Memo:
Cyclical Pattern
   Non-Resource-Rich                             0.411                                                     0.361                                                       0.566*
   Resource-Rich                                                                 0.958                                                     0.855                                                        0.454

Observations                                      806                            188                        734                            260                           446                            548
Number of Countries                               24                              8                         22                             10                            13                             15

Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald F statistic               15.5                           10.1                       13.5                           13.9                         13.0                            16.7
Country FE                                        YES                            YES                        YES                            YES                          YES                             YES

Notes: Government Final Consumption Expenditures and GDP in real local currencies filtered using the Hodrick-Prescott Filter. The cyclical component of GDP is instrumented with its own lags and the weighted average
of the GDP growth of each country’s export partners. Trade-partner growth is weighted by the share of the country’s total exports to each of its trading partners, each country’s weighted-trade-partner growth is multiplied
by the country’s average exports/GDP. LogIQ is the log of the Institutional Quality Index from the International Country Risk Guide published by the PRS Group. Constants are not reported. Standard errors in parentheses.
IV/2SLS with HAC standard errors.

***significant at 1%, ** significant at 5%, * significant at 10%




                                                                                                                                                                                                                         24
Table 7. A Different look at Resource Abundance: Sovereign Wealth Funds in SSA, 1970-2014
Dependent Variable: Cyclical component of government consumption expenditure (GovCons_Cycle), Sample Period 1970-2014 (Annual data)


                                          SWF throughout the sample period                                  Counting since the SWF was established
                                                 (1)                             (2)                                 (3)                               (4)
                                                                   IV/2SLS                                                          IV/2SLS
VARIABLES                                    Non SWF                         With SWF                             Non SWF                          With SWF

RGDP_Cycle                                    0.978**                          0.684                               0.757**                            0.697
                                              (0.395)                         (0.530)                              (0.341)                           (0.426)

GovCons_Cycle (t-1)                          -0.0174                          -0.0351                              -0.0210                           -0.0868
                                             (0.0651)                         (0.142)                             (0.0696)                           (0.169)

PublicDebt/GDP (t-1)                        -0.000906                         -0.00428                             -0.00160                          -0.00581
                                            (0.00469)                        (0.00958)                            (0.00415)                         (0.00765)

Memo:
Cyclical Pattern
   Non SWF                                    0.978**                                                              0.757**
   With SWF                                                                    0.684                                                                  0.697

Observations                                   1,015                            388                                 1,319                               84
Number of Countries                              27                              10                                   37                                10

Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald F                       19.4                            19.6                                30.6                               3.7
statistic
Country FE                                      YES                              YES                                 YES                               YES

Notes: Government Final Consumption Expenditures and GDP in real local currencies filtered using the Hodrick-Prescott Filter. The cyclical component of GDP is instrumented with its own lags and the weighted average
of the GDP growth of each country’s export partners. Trade-partner growth is weighted by the share of the country’s total exports to each of its trading partners, each country’s weighted-trade-partner growth is multiplied
by the country’s average exports/GDP. SWF states for Sovereign Wealth Fund. Constants are not reported. Standard errors in parentheses. IV/2SLS with HAC standard errors.

***significant at 1%, ** significant at 5%, * significant at 10%




                                                                                                                                                                                                                         25
Table 8. SSA: The Effect of ODA and Institutional Quality on the Cyclical Behavior of Fiscal Policy with Different Thresholds
Dependent Variable: Cyclical component of government consumption expenditure (GovCons_Cycle), Sample Period 1970-2014 (Annual data)

                                                                THRESHOLD = 10% (around the Median of SSA)                                                             THRESHOLD = 13% (Top Tercile of SSA)
                                               (1)                          (2)                 (3)                           (4)              (5)                           (6)                   (7)                           (8)
                                                           IV/2SLS                                       IV/2SLS with IQ                                    IV/2SLS                                         IV/2SLS with IQ
VARIABLES                              net ODA/GNI < 10%             net ODA/GNI > 10%   net ODA/GNI < 10%          net ODA/GNI > 10%   net ODA/GNI < 13%             net ODA/GNI > 13%     net ODA/GNI < 13%          net ODA/GNI > 13%

RGDP_Cycle                                    0.405                       1.247**              0.521                         0.149           0.888**                        0.684                 0.621                         -0.529
                                             (0.411)                      (0.564)             (0.461)                       (0.758)          (0.384)                       (0.664)               (0.414)                       (1.006)

LogIQ                                                                                         0.0273                       0.00793                                                               0.00303                       0.0356
                                                                                             (0.0509)                      (0.0383)                                                              (0.0334)                     (0.0554)

netODA/GNI (t-1)                            -0.0216                       0.0366             -0.0290                       0.0524**          0.0226                       0.0445*                0.00166                      0.0645**
                                            (0.0506)                     (0.0229)            (0.0587)                      (0.0236)         (0.0371)                      (0.0251)               (0.0419)                     (0.0255)

PublicDebt/GDP (t-1)                       -0.00467                       -0.00237            -0.00562                      -0.00344        -0.00526                      -0.000128              -0.00752                     -0.000497
                                           (0.00714)                     (0.00607)           (0.00844)                     (0.00493)        (0.00600)                     (0.00527)             (0.00712)                     (0.00437)

GovCons_Cylce (t-1)                          -0.107                       0.0233               -0.124                       -0.0189         -0.0456                        0.0174                 -0.102                       0.0215
                                             (0.115)                     (0.0626)             (0.126)                      (0.0858)         (0.0899)                      (0.0765)               (0.104)                       (0.131)
Memo:
Cyclical Pattern
   net ODA/GNI < Threshold                   0.405                                             0.521                                         0.888**                                              0.621
   net ODA/GNI > Threshold                                                1.247**                                           0.149                                           0.684                                              -0.529

Observations                                  714                          689                 569                           425              971                           432                    741                          253
Number of Countries                            28                           27                  22                            19               34                            22                     25                           15

Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald F statistic           24.7                         13.1                24.2                           6.2             30.3                           6.0                  29.5                           3.1
Country FE                                     YES                          YES                 YES                           YES              YES                           YES                   YES                           YES

Notes: Government Final Consumption Expenditures and GDP in real local currencies filtered using the Hodrick-Prescott Filter. The cyclical component of GDP is instrumented with its own lags and the weighted average
of the GDP growth of each country’s export partners. Trade-partner growth is weighted by the share of the country’s total exports to each of its trading partners, each country’s weighted-trade-partner growth is
multiplied by the country’s average exports/GDP. ODA is the dummy variable for those countries where the average of net ODA/GNI exceeds the threshold over each decade. LogIQ is the log of the Institutional Quality
Index from the International Country Risk Guide published by the PRS Group. Constants are not reported. Standard errors in parentheses. Pooled and Fixed-Effect regressions with Driscoll-Kraay standard errors, while
IV/2SLS with HAC standard errors.

***significant at 1%, ** significant at 5%, * significant at 10%


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       26
Table 9. The Effect of Fragile and Conflict Periods on the Cyclicality of Fiscal Policy in SSA, 1970-2014
Dependent Variable: Cyclical component of government consumption expenditure (GovCons_Cycle), Sample Period 1970-2014 (Annual data)


                                                              Failed/Occupied + Autocracy                                                  Failed/Occupied + Autocracy + Closed Anocracy (-0)
                                              (1)                     (2)                 (3)                    (4)                        (5)                    (6)                    (7)                   (8)
                                                       IV/2SLS                                     IV/2SLS                                           IV/2SLS                                       IV/2SLS
                                         Non Fragile                Fragile          Non Fragile               Fragile                 Non Fragile              Fragile              Non Fragile              Fragile
VARIABLES

RGDP_Cycle                                 1.113**                 0.904**             1.949***               0.897**                      0.994                0.762*                 2.168**               1.006***
                                           (0.532)                 (0.368)              (0.641)               (0.413)                     (0.764)               (0.401)                (0.863)                (0.364)

GovCons_Cycle (t-1)                        -0.0487                  0.0222             0.000741               0.00272                    -0.0127                 -0.0398               0.0682                 -0.0385
                                           (0.0986)                (0.0895)            (0.0964)               (0.0866)                   (0.138)                (0.0801)               (0.129)               (0.0753)

PublicDebt/GDP (t-1)                      -0.00371                  0.00374                                                              -0.00511              0.000697
                                          (0.00488)                (0.00696)                                                            (0.00580)              (0.00638)

Memo:
Cyclical Pattern
   Non Fragile                             1.113**                                     1.949***                                           0.994                                        2.168**
   Fragile                                                         0.904**                                    0.897**                                            0.762*                                      1.006***

Observations                                  854                    548                  887                    658                       541                    861                    553                    991
Number of Countries                            37                     31                   37                     34                        30                     34                     30                     35

Kleibergen-Paap rk Wald F                    14.3                    15.6                16.8                    6.6                        7.9                   21.9                   11.6                   9.2
statistic
Country FE                                    YES                     YES                 YES                    YES                        YES                    YES                   YES                    YES

Notes: Government Final Consumption Expenditures and GDP in real local currencies filtered using the Hodrick-Prescott Filter. The cyclical component of GDP is instrumented with its own lags and the weighted average
of the GDP growth of each country’s export partners. Trade-partner growth is weighted by the share of the country’s total exports to each of its trading partners, each country’s weighted-trade-partner growth is multiplied
by the country’s average exports/GDP. From Polity IV data set, we define fragile countries as those countries with a failed/occupied scores (special values of -66, -77 and -88) and autocracies (values from -10 to -6 in the
polity score). For robustness purposes, we expand the previous definition to include closed anocracies (values from -5 to 0 in the polity score, excluding the 0).Constants are not reported. Standard errors in parentheses.
IV/2SLS with HAC standard errors.

***significant at 1%, ** significant at 5%, * significant at 10%


                                                                                                                                                                                                                          27
                                                               APPENDIX
Table A1. Countries in the sample
               Sub-Saharan Africa (37)            Latin America (20)              Developing Asia (20)                 Industrial Countries (22)
   #    Name                    Code     Name                     Code    Name                       Code      Name                          Code
   1    Angola                  AGO      Argentina                ARG     Bangladesh                 BGD       Australia                     AUS
   2    Benin                   BEN      Bolivia                   BOL    Cambodia                   KHM       Austria                       AUT
   3    Botswana                BWA      Brazil                   BRA     China                      CHN       Belgium                        BEL
   4    Burkina Faso            BFA      Chile                     CHL    Fiji                           FJI   Canada                        CAN
   5    Burundi                 BDI      Colombia                  COL    India                      IND       Denmark                       DNK
   6    Cameroon                CMR      Costa Rica                CRI    Indonesia                      IDN   Finland                        FIN
   7    Cape Verde              CPV      Dominican Republic       DOM     Lao P.D.R.                 LAO       France                        FRA
   8    Central African Republic CAF     Ecuador                  ECU     Malaysia                   MYS       Germany                       DEU
   9    Chad                    TCD      El Salvador               SLV    Maldives                   MDV       Greece                        GRC
   10   Comoros                 COM      Guatemala                GTM     Mongolia                   MNG       Iceland                        ISL
   11   Congo, Rep.             COG      Haiti                     HTI    Myanmar                    MMR       Ireland                        IRL
   12   Congo, Dem. Rep.        COD      Honduras                 HND     Nepal                      NPL       Italy                          ITA
   13   Cote d'Ivoire           CIV      Mexico                   MEX     Papua New Guinea           PNG       Japan                         JPN
   14   Gabon                   GAB      Nicaragua                 NIC    Philippines                PHL       Netherlands                   NLD
   15   Gambia, The             GMB      Panama                   PAN     Samoa                      WSM       New Zealand                   NZL
   16   Ghana                   GHA      Paraguay                  PRY    Sri Lanka                  LKA       Norway                        NOR
   17   Guinea                  GIN      Peru                      PER    Thailand                   THA       Portugal                      PRT
   18   Guinea-Bissau           GNB      Trinidad and Tobago       TTO    Tonga                      TON       Spain                          ESP
   19   Kenya                   KEN      Uruguay                  URY     Vanuatu                    VUT       Sweden                        SWE
   20   Liberia                 LBR      Venezuela, RB            VEN     Vietnam                    VNM       Switzerland                   CHE
   21   Madagascar              MDG                                                                            United Kingdom                GBR
   22   Malawi                  MWI                                                                            United States                 USA
   23   Mali                    MLI
   24   Mauritania              MRT
   25   Mauritius               MUS
   26   Mozambique              MOZ
   27   Niger                   NER
   28   Nigeria                 NGA
   29   Rwanda                  RWA
   30   Senegal                 SEN
   31   Sierra Leone            SLE
   32   South Africa            ZAF
   33   Tanzania                TZA
   34   Togo                    TGO
   35   Uganda                  UGA
   36   Zambia                  ZMB
   37   Zimbabwe                ZWE




                                                                                                                                           28
Figure A1. Cyclical properties of Government Consumption Expenditure by Region and Country, 1970-2014

                                                                        Sub-Saharan Africa
                     Zimbabwe
                        Guinea
                        Zambia
                        Malawi
                        Nigeria                                                                                                   A
                    Mauritania                                                                                                    C
                   Burkina Faso
                                                                                                                                  Y
                         Kenya
                       Comoros                                                                                                    C
                      Botswana                                                                                                    L
                           Togo                                                                                                   I
                       Tanzania                                                                                                   C
                     Cameroon
                                                                                                                                  A
                   South Africa
                    Congo, Rep.                                                                                                   L
              Congo, Dem. Rep.
                         Angola
                  Mozambique
                         Ghana
                 Guinea-Bissau
        Central African Republic
                        Senegal
                    Cape Verde
                           Mali
                          Benin
                        Burundi                                                                                                   P
                      Mauritius                                                                                                   R
                        Uganda                                                                                                    O
                          Niger                                                                                                   C
                   Madagascar                                                                                                     Y
                   Gambia, The                                                                                                    C
                         Liberia                                                                                                  L
                           Chad                                                                                                   I
                   Sierra Leone                                                                                                   C
                   Cote d'Ivoire                                                                                                  A
                         Gabon                                                                                                    L
                       Rwanda

                                   -0.4          -0.2             0             0.2          0.4           0.6           0.8




                                                                            Latin America
                     Paraguay
                      Ecuador
         Trinidad and Tobago
                     Honduras
                                                                                                                               ACYCLICAL
          Dominican Republic
                          Haiti
                    Argentina
                   Guatemala
                    Nicaragua
                                                                                                                                  P
                        Bolivia
                                                                                                                                  R
                   El Salvador
                                                                                                                                  O
                     Colombia
                                                                                                                                  C
                Venezuela, RB
                                                                                                                                  Y
                    Costa Rica
                                                                                                                                  C
                      Uruguay
                                                                                                                                  L
                      Panama
                                                                                                                                  I
                          Chile
                                                                                                                                  C
                       Mexico
                                                                                                                                  A
                         Brazil
                                                                                                                                  L
                          Peru

                                  -0.2    -0.1          0   0.1       0.2      0.3    0.4      0.5   0.6         0.7   0.8




                                                                                                                                           29
                                                         Developing Asia
        Cambodia                                                                                                   A
               Fiji                                                                                                C
            Tonga                                                                                                  Y
         Maldives
                                                                                                                   C
        Lao P.D.R.
                                                                                                                   L
            Nepal
             India                                                                                                 I
         Mongolia                                                                                                  C
        Myanmar                                                                                                    A
         Thailand                                                                                                  L
       Bangladesh
Papua New Guinea
         Sri Lanka
            China
         Malaysia
        Indonesia
           Samoa                                                                                               PROCYCLICAL
       Philippines
          Vanuatu
          Vietnam

                      -0.4          -0.2          0         0.2          0.4       0.6         0.8         1




                                                           Industrial Countries
  United States
United Kingdom                                                                                             COUNTERCYCLICAL
         Canada
          France
        Sweden                                                                                                          A
            Italy                                                                                                       C
        Norway
                                                                                                                        Y
      Germany
    Netherlands                                                                                                         C
         Greece                                                                                                         L
         Austria                                                                                                        I
           Japan
        Belgium
                                                                                                                        C
      Denmark                                                                                                           A
       Australia                                                                                                        L
   New Zealand
         Finland
    Switzerland
       Portugal
         Ireland
         Iceland                                                                                                  PROCYCLICAL
           Spain

                    -0.6     -0.5          -0.4   -0.3   -0.2     -0.1         0   0.1   0.2         0.3    0.4




                                                                                                                                30
Table A2. Countries included as Resource-Rich in each classification technique

                                  Based on the Rents from Natural Resources (exlcuding forest) over GDP                                     Based on the
                                                                                        Threshold 10%                      Net-Exports of Commodities/Total Exports > 25%
                                     Threshold 10%
                                                                      (including BWA & NER throughout the sample period)

                 1       Angola                                           Angola                                               Angola
                 2       Cameroon                                         Botswana                                             Benin
                 3       Congo, Dem. Rep.                                 Cameroon                                             Botswana
                 4       Congo, Rep.                                      Congo, Dem. Rep.                                     Central African Republic
                 5       Gabon                                            Congo, Rep.                                          Cote d'Ivoire
                 6       Liberia                                          Gabon                                                Cameroon
                 7       Mauritania                                       Liberia                                              Congo, Dem. Rep.
                 8       Nigeria                                          Mauritania                                           Congo, Rep.
                 9       Chad                                             Niger                                                Gabon
 Sub-Saharan    10       Zambia                                           Nigeria                                              Ghana
    Africa      11                                                        Chad                                                 Guinea
                12                                                        Zambia                                               Liberia
                13                                                                                                             Mali
                14                                                                                                             Mauritania
                15                                                                                                             Malawi
                16                                                                                                             Nigeria
                17                                                                                                             Chad
                18                                                                                                             Zambia
                19                                                                                                             Zimbabwe




                                                                                                                                                                31
Table A3. Countries that exceed each threshold in Table 5

                                                                               (Net ODA /GNI) > Threshold

                     THRESHOLD = 8% (Average of Developing Countries)   THRESHOLD = 10% (around the Median of SSA)     THRESHOLD = 13% (Top Tercile of SSA)

                1       Benin                                            Benin                                       Botswana
                2       Botswana                                         Botswana                                    Burkina Faso
                3       Burkina Faso                                     Burkina Faso                                Burundi
                4       Burundi                                          Burundi                                     Cape Verde
                5       Cape Verde                                       Cape Verde                                  Central African Republic
                6       Central African Republic                         Central African Republic                    Chad
                7       Chad                                             Chad                                        Comoros
                8       Comoros                                          Comoros                                     Congo, Dem. Rep.
                9       Congo, Dem. Rep.                                 Congo, Dem. Rep.                            Gambia, The
               10       Congo, Rep.                                      Congo, Rep.                                 Guinea-Bissau
               11       Cote d'Ivoire                                    Gambia, The                                 Liberia
               12       Gambia, The                                      Guinea                                      Madagascar
               13       Ghana                                            Guinea-Bissau                               Malawi
               14       Guinea                                           Liberia                                     Mali
 Sub-Saharan   15       Guinea-Bissau                                    Madagascar                                  Mauritania
    Africa     16       Kenya                                            Malawi                                      Mozambique
               17       Liberia                                          Mali                                        Niger
               18       Madagascar                                       Mauritania                                  Rwanda
               19       Malawi                                           Mozambique                                  Sierra Leone
               20       Mali                                             Niger                                       Tanzania
               21       Mauritania                                       Rwanda                                      Uganda
               22       Mozambique                                       Senegal                                     Zambia
               23       Niger                                            Sierra Leone
               24       Rwanda                                           Tanzania
               25       Senegal                                          Togo
               26       Sierra Leone                                     Uganda
               27       Tanzania                                         Zambia
               28       Togo
               29       Uganda
               30       Zambia




                                                                                                                                                              32
