                                                    WPS8157


Policy Research Working Paper                      8157




   A Cross-Country Database of Fiscal Space
                                M. Ayhan Kose
                                 Sergio Kurlat
                              Franziska Ohnsorge
                              Naotaka Sugawara




Development Economics
Development Prospects Group
August 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 8157


  Abstract
 This paper presents a comprehensive cross-country data-                            many countries before the global financial crisis. In advanced
 base of fiscal space, broadly defined as the availability of                       economies, following severe deteriorations during the crisis,
 budgetary resources for a government to service its finan-                         many indicators of fiscal space have virtually returned to
 cial obligations. The database covers up to 200 countries                          levels in the mid-2000s. In contrast, fiscal space has shrunk
 over the period 1990–2016, and includes 28 indicators of                           in many emerging market and developing economies since
 fiscal space grouped into four categories: debt sustainability,                    the crisis. Second, financial crises tend to coincide with
 balance sheet vulnerability, external and private sector debt                      deterioration in multiple indicators of fiscal space, but they
 related risks as potential causes of contingent liabilities, and                   are often followed by reduced reliance on short-term bor-
 market access. The authors illustrate potential applications                       rowing. Finally, fiscal space narrows in energy-exporting
 of the database by analyzing developments in fiscal space                          emerging market and developing economies during oil price
 across three time frames: over the past quarter century;                           plunges but later expands, often because of procyclical fiscal
 during financial crises; and during oil price plunges. The                         tightening and, in some episodes, a recovery in oil prices.
 main results are as follows. First, fiscal space had improved in



  This paper is a product of the Development Prospects Group, Development Economics. It is part of a larger effort by the
  World Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions around the
  world. Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The authors may be
  contacted at akose@worldbank.org, fohnsorge@worldbank.org, and nsugawara@worldbank.org.




         The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
         issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
         names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
         of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
         its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                       Produced by the Research Support Team
              A Cross-Country Database of Fiscal Space
         M. Ayhan Kose, Sergio Kurlat, Franziska Ohnsorge, and Naotaka Sugawara




Key Words: Fiscal policy; sovereign debt; …scal de…cit; private debt; …nancial crises; oil prices.
JEL Codes: E62; H62; H63.




     Kose (Development Prospects Group, World Bank; Brookings Institution; CEPR; CAMA; akose@worldbank.org);
Ohnsorge (Development Prospects Group, World Bank; CAMA; fohnsorge@worldbank.org); Sugawara (Development
Prospects Group, World Bank; nsugawara@worldbank.org). Kurlat was a consultant at the Development Prospects
Group when the early analysis was conducted for this study. We would like to thank Carlos Arteta, Eduardo Boren-
zstein, Kevin Clinton, Raphael Espinoza, Raju Huidrom, Anna Ivanova, Ugo Panizza, Evis Rucaj, Marc Stocker,
Carlos Végh, Dana Vorisek and seminar participants at the World Bank for valuable comments, and Graeme Littler
and Praveen Penmetsa for developing the database web interface. Xinghao Gong provided excellent research assis-
tance. The …ndings, interpretations and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those of the authors and
should not be attributed to the World Bank, its Executive Directors, or the countries they represent. The database
is available at: http://www.worldbank.org/en/research/brief/fiscal-space.
1       Introduction
The need for support to economic activity in the aftermath of the global …nancial crisis presented a
painful reminder of the importance of a government’   s ability to implement e¤ective …scal stimulus.
This ability is ultimately predicated on the availability of …scal space. Ample …scal space provides
a government with the necessary budgetary resources to stimulate activity. Just as important, it
provides credibility about the sustainability of the budget, and thereby helps to ensure that …scal
stimulus is e¤ective in promoting growth.1 The availability of …scal space has also been at the
center of recent debates on the deployment of …scal policy to accelerate growth in advanced and
developing economies (IMF 2017; World Bank 2017a).

    Fiscal space is a complex concept as evident from multiple de…nitions and measures used in
the literature. Some authors de…ne …scal space simply as the budgetary room to create and allo-
cate funding for a certain purpose, such as smoothing the business cycle, or undertaking growth-
enhancing investment projects, without threatening liquidity and sustainability of a sovereign’ s
…nancial position (Heller 2005; Ley 2009). Perotti (2007) regards the notion of …scal space as an
                                         s intertemporal budget constraint. Others consider …scal
alternative way of expressing a sovereign’
space as the di¤erence between the current level of public debt and a country-speci…c debt limit
(Ostry et al. 2010).2

    Although there is no single de…nition, a core aspect of …scal space is “the ability of a government
to service its debt.” Unless debt service capacity is maintained, a government cannot inde…nitely
…nance its operations in a sound manner. Debt service capacity itself has multiple dimensions,
including …nancing needs that are related to budget positions, access to liquid markets, resilience
to valuation changes, and contingent liabilities.

    Recent research presents databases that include select indicators of …scal space, including those
associated with the debt service capacity of sovereigns.3 Some authors focus on public debt series
over a long period of time and/or for a large number of countries (Abbas et al. 2011; Jaimovich
and Panizza 2010; Panizza 2008). Some others compile databases featuring the composition of
government debt and provide data on contingent liabilities, revenues, and government investment
and consumption for more limited country and time coverage.4 Others construct datasets that
cover historical series of …scal ‡ow and stock indicators, but again with relatively limited country
coverage (Mauro et al. 2015; Reinhart and Rogo¤ 2009).

    Although the literature contains multiple measures of …scal space, no database systematically
brings together these measures for a large number of countries. Our paper aims to …ll this gap.
Speci…cally, our database expands on previous studies in two critical dimensions. First, it includes a
    1
     Auerbach and Gorodnichenko (2013) and Huidrom et al. (2016) …nd that …scal multipliers tend to be larger
when …scal space is wider.
   2
     This is also the de…nition used by Ghosh et al. (2013) and Nerlich and Reuter (2015). Park (2012) de…nes …scal
space as revenue generating capacity which is the di¤erence between current tax revenues and the maximum level
that is estimated in a model. Aizenman and Jinjarak (2012) use de facto …scal space, which is inversely related to
tax-years needed for public debt to be repaid.
   3
     We present a list of these studies in Supplementary Appendix Table A1.
   4
     For studies on government debt, see Arslanalp and Tsuda (2014a, 2014b) and Cowan et al. (2006). For databases
on government revenues, see Mansour (2014) and Prichard, Cobham, and Goodall (2014); for databases on government
investment and consumption, see Ilzetzki, Mendoza, and Végh (2013). For …scal consolidation data, see Guajardo,
Leigh, and Pescatori (2014); for contingent liabilities, see Bova et al. (2016); for private debt data, see Bernardini
and Forni (2017).


                                                          2
wide range of indicators that go beyond simple measures of solvency. These consist of 28 indicators
covering four broad aspects: government debt sustainability, balance sheet composition, external
and private sector debt, and market perception of sovereign risk. These aspects materially a¤ect
the availability of …scal space. For example, a higher share of short-term and foreign currency debt
could raise rollover and exchange rate risks, respectively. A high share of nonresident holdings of
government debt may imply liquidity risk as well as currency risk in the event of con…dence losses
among foreign investors. The maturity pro…le of debt is important since debt principal coming due
often constitutes an important portion of an economy’    s upcoming …nancing needs, and a bunching
of maturities can constrain …scal space. Market participants’perceptions of sovereign risk re‡   ect
and, in turn, in‡ uence an economy’   s ability to tap markets and service its obligations.

    The second innovative characteristic of our database is its wide country coverage. It contains
data for up to 200 economies over the period 1990-2016. For most of the indicators, it relies on mul-
tiple cross-country sources. In Section 2, we describe indicators for government debt sustainability;
balance sheet composition; external and private sector debt; and market perception. To facilitate
cross-country comparisons, we look separately at advanced economies, and emerging market and
developing economies (EMDEs)— the former contains 41 economies and the latter 159 economies.5

   In Section 3, we …rst analyze the basic features of the …scal space indicators. Simple correlations
across indicators support their division into four groups, in that cross-indicator correlations are on
average considerably larger within than across groups. We then describe the evolution of …scal
space since 2000. Our …ndings indicate widespread improvements in …scal space before the global
…nancial crisis. For example, most indicators improved in more than half of advanced economies,
and virtually all improved in more than half of EMDEs.

   However, mounting domestic contingent liabilities were a warning sign during this period. In
advanced economies, following severe deteriorations during the crisis, many indicators of …scal
space have virtually returned to levels in the mid-2000s. In contrast, …scal positions have worsened
sharply in EMDEs since the crisis. Both the pre-crisis improvements and post-crisis deteriorations
have been particularly marked among commodity-exporting EMDEs, in line with the pre-crisis
run-up and post-crisis slide in commodity prices.

    In Section 4, we provide two more applications to illustrate the potential use of our database. We
…rst analyze the behavior of …scal space during …nancial crises. Financial crises tend to coincide with
a signi…cant deterioration in multiple indicators of …scal space, including …scal debt sustainability
and, to a lesser extent, sovereign credit ratings. Crises are often followed by reduced reliance on
short-term borrowing. We then examine the behavior of …scal space in energy-exporting EMDEs
during oil price plunges. Collapses in oil prices also coincide with shrinking …scal space. These
episodes are typically followed by a rebound in indicators of …scal space, often as a result of
procyclical …scal tightening and, in some episodes, a recovery in oil prices. In Section 5, we provide
a short summary of our …ndings and discuss possible research directions.
   5
    Countries are included in the database if data are available in any one of 28 indicators. Since country coverage
does not always overlap between indicators, data are available up to 200 countries. While there are some countries
for which only one indicator is available, the average number of available indicators per country is 19.




                                                         3
2     Database
2.1     Data Sources
In order to ensure quality and consistency, most series are obtained from databases maintained
by international organizations in cooperation with national statistical agencies, using harmonized
methodologies. Our data sources include four databases maintained by the World Bank: the
World Development Indicators (WDI); International Debt Statistics (IDS); Quarterly External
Debt Statistics (QEDS); and Quarterly Public Sector Debt (QPSD). We also employ four databases
managed by the IMF— the World Economic Outlook (WEO); International Financial Statistics
(IFS); World Revenue Longitudinal Dataset; and Government Financial Statistics. For some of the
data series, information is gathered from the Joint External Debt Hub (JEDH)— a joint initiative
by the World Bank, Bank for International Settlements (BIS), IMF, and Organisation for Economic
Cooperation and Development (OECD)— and databases provided by the BIS, OECD, Bloomberg,
J.P. Morgan, and Arslanalp and Tsuda (2014a, 2014b). We provide details of these sources in Table
1.

2.2     Country and Time Coverage
The database contains annual data for up to 200 economies from 1990 to 2016 in an unbalanced
panel. It is nearly balanced since mid-2000 when data become available for a wider range of
countries. Countries are classi…ed into two groups (see Table 2 for details)— 41 advanced economies,
and 159 EMDEs. The latter group is further classi…ed into commodity exporters and importers, by
applying the classi…cation criteria used in World Bank (2017a). As a result, there are 91 commodity-
exporting EMDEs and 68 commodity-importing EMDEs. Out of 91 commodity exporters, 36
EMDEs are considered energy exporters.

2.3     Indicators of Fiscal Space
2.3.1    Government Debt Sustainability
Measures of debt sustainability and …scal balance refer to the longer-run capacity of the govern-
ment to …nance its obligations. The set of indicators of government debt sustainability consists of
twelve variables. The …rst three are available in, or can be computed from, the WEO dataset and
QPSD database: general government gross debt and general government (primary and overall) net
lending/borrowing in percent of GDP.

   The longer-run viability of actual budgets may be gauged from the cyclically-adjusted balance,
de…ned as the di¤erence between cyclically-adjusted revenues and cyclically-adjusted expenditures.
The cyclically-adjusted balance is de…ned as:


                                            (   rev   1)                   (   xp   1)
                      cb = rev (1 + ogap)                  xp (1 + ogap)                         (1)

    where cb is the cyclically-adjusted balance expressed in percent of potential GDP; rev and xp
are revenues and expenditures in percent of GDP; and ogap is the di¤erence between actual and
potential output in percent of potential output (de…ned as the Hodrick-Prescott-…ltered trend).
We assume that an output gap elasticity of revenues, rev , is one and an output gap elasticity
of expenditures, xp , is close to zero, speci…cally 0.1. When sub-components are aggregated, the


                                                      4
elasticity of revenues to the output gap tends to be close to one, whereas most expenditures,
except for bene…ts of a cyclical nature, are little correlated with output gaps (Fedelino, Ivanova,
and Horton 2009). The cyclically-adjusted balance de…ned in equation (1) di¤ers from a typical
structural balance in its exclusion of one-o¤ temporary expenditures (Bornhorst et al. 2011). Since
our objective is to provide comparable de…nitions for as broad a set of countries as possible, these
country-speci…c, one-o¤ adjustments are not taken into consideration.

   In many EMDEs, institutional weaknesses in the tax collection systems constrain the govern-
ment’s ability to service debt, even when debt ratios are moderate by the standards of advanced
economies (Aizenman and Jinjarak 2012). Realized tax collection or the size of the tax base may
provide a better gauge of a government’ s ability to service its debt than GDP. Hence, we calculate
an additional pair of debt and …scal balance indicators, as a percent of long-term average (since
1990) government tax revenues.

    The sustainability of government debt depends, not only on debt and de…cits, but also on growth
and borrowing cost. Fiscal sustainability gaps are indicators for the pressures that could emerge
from large …scal de…cits accumulating over time to unsustainable debt stocks, even when initial
stocks are modest. These gap indicators provide a simple snapshot of the adjustments that may be
needed to reach debt targets under di¤erent macroeconomic conditions (Buckle and Cruickshank
2013). Ley (2009) and Escolano (2010) outline the concept of sustainability that underlies the
de…nition of this gap measure. The …rst of these indicators that we compute is the overall …scal
balance sustainability gap (fbsusgap ):


                                         f bsusgap = b                 d                                       (2)
                                                              1+

    where represents nominal output growth and b the overall …scal balance (in percent of GDP).
The last term of equation (2) shows the overall …scal balance that stabilizes the stock of debt (in
percent of GDP) targeted at d . A positive gap indicates a …scal balance that would diminish
government debt, if sustained, over time, while a negative gap indicates a …scal balance that would
increase the stock of debt over time.

    Nominal output growth ( ) is calculated as a weighted average of percent changes in GDP
expressed in local currency and in U.S. dollars at current exchange rates. The weights are de…ned
as the long-term average (since 1990) share of general government debt denominated in foreign
and local currency (as discussed in Section 2.3.2). For countries missing data on the currency
composition of government debt, the median ratio of peer countries (advanced economies and
EMDEs) is applied.6

                                                                                                   s
   The target debt ratio, d , is de…ned as being equal to the historical median value in an economy’
peer group (advanced economies or EMDEs). Implicitly, compared with benchmarking against each
economy’ s own historical median, this approach implies more favorable debt target in economies
   6
     For Euro Area countries, two separate average shares are computed: before and after euro adoption. In EMDEs
where the share of government debt in foreign currency is not available, the weight is computed by the share of
government debt held by nonresidents as a proxy. The median share of foreign currency-denominated government
debt for advanced economies is 1.5 percent (based on 17 countries). For Euro Area countries, the median share is 17
percent before euro adoption (6 countries) and 2.1 percent after euro adoption (12 countries). The median share for
EMDEs is 42 percent (based on 45 countries).


                                                        5
with debt below the peer-group median and less favorable debt target in economies with debt above
the peer-group median. The target (and median) debt ratios for advanced economies and EMDEs
are, respectively, 52.3 percent of GDP and 45.2 percent of GDP. While there is no mechanical rule
to determine the threshold for “safe” levels of debt, the underlying assumption is that advanced
economies tend to have a higher debt tolerance (BIS 2012).

   We calculate sustainability indicators for primary balances as the primary balance sustainability
gap, i.e., the di¤erence between the primary balance and the debt-stabilizing primary balance
(pbsusgap ) with this equation:


                                            r g                i
                          pbsusgap = p               d =p              d                         (3)
                                            1+g                1+

    where p is the primary balance (in percent of GDP), i is the nominal long-term interest rate,
   nominal GDP growth, r the real interest rate (de…ned as the nominal interest rate de‡      ated
by the GDP de‡    ator), g real GDP growth, and d the target debt ratio (in percent of GDP).
Primary balance sustainability gaps are computed with the second half of equation (3), once again
calculating as a weighted average of percent changes in current local currency GDP and dollar-
denominated GDP. We calculate the sustainability gap indicators under …ve di¤erent assumptions
for growth rates, interest rates, and target debt ratio as we discuss below. The derivation of the
nominal long-term interest rate di¤ers across countries because of data constraints (see Table A2
for details).

    We derive …ve indicators using equation (3), applying country-speci…c and group-speci…c as-
sumptions about input variables. The actual primary balance remains the same in all cases. We
start out by calculating equation (3) using country-speci…c median values for GDP growth and
interest rates over the full sample period. This is what we call the “primary balance sustainability
gap under historical market conditions.” Second, by using GDP growth and interest rates at their
current levels in equation (3), we obtain the “primary balance sustainability gap under current
market conditions.”

    The third indicator within this set is the “primary balance sustainability gap under stressed
conditions.”For this indicator, is de…ned as the country-speci…c sample median of nominal GDP
growth minus one country-speci…c standard deviation of growth. The nominal interest rate (i) is
calculated as the country-speci…c median plus one country-speci…c standard deviation. Hence, this
variable shows whether the primary balance would be debt-stabilizing if conditions were to worsen
sharply (but within reasonable bounds).

    The fourth indicator is a “primary balance sustainability gap under benign conditions”based on
country-speci…c minimum interest rates and maximum growth rates. To avoid identifying extremely
low interest and high growth rates, we …rst compute 10-year moving averages of interest and growth
rates and de…ne minimum and maximum values from these averages.

    These four indicators are based on the historical country-group median debt stocks as the
target debt ratio, as in the overall balance sustainability gap. Finally, we calculate an additional
primary balance sustainability gap at historical conditions, by using country-speci…c median values
for interest rates, GDP growth, and the target debt level.


                                                 6
2.3.2    Balance Sheet Composition
Balance sheet composition may a¤ect exposures to the risks of a sudden change in …nancial market
conditions. The set of indicators focuses on the structure of sovereign balance sheets, including
sources of funding, currency structure and maturity pro…le. These indicators gauge the risk that
sharp swings in interest rates or exchange rates, or a shut-o¤ of capital in‡ ows, might undermine
liquidity or solvency. For example, concentration of short-term and foreign currency-denominated
debt makes a government’  s balance sheet vulnerable to rollover and exchange rate risks, respectively,
and a high share of nonresident holdings of government debt would imply liquidity risk in the event
of con…dence losses among foreign investors.7

   The variables included in this category are: general government debt in foreign currency in
percent of total general government debt; debt securities held by nonresidents in percent of total
debt securities; general government debt held by nonresidents in percent of total general government
debt; concessional external debt stocks in percent of general government gross debt; sovereign debt
average maturity; and central government debt maturing in 12 months or less in percent of GDP.

   These six variables are constructed with information collected from multiple data sources. The
share of foreign currency debt over total government debt is computed from the OECD and QPSD
databases. The value of debt securities held by nonresidents is reported in JEDH, which is derived
from the IMF’   s bilateral portfolio investment database. The total amount of outstanding debt
securities is taken from the debt securities statistics of the BIS.8 The share of government debt
held by nonresidents is obtained from the QPSD database. For countries not covered by the
preceding databases, the share is extracted from Arslanalp and Tsuda (2014a, 2014b), who maintain
datasets documenting the sovereign investor base for advanced economies and emerging markets.
Their datasets are also used to extend the main series if there are missing data points. Data on
concessional …nance are available from the WDI, and expressed as a ratio to general government
gross debt (from the WEO). This is a useful measure of …scal space, especially for low-income
countries.

   The average maturity of sovereign debt is derived from two sources. Within the emerging-
market debt universe, sovereign bonds denominated in foreign currency constitute a signi…cant
share in many countries, and provide a vehicle for these economies to access the world’ s largest and
most liquid funding pools. The average maturity of sovereign debt for EMDEs and some advanced
economies is proxied by the annual average life (average time of principal repayment) of the national
sub-indices of the J.P. Morgan EMBI Global index.9 For other advanced economies, the maturity
   7
     Similar variables are used by previous studies. The composition of advanced economies’sovereign bond investor
pool is analyzed in IMF (2012), noting the risks of sudden changes in investor sentiment to exchange rate and interest
rate stability, and, consequently, the possible emergence of funding gaps. Martínez Carrera and Vergara (2012)
analyze the magnitude of the …scal adjustment needed to restore …scal sustainability after a devaluation. Currency
composition and maturity structure variables are commonly used in the literature on early warning exercises of …scal
problems (Baldacci et al. 2011).
   8
     The series includes debt securities in the private sector but, in view of the large share of general government
in portfolio debt securities liabilities, this variable can also show the balance sheet vulnerability of sovereigns. The
median share of general government in the liability position of portfolio debt securities (classi…ed as in the Sixth
edition of Balance of Payments Manual) is 72 percent, based on the data for 100 countries over 1990-2015. In the
debt securities statistics of the BIS, data on currency decomposition of international debt securities issued by general
government are also available.
   9
     These indices are made up of sovereign and quasi-sovereign instruments denominated in U.S. dollars. Bonds also
have to comply with a strict set of rules in order to be included: they must have legal jurisdiction in a G7 economy, a
minimum issue size of $500 million, a maturity of at least 2.5 years at the time of entry (and 1 year overall minimum)
and they must be su¢ ciently liquid for prices to be available daily (Kim 2014).


                                                           7
pro…le of government debt is obtained from the FTSE via Bloomberg. Central government debt
maturing within 12 months is sourced from Bloomberg and calculated in percent of GDP. Debt
principal coming due usually constitutes the largest portion of an economy’  s upcoming …nancing
needs, and may impose a constraint on a government’   s ability to raise new money to …nance the
current budget de…cit.

2.3.3    External and Private Sector Debt
The group of external and private sector debt indicators includes measures of the size and composi-
tion of a country’s total external debt, their relation to foreign exchange reserves and the liabilities
of the private sector. The variables in this category are: total external debt stocks in percent of
GDP; external debt in foreign currency in percent of total external debt; private external debt
stocks in percent of GDP; domestic credit to the private sector in percent of GDP; short-term
external debt stocks in percent of total external debt stocks; short-term external debt stocks in
percent of total reserves; total external debt stocks in percent of total reserves; and total external
debt stocks in percent of reserves excluding gold.

    Private sector debt (domestic and external) has the potential to impact …scal sustainability if
explicit or implicit bailout guarantees create contingent liabilities, which would oblige governments
to assume private liabilities in the event of the failure of the borrower (Cebotari 2008). The costs
associated with such interventions would rise with the overall size of private sector obligations and
maturity or currency mismatches. For example, one channel through which private obligations
generate …scal costs is in the resolution of failing banks. This may include explicit guarantees (e.g.,
through deposit insurance), nationalization, recapitalizations, and the setup of asset management
companies. External and (private) domestic vulnerabilities are also closely linked: when private
…rms are hit by a sharp depreciation shock or an asset price collapse, currency mismatches and
excessive borrowing can feed into their solvency problems (Hausmann and Panizza 2011).

    The most encompassing variable within this group is the share of total external debt over GDP.
The data on external debt are available in the QEDS and IDS. We use the QEDS as the primary
source of data and then use the IDS for countries or years not covered by the QEDS. The share of
external debt in foreign currency is computed from QEDS. Likewise, the share of short-term debt
in total external debt is based on the QEDS and IDS.

   The share of private external debt over GDP is calculated as the di¤erence between a country’  s
gross external debt position and public sector external debt position in QEDS. However, the data on
public sector external debt are not always available in the QEDS dataset. For those countries that
do not have data for public external debt, the sum of general government and central bank external
debt stocks are used, though this ignores debt of public banks and other public corporations. When
the QEDS data are unavailable, the series of long-term private sector external debt stocks from
IDS are reported (as IDS does not report the short-term private external debt).10

    The share of domestic credit to the private sector in percent of GDP is available through the
WDI and IFS, and in BIS’   s dataset of credit to the non-…nancial sector. It refers to the sum of
commercial banks’and other …nancial corporations’claims on the non-…nancial private sector (and,
for some countries, on public enterprises too). Rising levels of private debt may re‡  ect …nancial
  10
    Because of di¤erent de…nitions of private external debt between QEDS (which includes both short and long-term
private debt) and IDS (which includes only long-term private debt), cross-country comparisons of these series require
caution. The database explains the sources of external debt data in each country.


                                                         8
deepening or unsustainable credit booms; in practice and in real time, these two causes of rising
debt are often impossible to disentangle. Regardless of the underlying causes for high or rising
private debt, the full amount of private debt risks, under stress conditions, to impose …scal cost.

    The last three variables in this group capture aspects of a country’s reserve adequacy, calculated
as the ratio of short-term external debt over reserves, the ratio of total external debt over reserves,
and the ratio of total external debt over foreign exchange reserves excluding gold.

2.3.4     Market Perception
Our dataset includes market perception indicators on a country’   s ability to roll over debt, or to
issue new debt, and on its market cost of borrowing. Market participants’perceptions of sovereign
risk re‡ect and, in turn, shape an economy’   s ability to tap markets and service its obligations.
Market perception indicators can serve as high-frequency proxies for …scal sustainability. They
are often available when timely information on macroeconomic fundamentals is not. The variables
included are the 5-year sovereign CDS spread and foreign currency long-term debt ratings by major
international rating agencies.

    The …rst indicator, the sovereign CDS spread, is taken from Bloomberg and J.P. Morgan and
monitors investor sentiment about sovereign credit risk.11 Our second variable is an annual average
of foreign currency long-term sovereign debt ratings by Moody’      s, Standard & Poor’    s, and Fitch
Ratings, which are available in Bloomberg on a daily basis. As rating agencies clearly state that
rating stability is among their objectives, sovereign ratings provide an alternative perspective of
investor sentiment to high-frequency market indicators. Credit rating agencies base their sovereign
ratings on a combination of economic, institutional, and political factors in order to assess an issuer’s
creditworthiness based not only on its ability, but also on its willingness to pay. Sovereign ratings
are ultimately determined by a wider range of indicators than those included in the database, but
there is signi…cant overlap in evaluation of risk factors a¤ecting public …nances. Ratings of each
agency are converted to a numerical scale to construct an index. We assign 1 to the worst rating
and 21 to the best one and then take a simple average of three ratings.


3        Main Features of Fiscal Space
This section …rst brie‡y presents the main features of the indicators of …scal space. We then analyze
the evolution of …scal space over time.

3.1      Comovement, Volatility and Size
Comovement. Our allocation of …scal space indicators into four distinct groups is supported
by cross-indicator correlations. Within each group, the correlations across the various individual
indicators are considerably larger on average, and a larger number of them are signi…cant, than
across groups. For example, the 66 correlations between the twelve indicators within the debt
sustainability grouping average 0.58 and all the individual correlations are statistically signi…cantly
di¤erent from zero (at least at the 5 percent level) (Tables 3 and A3).
    11
    CDS spreads tend to be cointegrated with sovereign bond yields. Both are a¤ected by factors such as counterparty
and liquidity risk. The causal relationship between the two depends on speci…c market and macroeconomic conditions
(IMF 2012).




                                                         9
    In contrast, only a half (36 of 72) of the correlations between the indicators in the debt sustain-
ability group and the balance sheet group are statistically signi…cant; on average, the correlation
across these two groups is near-zero (0.09). Similarly, the cross-indicator correlations within the
group of balance sheet indicators average 0.27 and those within the group of external and pri-
vate sector debt average 0.42. Cross-indicator correlations for advanced economies, as well as for
EMDEs, point to the distinctive information presented by these four separate groups of indicators.

    Volatility. The volatility of government debt sustainability indicators has declined over time
but that of external and private sector debt has increased. The volatility of debt and …scal balance
indicators relative to tax revenues tends to be larger than that of those relative to GDP, indicating
that the former has a wider range and contains some large outliers. In most cases, variation in
the volatility of …scal space indicators is larger when indicators are compared across countries than
compared over time within a country (Table A4).

    Size. On average over the full sample, as well as separately in the 1990s and 2000s, …scal
space in advanced economies has been considerably narrower than in EMDEs in most dimensions,
with two critical exceptions. Government debt sustainability measures in advanced economies were
weaker, and private as well as government balance sheet exposures to various risks larger (Tables
4-6). For example, since 2008, debt levels have been higher in advanced economies (66.5 percent of
GDP) than in EMDEs (45.6 percent of GDP), and sovereign debt has been of shorter maturity in
advanced economies.

    However, in two critical dimensions, advanced economies have greater …scal space than EMDEs.
First, advanced economies have persistently had considerably lower debt-to-revenue ratios, possibly
re‡ecting greater revenue-raising capacity and stronger institutions. Second, advanced economies
owe a considerably lower share of foreign currency-denominated debt, re‡   ecting reserve currency
status and more credible monetary policy frameworks. This may account for the more favorable
market perception indicators for advanced economies than for EMDEs (Dell’    Erba, Hausman, and
Panizza 2013).

3.2   Evolution of Fiscal Space
After improving during 2000-07 from the 1990s, …scal space has shrunk around the world since
the global …nancial crisis (Tables 4-6 and A5). The improving trend prior to the crisis was widely
shared: virtually all indicators of …scal space expanded in more than half of EMDEs; and most
indicators improved in more than half of advanced economies (Tables A6 and A7). After the crisis,
however, government debt as well as …scal sustainability gaps have deteriorated in at least three-
quarters of countries in the world. External and private debt stocks have also increased in more
than half of all countries and perceptions of market participants have worsened.

   The post-crisis deterioration in …scal space was more strongly synchronized than the pre-crisis
improvement. From 2007, almost half of the indicators deteriorated in at least two-thirds of the
countries in the sample. As a result, …scal space in the majority of EMDEs ended 2016 narrower in
most dimensions than in 2000 or 1995. This was partly mitigated by record low interest rates and
high reserve bu¤ers. The broad patterns were particularly pronounced in commodity-exporting
economies and in regions with predominantly commodity-exporting EMDEs.

   Pre-crisis improvements in …scal space. In EMDEs, and to a considerably lesser extent in
advanced economies, government debt sustainability improved signi…cantly as rapid growth reduced

                                                  10
de…cits, and helped reduce debt stocks prior to the global …nancial crisis (Figure 1). Fiscal de…cits
during the global slowdown of 2001 (0.7 percent of GDP in advanced economies, 2.8 percent of GDP
in EMDEs) turned into surpluses by 2007 (1.8 percent of GDP in advanced economies, 1.4 percent
of GDP in EMDEs). In low-income developing economies, relief initiatives such as the Heavily
Indebted Poor Countries initiative and the Multilateral Debt Relief Initiative helped reduce debt
burdens. These improvements helped reduce general government gross debt by 33 percentage points
of GDP over 2001-07 in EMDEs, to 47 percent of GDP. Government debt in advanced economies
was also stabilized at about 47 percent of GDP. By 2007, …scal positions in 90 percent of countries
in the world were sustainable under current as well as, to a lesser degree (75 percent of countries),
historical conditions.

    In advanced economies, government balance sheet indicators moved in di¤erent directions.
While the share of government debt held by nonresidents increased, the foreign currency share
declined and the maturity of debt became longer (Figure 2 and Table A6). External debt increased
by 90 percentage points to exceed 320 percent of GDP in 2007 from the early 2000s. Domestic cur-
rency liabilities dominated this growth, as the share of foreign currency-denominated external debt
declined by around 10 percentage points to 53 percent. In addition, mounting domestic contingent
liabilities were a warning sign of risks ahead, evidenced by the rise in private sector credit to 110
percent of GDP. In more than three-quarters of advanced economies, private sector credit rose in
tandem with external debt (Table A6).

    In EMDEs, external debt declined. By 2007, the external debt-to-GDP ratio was below the
levels of the early 2000s in three-quarters of EMDEs— but external debt had become increasingly
short-term. Sovereign spreads in EMDEs became markedly smaller between 2000 and 2007 (Figure
3). In more than two-thirds of EMDEs, declining external exposures were accompanied by rising
domestic private sector credit (Table A7).

   Post-crisis deterioration in …scal space. Since the crisis, …scal positions have deteriorated
sharply in EMDEs as activity has slowed. In contrast, in advanced economies, following severe
deteriorations during the 2009 global recession, most indicators of government debt sustainability
have virtually returned to levels in the mid-2000s.

   In advanced economies, the …scal primary balance has turned into a surplus of 0.6 percent of
GDP in 2016 from a de…cit of near 4 percent of GDP in 2009. Sustainability gaps have closed such
that, on average and especially under current or benign conditions, debt stocks would stabilize or
even slowly decline (Botev, Fournier, and Mourougane 2016). Government debt, which grew by
more than 15 percentage points of GDP between 2007 and 2010, has stabilized around at elevated
70 percent of GDP (Dobbs et al. 2015). As a result of narrower …scal de…cits, …scal positions
now appear to be sustainable in more than two-thirds of advanced economies at current …nancing
conditions, and in more than half of advanced economies under (less benign) historical …nancing
conditions. Despite these improvements since the crisis, advanced economy credit ratings remain
lower than before the crisis.

   In EMDEs, in contrast, debt sustainability indicators have steadily deteriorated since 2011
(Figure 1). Partly as a result of steep revenue losses in commodity-exporting EMDEs, sustainability
gaps and …scal de…cits have, on average, widened to 3-5 percent of GDP in 2016. Sustainability
gaps in EMDEs have worsened since the pre-crisis level, and, in around three-quarters of EMDEs,
…scal positions are clearly debt-increasing under current conditions (Figure 4). Government debt


                                                 11
has risen to 53 percent of GDP, on average, in 2016, exceeds 2000 levels in more than one third of
EMDEs and is increasingly held by non-residents (Table A7).

   External debt and private sector credit have risen from 2007 levels in at least three-quarters
of EMDEs. A rapid increase in private sector credit, especially for corporates, since the global
…nancial crisis has been accompanied by weaker solvency and pro…tability positions (Alfaro et al.
2017). Re‡  ecting deteriorating debt sustainability, balance sheet risks and contingent liabilities,
credit ratings of EMDEs have (marginally) worsened on average and, in more than half of EMDEs,
have weakened since 2007. As a result of the post-crisis deterioration, most indicators of …scal
space were narrower in 2016 than in the late 1990s in the majority of EMDEs. The exception is
external vulnerabilities, which have been mitigated by a reserve buildup.

   Divergence between commodity exporters and importers. The evolution of …scal
space has diverged sharply between commodity exporters and importers (Figure 5). Both the
pre-crisis improvement and the post-crisis deterioration have been particularly pronounced among
commodity-exporting EMDEs, in line with the cycle in commodity prices (World Bank 2017b).

    By 2007, sustainability gaps in excess of 5 percent of GDP set government debt on a declining
path in 80 percent of commodity-exporting EMDEs. A sharp deterioration during the global reces-
sion of 2009 was reversed within a year. However, since the onset of the commodity price slide in
2011, …scal sustainability gaps have steadily deteriorated, and since 2014 they have been materially
below those of commodity importers. This has also been re‡    ected in a sharp deterioration in credit
ratings.

   In commodity-importing EMDEs, the post-crisis deterioration in …scal space has been more
gradual than in commodity-exporting EMDEs. On the eve of the global …nancial crisis, in 2007,
public debt stocks were much higher than those of commodity exporters. Post-crisis, sustainability
gaps have reverted to debt-increasing positions. Accordingly, this has contributed a decline in
credit ratings, although it has been more gradual than in commodity exporters. Under current
conditions, sustainability gaps were below zero (i.e., debt-increasing) in three-…fths of commodity
importers in 2016.


4        How Does Fiscal Space Evolve During Periods of Financial Stress?
The global …nancial crisis of 2008-09 is an exceptional episode, among many periods of …nancial
stress. Past …nancial stress episodes have often been associated with …nancial crises, including
collapses of currencies, acute …scal challenges, or with collapses of commodity prices for those
relying heavily on commodity revenues. In this section, we …rst analyze the behavior of …scal space
during di¤erent types of …nancial crises.12 We then brie‡y examine the evolution of …scal space in
energy-exporting EMDEs during oil price plunges.

4.1      Fiscal Space During Financial Crises
We group …nancial crises into currency crises, banking crises and government debt distress episodes
following Gourinchas and Obstfeld (2012), and Laeven and Valencia (2013). Our sample of crises
    12
   An extensive literature discusses the impact of crises on …scal positions and the linkages between sovereign and
banking sector issues during …nancial crises (Fratzscher, Mehl, and Vansteenkiste 2011; Reinhart and Rogo¤ 2009;
Tagkalakis 2013).


                                                        12
covers 33 …nancial crisis episodes for advanced economies, and 160 crises for EMDEs (Table A8).
We consider the behavior of a wide range of …scal space measures, including government debt
sustainability, private and external debt, and market perception indicators. Fiscal debt sustain-
ability in advanced economies deteriorated sharply during and in the immediate aftermath of crises,
especially after banking crises (Figure 6 and Table A9).

    Debt sustainability. The deterioration after banking crises to some extent re‡      ects the cost
of government bail-outs (Tagkalakis 2013). The average level of government debt in advanced
economies was 49 percent of GDP just before a banking crisis and jumped to 66 percent of GDP
afterwards. Similarly, in EMDEs, government debt surged, on average, from 37 percent of GDP
to 53 percent of GDP. With rising debt, sharply widening primary de…cits and slowing growth,
…scal sustainability deteriorated signi…cantly during crises. For example, the primary balance
sustainability gap under current conditions in advanced economies was 3 percent of GDP before
a banking crisis but worsened to -8 percent of GDP, on average, in the two years after the crisis.
In EMDEs, positive sustainability gaps of 2.3 percent of GDP, which had put debt on a declining
path, before a banking crisis turned into negative (debt-increasing) gaps of -2.7 percent of GDP,
on average, in the two years after the crisis. Indeed, …scal positions sharply deteriorated in a year
after a banking crisis with sustainability gaps of -10 percent of GDP but became debt-reducing in
two years (3 percent of GDP).

    Balance sheet composition. Crises were often followed by reduced reliance on short-term
external borrowing, in both advanced economies and EMDEs. The share of short-term external
debt fell, on average, by 2-3 percentage points in the wake of banking and currency crises and debt
distress in EMDEs. After a debt distress episode in EMDEs, sovereign debt maturities shortened
signi…cantly more than after other types of crises.

    Private and external debt. During crises deleveraging that reduced private and external
debt proceeded. Crises were associated with signi…cant declines in private sector credit. Prior to
crises, the ratio of private sector debt-to-GDP grew on average by around 2.5 percentage points.
In the two years following crises, private sector credit declined on average by 2 percentage points
of GDP in EMDEs, and by 2.7 percentage points of GDP in advanced economies (and in both
country groups, changes are statistically signi…cant after banking crises). Similarly, external debt
also declined, or the pace of debt accumulation decelerated. In EMDEs, external debt contracted
sharply after currency crises and debt distress by 3.3 percentage points of GDP, on average. In
advanced economies, in contrast, external debt continued to grow after banking crises but at a
slower rate.

    Market perception. Deteriorating sovereign debt sustainability was accompanied by statisti-
cally signi…cant downgrades in credit ratings. In advanced economies, after banking and currency
crises, credit ratings declined by two notches. In EMDEs, any type of …nancial crisis is, on average,
associated with a decline in credit ratings by more than two notches.

    In advanced economies, government debt has recently been about 71 percent of GDP, a historic
high, and well above the roughly 50 percent of GDP in the year before past banking and currency
crises. In contrast, in EMDEs, the recent level of government debt (53 percent of GDP) has
been lower than on the eve of historical debt distress episodes (73 percent of GDP) or currency
crises (69 percent of GDP), although above that during banking crises (37 percent of GDP). These
developments have been re‡   ected in weaker sovereign credit ratings in advanced economies, and
stronger ratings than before past currency crises and debt distress in EMDEs (Figure 6). Almost

                                                 13
all indicators of …scal space currently compare unfavorably, especially in EMDEs, with the previous
periods leading up to crises (Table A10). In particular, private debt is more elevated now than on
the eve of the observed crises in EMDEs. Private sector credit is higher now than before previous
crises. In advanced economies, private sector credit is as high as those seen before earlier crisis
episodes. The share of short-term external debt is somewhat lower in advanced economies and
almost the same in EMDEs, compared to those in past crises.

4.2   Fiscal Space During Oil Price Plunges
Fiscal space in energy-exporting EMDEs is closely related to the behavior of oil prices, as these
economies tend to heavily rely on …scal revenues from the energy sector. In some of energy-
exporting EMDEs, hydrocarbon revenues account for more than half of these revenues. Collapses
in oil and other energy prices can therefore force them into sharp …scal adjustment. We focus on
36 energy-exporting EMDEs and study how …scal space evolves during episodes of major oil price
plunges— 1991, 1998, 2001, 2008 and 2014 (Table 2). These major collapses of global oil prices are
identi…ed as nonconsecutive decline episodes in prices where an average of Brent, Dubai, and West
Texas Intermediate oil prices dropped by more than 30 percent over a six-month period.

    Fiscal space deteriorated sharply during past oil price plunges but rebounded quickly as a result
of procyclical …scal tightening and, in some cases, a recovery in oil prices (Figure 7; Danforth, Medas,
and Salins 2016). Prior to past oil price plunges, energy-exporting EMDEs had highly favorable
debt sustainability indicators: primary surpluses were accompanied by positive sustainability gaps
and government debt was on a declining path. Fiscal positions signi…cantly worsened during and
in the immediate aftermath of oil price collapses as primary surpluses turned into de…cits and
government debt was set on a …rmly rising trajectory (Table A11).

    Within three years after the plunges, however, sustainability gaps returned to being debt-
reducing and were restored close to the pre-plunge levels. Sovereign debt maturities shortened only
marginally. Despite the deterioration in …scal positions, the adverse impact on sovereign ratings was
small. External debt rose during oil price plunges but stabilized quickly. The rebound in indicators
of …scal space was often as a result of procyclical …scal tightening and, in some episodes, a recovery
in oil prices. Compared to these earlier oil price plunges, energy-exporting EMDEs entered the
most recent plunge of 2014 with lower government debt but underwent a sharper deterioration in
…scal positions than in previous plunges.


5     Conclusion
We present a new, comprehensive, cross-country database of …scal space for up to 200 countries
over the period 1990-2016. Drawing on a wide range of sources, we bring together 28 indicators of
…scal space that are grouped into four broad categories: government debt sustainability, balance
sheet composition, external and private sector debt, and market perception of sovereign risk. Each
of these categories covers a di¤erent dimension of …scal space.

    After describing the data sources and methodology employed to construct our indicators, we
analyze the basic features of …scal space indicators. Simple correlations across indicators lend sup-
port to our four-part categorization: the cross-indicator correlations are considerably larger within
groups than across groups. We then analyze the evolution of …scal space since 2000. There were
signi…cant improvements during the 2000s, but this was followed by a shrinkage of …scal space


                                                  14
around the world since the global …nancial crisis. Speci…cally, …scal space has shrunk in many
emerging market and developing economies since the global …nancial crisis, although it remains
larger than during the late 1990s. In contrast, in advanced economies, most indicators of govern-
ment debt sustainability have virtually returned to levels in the mid-2000s. We also examine how
…scal space evolves during …nancial crises and oil price plunges. Financial crises coincide with a
deterioration in multiple indicators of …scal space but are often followed by reduced short-term
borrowing. Although …scal space worsens during oil price plunges, indicators of government debt
sustainability typically rebound close to pre-plunge levels within three years, partly as a result of
procyclical …scal tightening and recovering oil prices.

    Fiscal space is a multi-dimensional concept at the heart of often contentious policy debates. Our
cross-country database provides a source to analyze a broad set of …scal space measures for informed
debate about policy options. Our …ndings also suggest promising avenues for future research. For
example, it would be useful to analyze which dimensions of …scal space are most relevant in assessing
the e¤ectiveness of …scal policy. Another interesting question is on the relative importance of
determinants of market perception indicators in di¤erent country groups. Speci…cally, it would be
useful to undertake an empirical study of the role of revenue raising capacity, institutional quality,
and other possible factors in explaining di¤erences in market perception indicators of di¤erent
country groups.




                                                 15
References
 [1] Abbas, S. M. A., N. Belhocine, A. El-Ganainy, and M. Horton. 2011. “Historical Patterns and
     Dynamics of Public Debt— Evidence from a New Database.” IMF Economic Review 59 (4):
     717–742.

 [2] Abbas, S. M. A., and J. E. Christensen. 2010. “The Role of Domestic Debt Markets in Economic
     Growth: An Empirical Investigation for Low-Income Countries and Emerging Markets.” IMF
     Sta¤ Papers 57 (1): 209–  255.

 [3] Aizenman, J., and Y. Jinjarak. 2012. “The Fiscal Stimulus of 2009-2010: Trade Openness,
     Fiscal Space, and Exchange Rate Adjustment.”In NBER International Seminar on Macroeco-
     nomics 2011, edited by J. Frankel and C. Pissarides, 301–342. Chicago: University of Chicago
     Press.

 [4] Alfaro, L., G. Asis, A. Chari, and U. Panizza. 2017. “Lessons Unlearned? Corporate Debt
     in Emerging Markets.”NBER Working Paper 23407, National Bureau of Economic Research,
     Cambrdige.

 [5] Arslanalp, S., and T. Tsuda. 2014a. “Tracking Global Demand for Advanced Economy Sov-
     ereign Debt.” IMF Economic Review 62 (3): 430– 464.

 [6] Arslanalp, S., and T. Tsuda. 2014b. “Tracking Global Demand for Emerging Market Sovereign
     Debt.” IMF Working Paper 14/39, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.

 [7] Auerbach, A. J., and Y. Gorodnichenko. 2013. “Fiscal Multipliers in Recession and Expan-
     sion.”In Fiscal Policy after the Financial Crisis, edited by A. Alesina and F. Giavazzi, 63–98.
     Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

 [8] Baldacci, E., I. Petrova, N. Belhocine, G. Dobrescu, and S. Mazraani. 2011. “Assessing Fiscal
     Stress.” IMF Working Paper 11/100, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.

 [9] Bernardini, M., and L. Forni. 2017. “Private and Public Debt: Are Emerging Markets at
     Risk?” IMF Working Paper 17/61, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.

[10] BIS (Bank for International Settlements). 2012. “Fiscal Policy, Public Debt and Monetary
     Policy in Emerging Market Economies.” BIS Paper 67, Bank for International Settlements,
     Basel.

[11] Bornhorst, F., G. Dobrescu, A. Fedelino, J. Gottschalk, and T. Nakata. 2011. “When and How
     to Adjust Beyond the Business Cycle? A Guide to Structural Fiscal Balances.”IMF Technical
     Notes and Manuals 11/02, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.

[12] Botev, J., J.-M. Fournier, and A. Mourougane. 2016. “A Re-Assessment of Fiscal Space in
     OECD Countries.” OECD Economics Department Working Papers 1352, Organisation for
     Economic Co-operation and Development, Paris.

[13] Bova, E., M. Ruiz-Arranz, F. Toscani, and H. E. Ture. 2016. “The Fiscal Costs of Contin-
     gent Liabilities: A New Dataset.” IMF Working Paper 16/14, International Monetary Fund,
     Washington, DC.

[14] Bua, G., J. Pradelli, and A. F. Presbitero. 2014. “Domestic Public Debt in Low-Income Coun-
     tries: Trends and Structure.” Review of Development Finance 4 (1): 1–  19.

                                                16
[15] Buckle, R. A., and A. A. Cruickshank. 2013. “The Requirements for Long-Run Fiscal Sustain-
     ability.” New Zealand Treasury Working Paper 13/20, New Zealand Treasury, Wellington.
[16] Cebotari, A. 2008. “Contingent Liabilities: Issues and Practice.”IMF Working Paper 08/245,
     International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
[17] Cowan, K., E. Levy-Yeyati, U. Panizza, and F. Sturzenegger. 2006. “Sovereign Debt in the
     Americas: New Data and Stylized Facts.” IADB Working Paper 577, Inter-American Devel-
     opment Bank, Washington, DC.
[18] Danforth, J., P. Medas, and V. Salins. 2016. “Fiscal Policy: How to Adjust to a Large Fall in
     Commodity Prices.” IMF How to Notes 1, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
[19] Dell’Erba, S., R. Hausmann, and, U. Panizza. 2013. “Debt Levels, Debt Composition, and
     Sovereign Spreads in Emerging and Advanced Economies.” Oxford Review of Economic Policy
     29 (3): 518–547.
[20] Dobbs, R., S. Lund, J. Woetzel, and M. Mutafchieva. 2015. “Debt and (Not Much) Delever-
     aging.” McKinsey Global Institute report, February, McKinsey & Company, New York.
[21] Escolano, J. 2010. “A Practical Guide to Public Debt Dynamics, Fiscal Sustainability, and
     Cyclical Adjustment of Budgetary Aggregates.” IMF Technical Notes and Manuals 10/02,
     International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
[22] Fedelino, A., A. Ivanova, and M. Horton. 2009. “Computing Cyclically Adjusted Balances
     and Automatic Stabilizers.”IMF Technical Notes and Manuals 09/05, International Monetary
     Fund, Washington, DC.
[23] Fratzscher, M., A. Mehl, and I. Vansteenkiste. 2011. “130 Years of Fiscal Vulnerabilities and
     Currency Crashes in Advanced Economies.” IMF Economic Review 59 (4): 683–       716.
[24] Ghosh, A. R., J. I. Kim, E. G. Mendoza, J. D. Ostry, and M. S. Qureshi. 2013. “Fiscal Fatigue,
     Fiscal Space and Debt Sustainability in Advanced Economies.” The Economic Journal 123
     (February): F4– F30.
[25] Gourinchas, P.-O., and M. Obstfeld. 2012. “Stories of the Twentieth Century for the Twenty-
     First.” American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics 4 (1): 226–    265.
[26] Guajardo, J., D. Leigh, and A. Pescatori. 2014. “Expansionary Austerity? International Evi-
     dence.” Journal of the European Economic Association 12 (4): 949–968.
[27] Hausmann, R., and U. Panizza. 2011. “Redemption or Abstinence? Original Sin, Currency
     Mismatches and Counter Cyclical Policies in the New Millennium.” Journal of Globalization
     and Development 2 (1): Article 4.
[28] Heller, P. S. 2005. “Understanding Fiscal Space.”IMF Policy Discussion Paper 05/4, Interna-
     tional Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.
[29] Huidrom, R., M. A. Kose, J. J. Lim, and F. L. Ohnsorge. 2016. “Do Fiscal Multipliers De-
     pend on Fiscal Positions?” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 7724, World Bank,
     Washington, DC.
[30] Ilzetzki, E., E. G. Mendoza, and C. A. Végh. 2013. “How Big (Small?) Are Fiscal Multipliers?”
     Journal of Monetary Economics 60 (2): 239–    254.

                                                17
[31] IMF (International Monetary Fund). 2012. Global Financial Stability Report: The Quest for
     Lasting Stability. April. Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund.

[32] IMF. 2017. “Global Prospects and Policy Challenges.”Sta¤ note prepared for the G-20 Finance
     Ministers and Central Bank Governors’ Meetings in Baden-Baden, Germany, March 17-18.
     International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.

[33] Jaimovich, D., and U. Panizza. 2010. “Public Debt around the World: A New Data Set of
     Central Government Debt.” Applied Economics Letters 17 (1): 19–24.

[34] Jeanne, O., and A. Guscina. 2006. “Government Debt in Emerging Market Countries: A New
     Data Set.” IMF Working Paper 06/98, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.

[35] Kim, G. 2014. “EMBI Global and EMBI Global Diversi…ed: Rules and Methodology.”Global
     Index Research, June 30, J.P. Morgan Securities LLC, New York.

[36] Laeven, L., and F. Valencia. 2013. “Systemic Banking Crises Database.”IMF Economic Review
     61 (2): 225– 270.

[37] Ley, E. 2009. “Fiscal Policy for Growth.” PREM Note 131, World Bank, Washington, DC.

[38] Mansour, M. 2014. “A Tax Revenue Dataset for Sub-Saharan Africa: 1980-2010.” FERDI
     Working Paper I19, Foundation for International Development Study and Research, Clermont-
     Ferrand.

[39] Martínez Carrera, C., and R. Vergara. 2012. “Fiscal Sustainability: The Impact of Real Ex-
     change Rate Shocks on Debt Valuation, Interest Rates and GDP Growth.” World Development
     40 (9): 1762–1783.

[40] Mauro, P., R. Romeu, A. Binder, and A. Zaman. 2015. “A Modern History of Fiscal Prudence
     and Pro‡igacy.” Journal of Monetary Economics 76 (November): 55– 70.

[41] Nerlich, C., and W. H. Reuter. 2015. “Fiscal Rules, Fiscal Space and Procyclical Fiscal Policy.”
     ECB Working Paper 1872, European Central Bank, Frankfurt am Main.

[42] Ostry, J. D., A. R. Ghosh, J. I. Kim, and M. S. Qureshi. 2010. “Fiscal Space.” IMF Sta¤
     Position Note 10/11, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.

[43] Panizza, U. 2008. “Domestic and External Public Debt in Developing Countries.” UNCTAD
     Discussion Paper 188, United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, Geneva.

[44] Park, S. G. 2012. “Quantifying Impact of Aging Population on Fiscal Space.” IMF Working
     Paper 12/164, International Monetary Fund, Washington, DC.

[45] Perotti, R. 2007. “Fiscal Policy in Developing Countries: A Framework and Some Questions.”
     World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 4365, World Bank, Washington, DC.

[46] Prichard, W., A. Cobham, and A. Goodall. 2014. “The ICTD Government Revenue Dataset.”
     ICTD Working Paper 19, International Centre for Tax and Development, Brighton.

[47] Reinhart, C. M., and K. S. Rogo¤. 2009. This Time is Di¤ erent: Eight Centuries of Financial
     Folly. Princeton: Princeton University Press.



                                                 18
[48] Reinhart, C. M., and K. S. Rogo¤. 2011. “The Forgotten History of Domestic Debt.” The
     Economic Journal 121 (552): 319–350.

[49] Tagkalakis, A. 2013. “The E¤ects of Financial Crisis on Fiscal Positions.” European Journal
     of Political Economy 29 (March): 197–213.

[50] World Bank. 2017a. Global Economic Prospects: Weak Investment in Uncertain Times. Janu-
     ary. Washington, DC: World Bank.

[51] World Bank. 2017b. Leaning against the Wind: Fiscal Policy in Latin America and the
     Caribbean in a Historical Perspective. April. Washington, DC: World Bank.




                                              19
                                        Figure 1. Debt sustainability indicators
                      A. Primary balance                                            B. Fiscal balance
                       (percent of GDP)                                             (percent of GDP)
    4                                                            2


    2                                                            0


    0                                                            -2


   -2                                                            -4


   -4                                                            -6
        2000 02       04    06    08    10   12   14   16             2000 02       04    06   08   10   12   14   16

             C. General government gross debt                                           gap, primary balance
                                                                      D. Sustainability gap,
                    (percent of GDP)                                           conditions, percent of GDP)
                                                                      (current conditions,
    90                                                                6

    80                                                                3

    70                                                                0

    60                                                            -3

    50                                                            -6

    40                                                            -9
            2000 02    04   06     08   10   12   14   16                 2000 02   04    06   08   10   12   14   16

                     E. Fiscal balance                                     F. General government gross debt
             (percent of average tax revenues)                             (percent of average tax revenues)
    20                                                           700

                                                                 600
        0
                                                                 500

                                                                 400
   -20
                                                                 300

   -40                                                           200
            2000 02    04   06     08   10   12   14   16                 2000 02    04   06   08   10   12   14   16

                                 All countries         Advanced economies                  EMDEs
Note: Simple averages. The year of global recession (2009) is shaded in gray. The numbers for 2016 are estimates.
E.F. Countries with extremely high ratios are excluded.




                                                            20
                    Figure 2. Balance sheet and external and private debt indicators
A. General government debt held by nonresidents                       B. Sovereign debt average maturity
               (percent of total)                                                   (years)
    50                                                          12


    45
                                                                10

    40

                                                                 8
    35


    30                                                           6
          2000 02   04    06     08    10   12   14   16              2000 02   04   06   08   10   12   14   16
             C. Total external debt stocks                            D. External debt in foreign currency
                  (percent of GDP)                                             (percent of total)
   500                                                          100

   400
                                                                80
   300
                                                                60
   200
                                                                40
   100

      0                                                         20
          2000 02    04   06      08   10   12   14   16              2000 02   04   06   08   10   12   14   16

              Short-
           E. Short-term external debt stocks                         F. Domestic credit to private sector
                    (percent of total)                                       (percent of GDP)
    50                                                          140


    40                                                          110


    30                                                          80


    20                                                          50


    10                                                          20
          2000 02   04    06     08    10   12   14   16              2000 02   04   06   08   10   12   14   16

                               All countries          Advanced economies             EMDEs
Note: Simple averages. The year of global recession (2009) is shaded in gray. Data are not presented in some years,
because data are not available or the sample size is smaller than in the other years.




                                                           21
                                    Figure 3. Market perception indicators
         5-year dollar sovereign CDS spreads
      A. 5-                                                             Long-term sovereign debt ratings
                                                                    B. Long-
                   (basis points)                                    (index ranging from 1 to 21 [best])
   500                                                         21

   400                                                         19

                                                               17
   300
                                                               15
   200
                                                               13
   100                                                         11

     0                                                          9
         2000 02   04   06     08   10   12   14   16               2000 02   04   06   08   10    12   14   16

                             All countries         Advanced economies               EMDEs

Note: Simple averages. The year of global recession (2009) is shaded in gray.
A. Countries with extremely high spreads are excluded. Due to the small sample size, the data for advanced economies
up to 2002 are not presented.
B. The sovereign debt ratings are converted to a numerical scale ranging from 1 to 21 (higher, better rating). The
horizontal line is the border between investment grade (above the line) and non-investment grade (below the line).




                                                        22
                               Figure 4. Primary balance sustainability gaps
                                  Average by indicator (percent of GDP)
               A. Advanced economies                                                      B. EMDEs
    10                                                              10


     5                                                               5


     0                                                               0


    -5                                                              -5


   -10                                                             -10
                2003-07                  2010-16                               2003-07                    2010-16

                        Country-specific        Historical        Current      Stressed         Benign

             Share of countries with negative sustainability gap (percent of countries)
               C. Advanced economies                                                      D. EMDEs
   100                                                            100


    75                                                             75


    50                                                             50


    25                                                             25


     0                                                               0
         2000 02   04     06   08   10     12   14   16                  2000 02     04    06   08   10    12   14   16

                        Country-specific        Historical        Current          Stressed      Benign
Note: A positive gap indicates a primary balance that would diminish government debt, if sustained, over time, while
a negative gap shows a primary balance that would increase the stocks of debt. Sustainability gap indicators are
computed under five different assumptions for GDP growth rates, interest rates, and target debt ratio. (1) Under
country-specific conditions, a sustainability gap is based on country-specific median values in GDP growth rate,
interest rate, and debt ratio. (2) Under historical conditions, country-specific median GDP growth and interest rates
and median debt ratio by country group (advanced economies and EMDEs) are used. (3) A sustainability gap under
current conditions is computed with contemporaneous values in GDP growth and interest rates and medina debt
ratio by country group. (4) Stressed conditions are defined as country-specific median GDP growth minus one
country-specific standard deviation, country-specific median interest rate plus one country-specific standard
deviation, and country-group median debt ratio. (5) A sustainability gap under benign conditions is computed with
maximum GDP growth and minimum interest rates based on 10-year moving averages and country-group median
debt ratio.
A.B. Period average sustainability gaps in respective country groups. Lines in gray show the interquartile range.
C.D. Share of countries in respective groups with negative sustainability gap in respective years (in percent). Data
availability varies by year and indicator but they cover at most 35 advanced economies and 72 EMDEs. The year of
global recession (2009) is shaded in gray and the numbers for 2016 are estimates.




                                                             23
              Figure 5. Fiscal space indicators, by EMDE commodity exporter status
          A. General government gross debt                                      gap, primary balance
                                                              B. Sustainability gap,
                 (percent of GDP)                                      conditions, percent of GDP)
                                                              (current conditions,
    90                                                      10


                                                             5
    70

                                                             0

    50
                                                            -5


    30                                                     -10
         2000 02   04   06   08   10   12   14   16              2000 02   04   06   08   10   12   14   16

         C. Sovereign debt average maturity                         D. Total external debt stocks
                       (years)                                           (percent of GDP)
    13                                                      90



    11                                                      70



     9                                                      50



     7                                                      30
         2000 02   04   06   08   10   12   14   16              2000 02   04   06   08   10   12   14   16

         E. Domestic credit to private sector                       Long-term sovereign debt ratings
                                                                 F. Long-
                (percent of GDP)                                 (index ranging from 1 to 21 [best])
    60                                                      11

    50

    40
                                                            10
    30

    20

    10                                                       9
         2000 02   04   06   08   10   12   14   16              2000 02   04   06   08   10   12   14   16

                             Commodity exporters                 Commodity importers

Note: Simple averages. The commodity exporter status is based on the criteria used in World Bank (2017a). The
year of global recession (2009) is shaded in gray.
A.B. The numbers for 2016 are estimates.
F. The sovereign ratings are converted to a numerical scale ranging from 1 to 21 (higher, better rating).




                                                      24
                            Figure 6. Fiscal space around crisis episodes
                 Advanced economies                                    EMDEs
                                   gap, primary balance (current conditions,
                 A. Sustainability gap,                          conditions, percent of GDP)
     4                                                           5


     0                                                           0


    -4                                                          -5


    -8                                                         -10


   -12                                                         -15
          t-3     t-2   t-1      t   t+1   t+2   t+3                  t-3   t-2     t-1    t   t+1   t+2      t+3

                      Long-term sovereign debt ratings (index ranging from 1 to 21 [best])
                   B. Long-
    20                                                          12


    19                                                          10


    18                                                           8


    17                                                           6


    16                                                           4
          t-3     t-2   t-1      t   t+1   t+2   t+3                  t-3   t-2     t-1    t   t+1   t+2      t+3

                                 Short-term external debt stocks (percent of GDP)
                              C. Short-
    43                                                          16


    41
                                                                14

    39

                                                                12
    37


    35                                                          10
          t-3     t-2   t-1      t   t+1   t+2   t+3                  t-3   t-2     t-1    t   t+1   t+2      t+3

                Banking crises       Currency crises       Debt distress          Current period (t = 2016)
Note: Simple averages. Crisis episodes are based on Gourinchas and Obstfeld (2012) and Laeven and Valencia (2013).
In any country, when consecutive crises are identified within the next five years, the one associated with the lowest
real GDP growth is used. For the full list of crisis episodes used in the figure, refer to Table A8. Due to the small
sample size, the aggregate numbers for advanced economies in the case of debt distress episodes are not presented.
B. The sovereign ratings are converted to a numerical scale ranging from 1 to 21 (higher, better rating).
C. Due to the small sample size, the aggregated data for advanced economies in currency crisis episodes are not
presented.




                                                         25
                                Figure 7. Fiscal space during oil price plunges
         A. General government gross debt                             B. Sustainability gap, primary balance
                (percent of GDP)                                               conditions, percent of GDP)
                                                                      (current conditions,
    80                                                           20


    60
                                                                 10

    40

                                                                  0
    20


     0                                                          -10
          t-3    t-2     t-1    t    t+1   t+2   t+3                     t-3    t-2   t-1   t    t+1      t+2   t+3

         C. Sovereign debt average maturity                               D. Total external debt stocks
                       (years)                                                 (percent of GDP)
    17                                                           80

    15
                                                                 60
    13

    11
                                                                 40
     9

     7                                                           20
           t-3   t-2      t-1    t   t+1   t+2   t+3                     t-3    t-2   t-1   t    t+1      t+2   t+3

         E. Domestic credit to private sector                             Long-term sovereign debt ratings
                                                                       F. Long-
                (percent of GDP)                                       (index ranging from 1 to 21 [best])
    50                                                           15

    40
                                                                 13
    30
                                                                 11
    20
                                                                  9
    10

     0                                                            7
          t-3    t-2     t-1    t    t+1   t+2   t+3                     t-3    t-2   t-1   t    t+1      t+2   t+3

                       Past oil price plunges     Interquartile range          Latest plunge (t = 2014)

Note: Simple averages. Oil price plunges are episodes where global oil prices dropped significantly over a short period
of time and include 1991, 1998, 2001, 2008, and 2014. Data are not presented in some years, because data are not
available or the sample size is smaller than in the other years.
F. The sovereign ratings are converted to a numerical scale ranging from 1 to 21 (higher, better rating). The
horizontal line is the border between investment grade (above the line) and non-investment grade (below the line).




                                                          26
                               Table 1. Variable list, sources and data coverage
                                                                                                             Coverage
Variable                                                            Sources                       Obs.    Country Year
Government debt sustainability
General government gross debt (percent of GDP)                      IMF; World Bank               3,907    186   1990-2016
Primary balance (percent of GDP)                                    IMF                           4,191    184   1990-2016
Cyclically-adjusted balance (percent of potential GDP)              Authors' calculations         3,610    153   1990-2016
Fiscal balance (percent of GDP)                                     IMF                           4,374    191   1990-2016
General government gross debt                                       IMF; OECD; World Bank         3,868    182   1990-2016
   (percent of average tax revenues)
Fiscal balance (percent of average tax revenues)                    IMF; OECD                     4,342    187   1990-2016
Sustainability gap, fiscal balance (percent of GDP)                 Authors' calculations         4,352    191   1990-2016
Sustainability gap, primary balance, country-specific conditions    Authors' calculations         2,476    107   1990-2016
   (percent of GDP)
Sustainability gap, primary balance, historical conditions          Authors' calculations         2,476    107   1990-2016
   (percent of GDP)
Sustainability gap, primary balance, current conditions             Authors' calculations         1,961    107   1990-2016
   (percent of GDP)
Sustainability gap, primary balance, stressed conditions            Authors' calculations         2,476    107   1990-2016
   (percent of GDP)
Sustainability gap, primary balance, benign conditions              Authors' calculations         2,476    107   1990-2016
   (percent of GDP)
Balance sheet composition
General government debt in foreign currency                         OECD; World Bank               505     48    1990-2016
   (percent of total) 1/
Debt securities held by nonresidents (percent of total)             JEDH; BIS                      640     43    2001-2016
General government debt held by nonresidents                        Arslanalp and Tsuda (2014a,    893     73    1995-2016
   (percent of total) 1/                                            2014b); World Bank
Concessional external debt stocks                                   IMF; World Bank               2,211    121   1990-2015
   (percent of general government gross debt)
Sovereign debt average maturity (years)                             Bloomberg; J.P. Morgan        1,132     89   1993-2016
Central government debt maturing in 12 months or less               Bloomberg; IMF                  795    146   2011-2016
   (percent of GDP)
External and private sector debt
Total external debt stocks (percent of GDP)                         IMF; World Bank               3,727    170   1990-2016
External debt in foreign currency (percent of total)                World Bank                      391     39   1998-2016
Private external debt stocks (percent of GDP)                       IMF; World Bank               3,727    170   1990-2016
Domestic credit to private sector (percent of GDP)                  BIS; IMF; World Bank          4,636    185   1990-2016
Short-term external debt stocks (percent of total)                  World Bank                    3,785    170   1990-2016
Short-term external debt stocks (percent of reserves)               IMF; World Bank               3,597    164   1990-2016
Total external debt stocks (percent of reserves)                    IMF; World Bank               3,598    164   1990-2016
Total external debt stocks (percent of reserves excluding gold)     IMF; World Bank               3,599    164   1990-2016
Market perception
5-year sovereign CDS spreads (basis points)                         Bloomberg; J.P. Morgan          930     71   1997-2016
Foreign currency long-term sovereign debt ratings                   Bloomberg                     2,786    148   1990-2016
   (index ranging from 1 to 21 [best])
Note: Year coverage differs by country in each variable. 1/ Data cover public sector, instead of general government,
for Kenya and Uganda.




                                                                   27
                          Table 2. Country coverage and groups
 Advanced economies (41)  Andorra; Australia; Austria; Belgium; Canada; Cyprus; Czech
                          Republic; Denmark; Estonia; Finland; France; Germany; Greece;
                          Hong Kong SAR, China; Iceland; Ireland; Isle of Man; Israel;
                          Italy; Japan; Korea, Rep.; Latvia; Liechtenstein; Lithuania;
                          Luxembourg; Macao SAR, China; Malta; Netherlands; New
                          Zealand; Norway; Portugal; Puerto Rico; San Marino; Singapore;
                          Slovak Republic; Slovenia; Spain; Sweden; Switzerland; United
                          Kingdom; United States
 Emerging market and developing economies (EMDEs) (159)
   Commodity exporters (91)
       Energy exporters   Albania; Algeria; Angola; Azerbaijan; Bahrain; Bolivia; Brunei
       (36)               Darussalam; Cameroon; Chad; Colombia; Congo, Rep.; Ecuador;
                          Equatorial Guinea; Gabon; Ghana; Indonesia; Iran, Islamic Rep.;
                          Iraq; Kazakhstan; Kuwait; Libya; Malaysia; Myanmar; Nigeria;
                          Oman; Qatar; Russian Federation; Saudi Arabia; South Sudan;
                          Sudan; Timor-Leste; Trinidad & Tobago; Turkmenistan; United
                          Arab Emirates; Venezuela, RB; Yemen, Rep.
       Other commodity    Argentina; Armenia; Belize; Benin; Botswana; Brazil; Burkina
       exporters (55)     Faso; Burundi; Central African Rep.; Chile; Congo, Dem. Rep.;
                          Costa Rica; Cote d’Ivoire; Ethiopia; Gambia, The; Guatemala;
                          Guinea; Guinea-Bissau; Guyana; Honduras; Kenya; Kyrgyz
                          Republic; Lao PDR; Liberia; Madagascar; Malawi; Mali;
                          Mauritania; Mongolia; Morocco; Mozambique; Namibia;
                          Nicaragua; Niger; Papua New Guinea; Paraguay; Peru; Rwanda;
                          Sao Tome & Principe; Senegal; Sierra Leone; South Africa; Sri
                          Lanka; Suriname; Tajikistan; Tanzania; Togo; Tonga; Uganda;
                          Ukraine; Uruguay; Uzbekistan; West Bank & Gaza; Zambia;
                          Zimbabwe
   Commodity importers Afghanistan; Antigua & Barbuda; Aruba; Bahamas, The;
   (68)                   Bangladesh; Barbados; Belarus; Bermuda; Bhutan; Bosnia &
                          Herzegovina; Bulgaria; Cabo Verde; Cambodia; Cayman Islands;
                          China; Comoros; Croatia; Cuba; Djibouti; Dominica; Dominican
                          Republic; Egypt, Arab Rep.; El Salvador; Eritrea; Fiji; Georgia;
                          Grenada; Haiti; Hungary; India; Jamaica; Jordan; Kiribati;
                          Kosovo; Lebanon; Lesotho; Macedonia, FYR; Maldives; Marshall
                          Islands; Mauritius; Mexico; Micronesia, Fed. States; Moldova;
                          Montenegro; Nauru; Nepal; Pakistan; Palau; Panama; Philippines;
                          Poland; Romania; Samoa; Serbia; Seychelles; Solomon Islands;
                          Somalia; St. Kitts & Nevis; St. Lucia; St. Vincent & the
                          Grenadines; Swaziland; Syrian Arab Republic; Thailand; Tunisia;
                          Turkey; Tuvalu; Vanuatu; Vietnam
Note: The number of countries in each country group is in parenthesis.




                                                   28
                    Table 3. Correlations among indicators of fiscal space
                                            A. All countries
                                   Government debt    Balance sheet   External and        Market
                                     sustainability    composition private sector debt   perception

Government debt sustainability          0.58
                                       [66,66]
Balance sheet composition               0.09              0.27
                                       [36,72]           [12,15]
External and private sector debt        0.06              0.25             0.42
                                       [55,96]           [38,48]          [28,28]
Market perception                       0.11              0.26             0.27             0.58
                                       [16,24]           [11,12]          [14,16]           [1,1]

                                        B. Advanced economies
                                   Government debt    Balance sheet   External and        Market
                                     sustainability    composition private sector debt   perception

Government debt sustainability          0.74
                                       [66,66]
Balance sheet composition               0.13              0.22
                                       [28,60]           [6,10]
External and private sector debt        0.10              0.18             0.45
                                       [30,96]           [23,40]          [19,28]
Market perception                       0.22              0.16             0.15             0.52
                                       [22,24]           [6,10]           [6,16]            [1,1]

                                                 C. EMDEs
                                   Government debt    Balance sheet   External and        Market
                                     sustainability    composition private sector debt   perception

Government debt sustainability          0.53
                                       [66,66]
Balance sheet composition               0.13              0.28
                                       [38,72]           [9,15]
External and private sector debt        0.06              0.16             0.24
                                       [41,96]           [27,48]          [24,28]
Market perception                       0.14              0.24             0.19             0.51
                                       [18,24]           [7,12]           [11,16]           [1,1]
Note: Average correlation coefficients between variables in respective groups. The numbers before and
after the comma in bracket are, respectively, the number of statistically significant coefficients from
zero at least at the 5-percent level and the total number of individual coefficients considered. Because
of differences in coefficient signs, absolute values are used to compute averages. When computing
individual correlations, observations smaller than the 1st percentile and larger than the 99th percentile
are excluded. Due to the potential trends in the level, indicators of government debt level (percent of
GDP and percent of tax revenues) are first difference series and multiplied by negative one to make it
in line with fiscal and primary balances. All the individual coefficients are presented in Table A3.




                                                           29
                                                         Table 4. Descriptive statistics of fiscal space, all countries
All countries                                     Full period      1990s     2000-07      2008-16     All countries                                    Full period      1990s     2000-07    2008-16
Government debt sustainability                                                                        Balance sheet composition (continued)
General government gross debt                            58.0         63.0         64.8       49.8    Concessional external debt stocks                      37.1         38.5       39.8         33.9
   (percent of GDP)                                   [49.6]       [42.9]       [64.7]     [34.7]        (percent of general government gross debt)        [26.7]       [25.3]     [27.7]       [26.1]
Primary balance                                          -0.7         -2.1          0.9       -1.2    Sovereign debt average maturity                         9.5         12.6        9.3          9.0
   (percent of GDP)                                   [13.4]       [23.3]         [6.7]      [6.2]       (years)                                            [4.7]        [5.5]      [4.9]        [4.2]
Cyclically-adjusted balance                              -2.5         -4.1         -1.1       -2.6    Central government debt maturing in                     6.7           ...        ...         6.7
   (percent of potential GDP)                         [12.0]       [20.5]         [5.9]      [5.2]       12 months or less (percent of GDP)                 [7.7]         [...]      [...]       [7.7]
Fiscal balance                                           -2.4         -4.4         -0.9       -2.3
   (percent of GDP)                                   [13.5]       [22.7]         [7.4]      [7.2]    External and private sector debt
General government gross debt                          497.0        588.0        588.8      371.4     Total external debt stocks                             99.1       74.7       97.4      119.6
   (percent of average tax revenues)               [1,171.8]    [1,274.8]    [1,559.5]    [561.6]        (percent of GDP)                                 [303.3]     [91.6]    [255.2]    [423.3]
Fiscal balance                                           -9.9       -56.7          16.8        0.5    External debt in foreign currency                      80.6       95.0       86.5       78.0
   (percent of average tax revenues)                 [364.8]      [532.2]      [276.6]    [268.9]        (percent of total) 1/                             [24.8]     [10.6]     [20.3]     [26.1]
Sustainability gap, fiscal balance                        1.3         -0.2          3.8        0.3    Private external debt stocks                           52.4        9.6       49.2       88.7
   (percent of GDP)                                   [14.7]       [23.5]         [9.0]      [9.2]       (percent of GDP)                                 [297.0]     [19.4]    [253.7]    [417.7]
Sustainability gap, primary balance, country-             0.2          0.5          1.2       -1.0    Domestic credit to private sector                      43.8       35.9       41.6       53.8
   specific conditions (percent of GDP)                 [4.6]        [4.4]        [4.6]      [4.4]       (percent of GDP)                                  [40.6]     [34.9]     [39.9]     [44.3]
Sustainability gap, primary balance, historical           0.4          0.7          1.5       -0.8    Short-term external debt stocks                        16.2       12.0       17.2       18.9
   conditions (percent of GDP)                          [4.6]        [4.3]        [4.6]      [4.4]       (percent of total)                                [16.5]     [13.4]     [17.4]     [17.2]
Sustainability gap, primary balance, current              0.0         -0.6          2.0       -1.4    Short-term external debt stocks                     1,943.1    1,594.2    2,890.9    1,423.5
   conditions (percent of GDP)                          [6.3]        [5.5]        [6.1]      [6.3]       (percent of reserves)                         [20,394.1] [15,665.6] [29,896.7] [12,215.7]
Sustainability gap, primary balance, stressed            -4.8         -4.0         -3.8       -6.1    Total external debt stocks                          5,256.2    5,711.2    6,020.9    4,263.9
   conditions (percent of GDP)                          [5.4]        [4.8]        [5.2]      [5.7]       (percent of reserves)                         [42,359.2] [37,649.0] [55,484.4] [31,893.3]
Sustainability gap, primary balance, benign               2.6          2.8          3.8        1.5    Total external debt stocks                          7,929.0 11,641.0      7,287.6    5,571.7
   conditions (percent of GDP)                          [5.2]        [4.8]        [5.3]      [5.2]       (percent of reserves excluding gold)          [59,726.6] [74,895.0] [65,684.4] [36,627.3]

Balance sheet composition                                                                             Market perception
General government debt in foreign currency             26.8         10.6         12.9       33.5     5-year sovereign CDS spreads                          461.4        822.9      193.6        566.7
  (percent of total)                                  [29.7]       [13.2]       [23.2]     [30.7]        (basis points)                                 [2,962.0]    [1,491.9]    [304.6]    [3,717.1]
Debt securities held by nonresidents                     3.2           ...         3.3        3.1     Foreign currency long-term sovereign debt               13.1         14.8       12.9         12.5
  (percent of total)                                   [3.6]         [...]       [4.0]      [3.3]        ratings (index ranging from 1 to 21 [best])         [5.2]        [4.8]      [5.3]        [5.1]
General government debt held by nonresidents            40.7         22.6         39.0       42.6
  (percent of total)                                  [21.6]       [10.1]       [21.5]     [21.7]

Note: Simple averages. Standard deviations are presented in bracket. 1/ Only six data points are available in 1990s.




                                                                                                     30
                                                   Table 5. Descriptive statistics of fiscal space, advanced economies
Advanced economies                                Full period    1990s     2000-07    2008-16     Advanced economies                               Full period     1990s      2000-07    2008-16
Government debt sustainability                                                                    Balance sheet composition (continued)
General government gross debt                            58.4       57.1       50.2       66.5    Concessional external debt stocks                        ...          ...        ...          ...
   (percent of GDP)                                   [38.1]     [30.6]     [34.3]     [44.5]        (percent of general government gross debt)          [...]        [...]      [...]        [...]
Primary balance                                           0.1        0.6        1.2       -1.2    Sovereign debt average maturity                         7.4          7.2        7.1          7.6
   (percent of GDP)                                     [4.0]      [4.2]      [3.3]      [4.0]       (years) 1/                                         [2.3]        [1.5]      [1.9]        [2.5]
Cyclically-adjusted balance                              -1.7       -2.0       -0.9       -2.1    Central government debt maturing in                    11.0           ...        ...        11.0
   (percent of potential GDP)                           [4.5]      [4.8]      [4.0]      [4.6]       12 months or less (percent of GDP)                 [9.8]         [...]      [...]       [9.8]
Fiscal balance                                           -1.5       -2.3       -0.2       -1.9
   (percent of GDP)                                     [5.2]      [4.9]      [4.3]      [5.8]    External and private sector debt
General government gross debt                          251.9      234.4      218.9      294.7     Total external debt stocks                            326.2         81.6       258.0      381.5
   (percent of average tax revenues)                 [199.5]    [140.4]    [183.5]    [242.2]        (percent of GDP)                                 [750.8]       [48.0]     [580.4]    [853.2]
Fiscal balance                                           -6.2       -7.8       -1.9       -8.5    External debt in foreign currency                      51.2         90.0        68.9       42.3
   (percent of average tax revenues)                  [23.8]     [26.7]     [19.0]     [24.7]        (percent of total) 1/                             [31.5]       [14.5]      [30.6]     [28.1]
Sustainability gap, fiscal balance                        1.0        0.9        3.2       -0.7    Private external debt stocks                          293.8         65.9       236.6      341.2
   (percent of GDP)                                     [6.5]      [5.8]      [5.5]      [7.3]       (percent of GDP)                                 [745.1]       [49.3]     [582.9]    [844.9]
Sustainability gap, primary balance, country-             0.2        0.6        1.3       -1.1    Domestic credit to private sector                      96.6         79.4        96.1      114.9
   specific conditions (percent of GDP)                 [4.1]      [4.4]      [3.4]      [4.1]       (percent of GDP)                                  [46.2]       [38.2]      [45.7]     [47.4]
Sustainability gap, primary balance, historical           0.4        0.7        1.5       -0.9    Short-term external debt stocks                        40.8         37.9        42.5       39.9
   conditions (percent of GDP)                          [4.1]      [4.3]      [3.4]      [4.1]       (percent of total)                                [16.5]       [17.9]      [17.7]     [15.6]
Sustainability gap, primary balance, current             -0.1       -0.7        2.3       -1.8    Short-term external debt stocks                     7,898.5        637.1 11,329.6       6,059.2
   conditions (percent of GDP)                          [5.4]      [4.5]      [4.2]      [6.1]       (percent of reserves)                         [39,278.9]    [1,504.9] [55,473.8] [25,133.2]
Sustainability gap, primary balance, stressed            -3.1       -2.7       -2.1       -4.4    Total external debt stocks                         18,563.4      1,210.2 21,566.1 17,482.6
   conditions (percent of GDP)                          [4.3]      [4.4]      [3.7]      [4.3]       (percent of reserves)                         [79,033.2]    [1,910.6] [99,097.8] [65,348.9]
Sustainability gap, primary balance, benign               2.3        2.6        3.4        1.0    Total external debt stocks                         24,579.6      1,424.9 28,601.6 23,127.5
   conditions (percent of GDP)                          [4.2]      [4.4]      [3.4]      [4.2]       (percent of reserves excluding gold)          [98,018.7]    [2,251.9] [129,324.5] [74,378.9]

Balance sheet composition                                                                         Market perception
General government debt in foreign currency              7.4        8.6        6.6        7.7     5-year sovereign CDS spreads                          257.5       190.4        13.7        346.5
  (percent of total)                                  [14.7]     [11.4]     [13.1]     [16.5]        (basis points) 1/                              [2,725.8]     [222.6]      [21.0]    [3,201.2]
Debt securities held by nonresidents                     3.9         ...       4.1        3.8     Foreign currency long-term sovereign debt               18.4        18.4       18.7          18.0
  (percent of total)                                   [3.8]       [...]     [4.3]      [3.4]        ratings (index ranging from 1 to 21 [best])         [3.1]       [2.9]      [2.6]         [3.7]
General government debt held by nonresidents            39.7       24.3       38.2       42.7
  (percent of total)                                  [20.8]      [9.4]     [20.4]     [21.2]

Note: Simple averages. Standard deviations are presented in bracket. 1/ Less than 10 data points are available in 1990s.




                                                                                                 31
                                                            Table 6. Descriptive statistics of fiscal space, EMDEs
EMDEs                                             Full period      1990s     2000-07      2008-16     EMDEs                                            Full period      1990s     2000-07    2008-16
Government debt sustainability                                                                        Balance sheet composition (continued)
General government gross debt                            57.9         65.6         68.6       45.6    Concessional external debt stocks                      37.1         38.5       39.8         33.9
   (percent of GDP)                                   [52.4]       [47.2]       [69.9]     [30.5]        (percent of general government gross debt)        [26.7]       [25.3]     [27.7]       [26.1]
Primary balance                                          -0.9         -2.8          0.8       -1.2    Sovereign debt average maturity                        10.2         12.9       10.2          9.6
   (percent of GDP)                                   [14.8]       [26.1]         [7.3]      [6.6]       (years)                                            [5.1]        [5.5]      [5.4]        [4.7]
Cyclically-adjusted balance                              -2.8         -4.8         -1.2       -2.7    Central government debt maturing in                     5.2           ...        ...         5.2
   (percent of potential GDP)                         [13.5]       [23.7]         [6.3]      [5.4]       12 months or less (percent of GDP)                 [6.1]         [...]      [...]       [6.1]
Fiscal balance                                           -2.6         -5.0         -1.0       -2.4
   (percent of GDP)                                   [14.9]       [25.6]         [8.0]      [7.5]    External and private sector debt
General government gross debt                          568.0        746.7        683.1      390.5     Total external debt stocks                             61.8        74.6      64.9           46.2
   (percent of average tax revenues)               [1,318.0]    [1,505.1]    [1,732.1]    [614.3]        (percent of GDP)                                  [69.0]     [92.0]     [64.1]         [35.2]
Fiscal balance                                         -10.9        -70.9          21.5        2.7    External debt in foreign currency                      89.6      100.0       91.7           88.6
   (percent of average tax revenues)                 [409.2]      [603.5]      [308.7]    [300.1]        (percent of total) 1/                             [12.6]       [0.0]    [11.8]         [12.9]
Sustainability gap, fiscal balance                        1.4         -0.5          3.9        0.5    Private external debt stocks                           12.7         8.8      11.3           17.9
   (percent of GDP)                                   [16.1]       [26.5]         [9.6]      [9.6]       (percent of GDP)                                  [22.6]     [17.6]     [18.1]         [28.9]
Sustainability gap, primary balance, country-             0.1          0.5          1.2       -1.0    Domestic credit to private sector                      30.4        24.4      28.0           38.4
   specific conditions (percent of GDP)                 [4.8]        [4.4]        [5.1]      [4.6]       (percent of GDP)                                  [25.1]     [22.9]     [23.4]         [26.6]
Sustainability gap, primary balance, historical           0.4          0.7          1.5       -0.8    Short-term external debt stocks                        12.3        11.6      12.1           13.1
   conditions (percent of GDP)                          [4.8]        [4.3]        [5.1]      [4.6]       (percent of total)                                [12.5]     [13.0]     [12.1]         [12.5]
Sustainability gap, primary balance, current              0.0         -0.5          1.8       -1.2    Short-term external debt stocks                       923.1    1,607.8    1,123.2           64.2
   conditions (percent of GDP)                          [6.8]        [6.8]        [7.0]      [6.4]       (percent of reserves)                         [14,704.6] [15,775.1] [20,521.3]        [236.7]
Sustainability gap, primary balance, stressed            -5.6         -4.7         -4.7       -7.0    Total external debt stocks                          2,977.7    5,775.1    2,764.6          391.3
   conditions (percent of GDP)                          [5.7]        [4.9]        [5.6]      [6.0]       (percent of reserves)                         [31,595.7] [37,910.9] [40,172.7]        [986.4]
Sustainability gap, primary balance, benign               2.8          2.8          4.0        1.8    Total external debt stocks                          5,078.9 11,785.8      2,822.9          428.6
   conditions (percent of GDP)                          [5.7]        [5.0]        [6.1]      [5.6]       (percent of reserves excluding gold)          [49,804.9] [75,414.2] [40,180.3]      [1,034.6]

Balance sheet composition                                                                             Market perception
General government debt in foreign currency             50.2         26.2         46.4       51.1     5-year sovereign CDS spreads                          585.0        903.7      272.4        739.4
  (percent of total) 1/                               [26.1]       [17.6]       [34.4]     [25.3]        (basis points)                                 [3,092.2]    [1,565.8]    [336.0]    [4,072.7]
Debt securities held by nonresidents                     1.0           ...         0.7        1.2     Foreign currency long-term sovereign debt               10.2         10.8       10.0         10.2
  (percent of total)                                   [1.3]         [...]       [0.8]      [1.5]        ratings (index ranging from 1 to 21 [best])         [3.6]        [2.9]      [3.6]        [3.8]
General government debt held by nonresidents            41.7         10.4         40.2       42.6
  (percent of total) 1/                               [22.4]        [5.6]       [23.3]     [22.0]

Note: Simple averages. Standard deviations are presented in bracket. 1/ Less than 10 data points are available in 1990s.




                                                                                                     32
                                  SUPPLEMENTARY APPENDIX

                     Cross-Country Database of Fiscal Space
                   A Cross-

        M. Ayhan Kose, Sergio Kurlat, Franziska Ohnsorge, and Naotaka Sugawara∗



                                                      August 2017
                                                      August


This appendix contains:
    Table A1.         Select studies on fiscal databases
    Table A2.         Derivation of nominal long-term interest rate
    Table A3.         Correlation coefficients among indicators of fiscal space for all countries (A),
                      advanced economies (B) and emerging market and developing economies
                      (EMDEs) (C).
    Table   A4.       Volatility of fiscal space indicators
    Table   A5.       Changes in fiscal space, share of countries, all countries
    Table   A6.       Changes in fiscal space, share of countries, advanced economies
    Table   A7.       Changes in fiscal space, share of countries, EMDEs
    Table   A8.       List of crisis episodes
    Table   A9.       Changes in fiscal space during financial crises, before vs after
    Table   A10.      Changes in fiscal space, pre-crisis vs current period
    Table   A11.      Changes in fiscal space over oil price plunges




∗
  Kose (Development Prospects Group, World Bank; Brookings Institution; CEPR; CAMA; akose@worldbank.org); Ohnsorge
(Development Prospects Group, World Bank; CAMA; fohnsorge@worldbank.org); Sugawara (Development Prospects Group,
World Bank; nsugawara@worldbank.org). Kurlat was a consultant at the Development Prospects Group when the early
analysis was conducted for this study. We would like to thank Carlos Arteta, Eduardo Borenzstein, Kevin Clinton, Raphael
Espinoza, Raju Huidrom, Anna Ivanova, Ugo Panizza, Evis Rucaj, Marc Stocker, Carlos Végh, Dana Vorisek and seminar
participants at the World Bank for valuable comments, and Graeme Littler and Praveen Penmetsa for developing the database
web interface. Xinghao Gong provided excellent research assistance. The findings, interpretations and conclusions expressed
in this paper are entirely those of the authors and should not be attributed to the World Bank, its Executive Directors, or the
countries they represent. The database is available at: http://www.worldbank.org/en/research/brief/fiscal-space.



                                                             33
                                Table A1. Select studies on fiscal databases
                                                    Coverage
                                          Country       Period         Indicators of fiscal space
Abbas et al. (2011)                    178 AE/EMDE 1692-2012           Central/General government debt
[Fall 2013 version]
Abbas and Christensen (2010)            93 LIC/EM       1975-2004      Central government domestic debt
Arslanalp and Tsuda (2014a)             24 AE           2004Q1-2016Q4 General government debt 1/
[April 2017 version]
Arslanalp and Tsuda (2014b)             24 EM           2004Q1-2016Q4 General government debt 1/
[April 2017 version]
Bova et al. (2016)                      34 AE           1990-2014      Contingent liability realizations
                                        46 EM
Bua, Pradelli, and Presbitero (2014)    40 LIC/LMC      1971-2011      Central government debt 1/
Ilzetzki, Mendoza, and Végh (2013)      20 AE           1960Q1-2007Q4 Government consumption;
                                        24 EMDE                        Government investment
Cowan et al. (2006)                     30 AE/EMDE 1980-2006           Central government debt 1/
Jaimovich and Panizza (2010)           140 AE/EMDE 1970-2005           Central government debt
Jeanne and Guscina (2006)               19 EM           1980-2002      Central government debt 1/
Mansour (2014)                          41 Africa       1980-2010      Tax revenues 1/
Mauro et al. (2015)                     24 AE           1800-2011      Government debt; Revenues;
                                        31 EMDE                         Expenditure; Primary balance
Panizza (2008)                         130 AE/EMDE 1990-2007           Central/General government debt
Prichard, Cobham, and Goodall (2014) 204 AE/EMDE 1980-2013             Central/General government revenues 1/
[May 2016 update]
Reinhart and Rogoff (2011)              64 AE/EMDE 1791-2010           Revenues; Central government debt 1/
Note: AE, EM, EMDE, LIC and LMC refer to advanced economies, emerging markets, emerging market and
developing economies, low income countries and lower-middle income countries, respectively.
1/ The database contains detailed information (e.g., composition and structure) of fiscal indicators.




                                                        34
                                                       long-term interest rate
                      Table A2. Derivation of nominal long-
 10-year government bond yield       Australia; Austria; Bangladesh; Belgium; Botswana; Bulgaria;
 (51)                                Canada; Cyprus; Czech Republic; Denmark; Estonia; Fiji;
                                     Finland; France; Germany; Greece; Hong Kong SAR, China;
                                     Hungary; Iceland; India; Indonesia; Ireland; Israel; Italy;
                                     Japan; Korea, Rep.; Latvia; Lithuania; Luxembourg;
                                     Malaysia; Malta; Morocco; Myanmar; Nepal; Netherlands;
                                     New Zealand; Norway; Portugal; Romania; Saudi Arabia;
                                     Singapore; Slovak Republic; Slovenia; South Africa; Spain;
                                     Sweden; Switzerland; Thailand; United Kingdom; United
                                     States; Vanuatu
 10-year government bond yield,      Brazil; China; Colombia; Croatia; Egypt, Arab Rep.; Georgia;
 extended by U.S. 10-year            Mexico; Pakistan; Peru; Philippines; Poland; Russian
 government bond yield plus actual Federation; Sri Lanka; Turkey; Ukraine; Vietnam
 J.P. Morgan EMBI Global
 stripped spread (16)
 U.S. 10-year government bond        Algeria; Argentina; Armenia; Belarus; Belize; Chile; Cote
 yield plus actual J.P. Morgan       d’Ivoire; Dominican Republic; Ecuador; El Salvador; Gabon;
 EMBI Global stripped spread (23) Ghana; Iraq; Jamaica; Kazakhstan; Lebanon; Nigeria;
                                     Panama; Serbia; Trinidad & Tobago; Tunisia; Uruguay;
                                     Venezuela, RB
 U.S. 10-year government bond        Angola; Azerbaijan; Bolivia; Cameroon; Costa Rica; Ethiopia;
 yield plus estimated J.P. Morgan    Guatemala; Honduras; Jordan; Kenya; Mongolia;
 EMBI Global stripped spread (17) Mozambique; Namibia; Paraguay; Senegal; Tanzania; Zambia
Note: The number of countries is in parenthesis. The derivation of the nominal long-term interest rate differs across
countries because of data constraints. First, it is proxied by the 10-year government bond yield for a group of 51
economies that have data available over a reasonably long period. Specifically, the 10-year bond yield is used for
countries for which yield data have more observations than J.P. Morgan’s EMBI Global Stripped Spread. Because of
data availability, data on 5-year government bond yields are used in Fiji, Myanmar, and Nepal, and government bond
yields for Estonia cover those over 5 years. Second, there are 16 countries with an insufficient number of observations;
for them, the 10-year bond yield is extended using the sum of available U.S. government bond yields and EMBI spreads,
since the stripped spread is the spread over U.S. Treasury bond stripped of its collateralized flows (Kim 2014). Finally,
for those countries without any 10-year bond yield data, the long-term interest rate is proxied by the sum of the U.S.
10-year government bond yield and each country’s EMBI Global Stripped Spread. The actual EMBI spread series is
used for the 23 countries that have EMBI data over a long period. For 17 countries with limited availability of EMBI
data, the spread is estimated as the predicted value from a fixed-effects linear regression of EMBI Global Stripped
Spread on the Economist Intelligence Unit (EIU) country risk scores, using the EMDE sample. Predicted J.P. Morgan
EMBI Global stripped spread is obtained in the following fixed-effects model: EMBI spread (in percent) = -15.88 +
0.413 [EIU country risk score] + u + ε, where u and ε are country fixed-effects and residuals, respectively. R2 is 0.23
and both coefficients are found to be statistically significant at the 1 percent level. The estimation is based on 758
observations and 62 EMDEs where data are available over the period of 1997-2016.




                                                           35
                                                                                        Table A3.A. Correlations among indicators of fiscal space, all countries
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Short-              Total
                                                                                                                                Sustainability                                                             General                                                     Central   Total                               Short-term term      Total    external              Foreign
                                                                                               General   Fiscal                 gap, primary Sustainability Sustainability Sustainability Sustainability government   Debt        General                  Sovereign government external External Private Domestic external external external debt stocks 5-year        currency
                                                  General               Cyclically-          government balance / Sustainability balance, gap, primary gap, primary gap, primary gap, primary              debt in  securities government Concessional       debt debt maturing debt      debt in external credit to    debt      debt     debt   / reserves sovereign long-term
                                                government   Primary    adjusted    Fiscal    debt / tax   tax     gap, fiscal    country-     balance,       balance,       balance,       balance,       foreign   held by    debt held by external debt average in 12 months stocks / foreign    debt    private   stocks /  stocks / stocks / excluding    CDS     sovereign
                                                debt / GDP   balance     balance balance      revenues revenues     balance       specific     historical     current        stressed        benign       currency nonresidents nonresidents    stocks      maturity   or less   GDP currency stocks        sector      total  reserves reserves      gold    spreads debt ratings
General government gross debt                      1.00
 (percent of GDP)                                 [3,647]
Primary balance                                  0.30***      1.00
 (percent of GDP)                                [3,488]     [4,107]
Cyclically-adjusted balance                      0.27***     0.81***      1.00
 (percent of potential GDP)                      [3,012]     [3,473]     [3,536]
Fiscal balance                                   0.28***     0.87***    0.97***     1.00
  (percent of GDP)                               [3,566]     [4,095]    [3,535]    [4,286]
General government gross debt                    0.80***     0.22***    0.20***    0.25***      1.00
 (percent of average tax revenues)               [3,572]     [3,469]    [3,026]    [3,539]     [3,613]
Fiscal balance                                   0.18***     0.65***    0.72***    0.71***    0.25***      1.00
  (percent of average tax revenues)              [3,518]     [4,034]    [3,505]    [4,201]    [3,541]     [4,254]
Sustainability gap, fiscal balance               0.45***     0.70***    0.75***    0.80***    0.37***     0.58***      1.00
 (percent of GDP)                                [3,568]     [4,066]    [3,517]    [4,236]    [3,543]     [4,182]     [4,266]
Sustainability gap, primary balance, country-    0.38***     0.86***    0.70***    0.73***    0.26***     0.51***     0.66***       1.00
 specific conditions (percent of GDP)            [2,120]     [2,427]    [2,350]    [2,425]    [2,119]     [2,412]     [2,417]      [2,427]
Sustainability gap, primary balance              0.37***     0.88***    0.71***    0.74***    0.26***     0.52***     0.67***     0.97***        1.00
 historical conditions (percent of GDP)          [2,120]     [2,428]    [2,350]    [2,425]    [2,118]     [2,412]     [2,418]     [2,423]       [2,428]
Sustainability gap, primary balance              0.51***     0.74***    0.57***    0.65***    0.37***     0.48***     0.87***     0.76***      0.77***        1.00
 current conditions (percent of GDP)             [1,826]     [1,921]    [1,863]    [1,919]    [1,825]     [1,913]     [1,920]     [1,912]      [1,912]       [1,921]
Sustainability gap, primary balance              0.28***     0.74***    0.58***    0.60***    0.19***     0.42***     0.45***     0.71***      0.71***      0.59***        1.00
 stressed conditions (percent of GDP)            [2,109]     [2,424]    [2,343]    [2,419]    [2,107]     [2,410]     [2,414]     [2,399]      [2,399]      [1,893]       [2,426]
Sustainability gap, primary balance              0.34***     0.80***    0.63***    0.66***    0.24***     0.47***     0.62***     0.90***      0.92***      0.70***      0.53***        1.00
 benign conditions (percent of GDP)              [2,123]     [2,427]    [2,347]    [2,424]    [2,120]     [2,409]     [2,418]     [2,415]      [2,417]      [1,909]      [2,390]       [2,427]
General government debt in foreign                 0.07       -0.05        0.06     0.08*        0.06     -0.13***    0.11**      -0.22***     -0.22***      -0.09*      -0.21***     -0.21***       1.00
 currency (percent of total)                      [420]       [424]       [416]     [424]       [421]       [424]      [422]        [361]        [360]        [351]        [359]        [360]       [435]
Debt securities held by nonresidents              -0.07*     0.08**     0.12***    0.11***      -0.04     0.11***       0.00         0.02        -0.02         0.01      0.18***      -0.09**      -0.30***       1.00
 (percent of total)                                [622]      [617]      [620]      [624]       [620]      [617]       [621]        [610]        [609]        [594]       [608]        [615]         [184]       [626]
General government debt held by                   -0.04        0.01        0.04      0.06       -0.01       0.04        0.01       -0.06*       -0.07**       -0.04      -0.12***      -0.07*      0.58***        0.07         1.00
 nonresidents (percent of total)                  [863]       [868]       [863]     [868]       [866]      [869]       [866]        [800]        [798]        [786]        [785]        [802]       [411]        [462]        [875]
Concessional external debt stocks                0.10***     -0.12***     0.02      0.03      0.09***      0.00        -0.01      -0.17***     -0.24***     -0.17***       0.01       -0.30***     0.64***       -0.17       0.52***       1.00
 (percent of general government gross debt)      [2,005]      [2,082]    [1,810]   [2,121]    [2,018]     [2,124]     [2,120]      [1,141]      [1,142]       [905]       [1,136]      [1,136]      [156]         [82]        [305]       [2,165]
Sovereign debt average maturity                  0.18***     0.16***      0.05      0.06*     0.15***     0.08***     0.13***     0.15***      0.14***      0.13***        -0.03      0.19***       0.15**      -0.12**       -0.01      -0.33***      1.00
 (years)                                         [1,037]     [1,066]     [1,048]   [1,074]    [1,035]     [1,069]     [1,072]     [1,060]      [1,059]      [1,031]       [1,043]     [1,060]        [237]       [402]        [586]        [574]      [1,108]
Central government debt maturing in               -0.07*       0.03     -0.12*** -0.12***       -0.06     -0.08**    -0.15***       -0.04        -0.06        -0.02      0.16***      -0.09**      -0.38***     0.23***     -0.18***     -0.20***    -0.10**       1.00
 12 months or less (percent of GDP)                [774]      [766]       [700]    [774]        [761]      [753]       [769]        [547]        [547]        [534]       [542]        [548]         [209]       [238]        [382]        [386]      [425]       [779]
Total external debt stocks                         -0.01     0.05***    0.05***    0.03**      0.04**      0.03*     -0.08***       0.01         0.01         -0.01      0.13***        -0.02      -0.43***     0.50***      0.19***      0.14***    -0.11***    0.37***      1.00
 (percent of GDP)                                 [2,730]    [3,138]    [2,794]    [3,212]     [2,748]    [3,227]     [3,210]      [1,929]      [1,929]      [1,538]     [1,928]       [1,924]       [360]       [544]        [767]       [2,139]     [1,025]     [663]      [3,651]
External debt in foreign currency                  0.08        0.07        0.03      0.03        0.05      -0.01      0.16***      0.13**       0.12**         0.08       -0.11*       0.14**      0.63***      -0.48***       0.05       0.33***    0.23***     -0.25***   -0.28***    1.00
 (percent of total)                               [376]       [379]       [379]     [379]       [378]      [379]       [379]        [349]        [349]        [338]        [337]        [349]        [99]         [146]       [287]        [189]      [269]        [194]      [382]    [382]
Private external debt stocks                     -0.09***    0.06***    0.14***    0.12***    -0.08***    0.17***      -0.03        0.03         0.02         0.03       0.15***        -0.01      -0.39***     0.51***      0.07**      -0.17***    -0.12***    0.33***    0.91*** -0.21***     1.00
 (percent of GDP)                                 [2,090]    [2,333]    [2,166]    [2,389]     [2,090]    [2,386]     [2,385]      [1,788]      [1,786]      [1,435]     [1,778]       [1,784]       [341]       [543]        [753]       [1,506]      [998]      [562]     [2,681]   [382]     [2,713]
Domestic credit to private sector                -0.20***     0.02      0.05***    0.03**     -0.15***    0.05***    -0.12***      -0.05**     -0.06***     -0.05**      0.20***      -0.11***     -0.61***     0.34***     -0.25***     -0.36***    -0.32***    0.22***    0.30*** -0.35***    0.54***     1.00
 (percent of GDP)                                 [3,409]    [3,858]    [3,365]    [3,982]     [3,392]    [3,950]     [3,966]      [2,348]      [2,351]     [1,860]      [2,348]       [2,350]       [418]       [588]        [847]       [2,078]     [1,083]     [740]     [3,426]   [379]     [2,550]    [4,543]
Short-term external debt stocks                  -0.10***     0.01        0.03     0.05***    -0.06***    0.08***      -0.02       -0.05**      -0.04*        0.01        0.05**       -0.04*      -0.49***     0.29***     -0.22***     -0.39***    -0.15***    0.26***    0.33*** -0.35***    0.47***   0.58***     1.00
 (percent of total)                               [2,678]    [3,082]     [2,749]   [3,143]     [2,698]    [3,157]     [3,137]      [1,929]      [1,928]      [1,532]      [1,927]      [1,924]       [357]       [547]        [778]       [2,104]     [1,015]     [646]     [3,500]   [380]     [2,626]   [3,359]    [3,626]
Short-term external debt stocks                    -0.03      -0.01     -0.06***   -0.03*       0.00      -0.04**    -0.07***      -0.04*       -0.05**       -0.03        0.04       -0.07***     -0.40***     0.39***        0.00       -0.05**      -0.01       0.06     0.45*** -0.66***    0.40***   0.18***    0.28***     1.00
 (percent of reserves)                            [2,597]    [3,007]     [2,684]   [3,046]     [2,617]    [3,059]     [3,043]      [1,927]      [1,926]      [1,530]      [1,928]      [1,922]       [362]       [555]        [771]       [2,014]     [1,011]     [637]     [3,409]   [382]     [2,562]   [3,312]    [3,418]    [3,451]
Total external debt stocks                         -0.01      0.00      -0.08*** -0.05***       0.00      -0.09***   -0.06***       -0.02        -0.03        -0.01        0.01       -0.05**      -0.49***     0.23***       0.07*        0.01        -0.04       0.06     0.31*** -0.72***    0.16***    0.04**    0.12***    0.83***    1.00
 (percent of reserves)                            [2,660]    [3,063]     [2,726]  [3,119]      [2,678]     [3,133]    [3,116]      [1,927]      [1,927]      [1,537]      [1,921]     [1,922]        [367]       [553]        [775]       [2,050]     [1,022]     [664]     [3,492]   [382]     [2,587]    [3,387]   [3,384]    [3,414]   [3,528]
Total external debt stocks                       -0.06***    -0.06*** -0.09*** -0.09***        -0.03*     -0.12***   -0.11***     -0.08***     -0.07***     -0.07***     -0.05**      -0.08***     -0.53***     0.14***      0.13***       -0.01     -0.08**       0.03     0.42*** -0.71***    0.34***   0.16***    0.15***    0.69***   0.86***    1.00
 (percent of reserves excluding gold)             [2,664]     [3,068]  [2,731]  [3,124]        [2,682]     [3,139]    [3,121]      [1,932]      [1,931]      [1,542]     [1,926]       [1,927]       [367]       [559]        [782]       [2,046]    [1,028]      [669]     [3,483]   [382]     [2,577]   [3,387]    [3,383]    [3,403]   [3,515]   [3,527]
5-year sovereign CDS spreads                     -0.11***    -0.07**    -0.13*** -0.20***     -0.13***    -0.13***   -0.19***        0.01         0.01      -0.17***     -0.32***       0.05       0.37***      -0.15***     0.13***      -0.10**    0.26***     0.15***    -0.09*** 0.30***    -0.16*** -0.30***    -0.21***   -0.08**    -0.05      0.00      1.00
  (basis points)                                   [881]      [892]       [865]    [902]        [870]       [887]      [899]        [859]        [857]        [814]        [840]       [859]        [205]         [437]       [566]        [382]      [702]       [355]       [829]   [271]       [822]    [883]       [828]     [826]     [830]     [835]     [910]
Foreign currency long-term sovereign debt        -0.07***    0.08***    0.13***    0.18***      0.01      0.17***     0.05***        0.04*       0.04*        0.03       0.23***        0.00       -0.69***     0.37***     -0.24***     -0.44***    -0.18***      0.06     0.30*** -0.61***    0.39***   0.61***    0.54***    0.26***   0.19***   0.18***   -0.58***    1.00
 ratings (index)                                  [2,064]    [2,154]    [2,027]    [2,216]     [2,037]    [2,176]      [2,207]      [1,683]     [1,686]      [1,448]      [1,677]      [1,685]       [339]       [449]        [672]       [1,110]      [903]      [601]     [1,713]   [322]     [1,547]   [2,273]    [1,678]    [1,652]   [1,698]   [1,702]     [810]    [2,426]
                                                                                                                     -0.117***    -0.114***   -0.114***    -0.290***    -0.402***    -0.402***

Note: *, ** and *** denote statistical significance at the 10 percent, 5 percent and 1 percent levels, respectively. The number of observations is presented in bracket below the
corresponding coefficient. Observations smaller than the 1st percentile and larger than the 99th percentile are excluded. Due to the potential trends in the level, indicators of
government debt level (percent of GDP and percent of tax revenues) are first difference series and multiplied by negative one to make it in line with fiscal and primary balances.




                                                                                                                                                                                       36
                                                                              Table A3.B. Correlations among indicators of fiscal space, advanced economies
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Short-              Total
                                                                                                                                Sustainability                                                             General                                                     Central   Total                               Short-term term      Total    external              Foreign
                                                                                               General   Fiscal                 gap, primary Sustainability Sustainability Sustainability Sustainability government   Debt        General                  Sovereign government external External Private Domestic external external external debt stocks 5-year        currency
                                                  General               Cyclically-          government balance / Sustainability balance, gap, primary gap, primary gap, primary gap, primary              debt in  securities government Concessional       debt debt maturing debt      debt in external credit to    debt      debt     debt   / reserves sovereign long-term
                                                government   Primary    adjusted    Fiscal    debt / tax   tax     gap, fiscal    country-     balance,       balance,       balance,       balance,       foreign   held by    debt held by external debt average in 12 months stocks / foreign    debt    private   stocks /  stocks / stocks / excluding    CDS     sovereign
                                                debt / GDP   balance     balance balance      revenues revenues     balance       specific     historical     current        stressed        benign       currency nonresidents nonresidents    stocks      maturity   or less   GDP currency stocks        sector      total  reserves reserves      gold    spreads debt ratings
General government gross debt                      1.00
 (percent of GDP)                                 [826]
Primary balance                                  0.55***       1.00
 (percent of GDP)                                 [789]       [834]
Cyclically-adjusted balance                      0.34***     0.77***       1.00
 (percent of potential GDP)                       [784]       [814]       [848]
Fiscal balance                                   0.41***     0.82***    0.96***      1.00
  (percent of GDP)                                [804]       [832]      [844]      [879]
General government gross debt                    0.97***     0.54***    0.37***    0.41***       1.00
 (percent of average tax revenues)                [811]       [784]      [784]      [798]       [815]
Fiscal balance                                   0.38***     0.80***    0.93***    0.96***    0.42***       1.00
  (percent of average tax revenues)               [797]       [825]      [842]      [869]      [797]       [876]
Sustainability gap, fiscal balance               0.50***     0.77***    0.81***    0.89***    0.50***     0.86***       1.00
 (percent of GDP)                                 [805]       [829]      [841]      [869]      [800]       [864]       [876]
Sustainability gap, primary balance, country-    0.54***     0.98***    0.79***    0.83***    0.55***     0.82***     0.81***        1.00
 specific conditions (percent of GDP)             [773]       [816]      [813]      [815]      [773]       [813]       [814]        [818]
Sustainability gap, primary balance              0.53***     0.97***    0.79***    0.83***    0.54***     0.81***     0.82***     0.99***         1.00
 historical conditions (percent of GDP)           [774]       [817]      [814]      [816]      [774]       [813]       [815]       [818]         [819]
Sustainability gap, primary balance              0.71***     0.85***    0.65***    0.76***    0.70***     0.74***     0.90***     0.86***      0.87***         1.00
 current conditions (percent of GDP)              [732]       [760]      [759]      [759]      [731]       [759]       [761]       [760]        [760]         [765]
Sustainability gap, primary balance              0.52***     0.93***    0.76***    0.81***    0.51***     0.80***     0.74***     0.93***      0.90***      0.80***        1.00
 stressed conditions (percent of GDP)             [776]       [817]      [814]      [817]      [774]       [813]       [814]       [816]        [817]        [761]        [819]
Sustainability gap, primary balance              0.52***     0.94***    0.75***    0.79***    0.52***     0.76***     0.80***     0.96***      0.98***      0.85***      0.81***        1.00
 benign conditions (percent of GDP)               [773]       [816]      [813]      [814]      [773]       [811]       [813]       [816]        [817]        [760]        [815]        [818]
General government debt in foreign               0.19***       0.09      0.14**    0.18**      0.18**      0.16**     0.27***      0.17**      0.26***      0.21***       -0.10       0.35***        1.00
 currency (percent of total)                      [202]       [202]       [202]     [202]       [202]       [202]      [201]        [202]       [202]        [201]        [203]        [201]        [214]
Debt securities held by nonresidents               0.01      0.11**     0.15***    0.15***       0.02     0.18***       0.07         0.07         0.03         0.04      0.14***        0.00        -0.14*        1.00
 (percent of total)                               [452]       [451]      [457]      [456]       [451]      [460]       [455]        [451]        [451]        [443]       [452]        [451]         [159]       [464]
General government debt held by                  -0.13**      -0.05      -0.09*     -0.07     -0.11**      -0.04       -0.01        -0.06        -0.04        -0.07      -0.25***       0.07       0.26***       -0.01         1.00
 nonresidents (percent of total)                  [423]       [424]       [426]     [425]      [425]       [429]       [424]        [424]        [424]        [422]        [425]       [424]        [208]        [337]        [439]
Concessional external debt stocks                   …           …          …         …           …           …          …            …            …            …            …            …            …            …           …            …
 (percent of general government gross debt)        […]         […]        […]       […]         […]         […]        […]          […]          […]          […]          […]          […]          […]          […]         […]          […]
Sovereign debt average maturity                   -0.07      -0.26*** -0.36*** -0.34***         -0.04     -0.29***   -0.32***     -0.30***     -0.31***     -0.17***     -0.20***     -0.32***     -0.42***       0.06      -0.24***        …          1.00
 (years)                                          [292]        [291]    [292]    [292]          [293]       [296]      [292]        [291]        [291]        [284]        [292]        [291]        [119]       [266]        [277]        […]        [301]
Central government debt maturing in               -0.09        0.04       -0.02     -0.01       -0.09       0.09       -0.02         0.01        -0.01         0.03        0.05        -0.05       -0.44***      0.15*      -0.24***        …        0.27***       1.00
 12 months or less (percent of GDP)               [191]       [197]       [200]     [198]       [192]      [199]       [198]        [198]        [198]        [194]       [197]        [198]         [75]        [171]        [163]        […]        [127]       [200]
Total external debt stocks                        -0.02        0.06       0.09*    0.10**       -0.03      0.09**      0.08*        0.08*        0.07*         0.07       0.10**        0.06       -0.16**      0.28***       -0.01         …        0.16***      -0.04       1.00
 (percent of GDP)                                 [499]       [499]       [505]     [504]       [499]       [509]      [504]        [499]        [499]        [486]        [500]       [499]        [169]        [418]        [373]        […]        [284]       [198]      [515]
External debt in foreign currency                  0.04      0.50***    0.71***    0.68***      0.04      0.72***     0.56***     0.46***      0.39***      0.38***      0.70***        0.12         0.03        0.35**     -0.74***        …          0.01      -0.29**      0.13      1.00
 (percent of total)                                [89]        [89]       [89]       [89]       [89]        [89]        [89]        [89]         [89]         [87]         [89]         [89]         [26]         [46]         [78]        […]         [49]        [47]       [84]      [89]
Private external debt stocks                       0.00        0.07      0.11**    0.12***      -0.01     0.12***     0.11**       0.10**       0.09**       0.10**      0.12***       0.07*        -0.15*      0.28***       -0.07         …        0.16***      -0.04     1.00***   0.36***      1.00
 (percent of GDP)                                 [498]       [498]       [504]     [503]       [498]      [508]       [503]        [498]        [498]        [485]       [499]        [498]         [169]       [418]        [373]        […]        [283]       [198]      [514]      [83]      [514]
Domestic credit to private sector                -0.20***    -0.12***    0.08**      0.05     -0.23***      0.03     -0.09***     -0.13***     -0.18***     -0.17***      -0.01       -0.25***     -0.44***     0.15***     -0.31***        …         -0.08      0.34***      0.03    0.43***      0.03      1.00
 (percent of GDP)                                  [787]       [798]      [825]     [840]       [786]      [840]       [840]        [798]        [799]        [749]       [799]         [798]        [212]       [455]        [436]        […]        [300]       [194]      [503]      [89]      [502]     [922]
Short-term external debt stocks                   -0.03       -0.04        0.03      0.05       -0.02      0.11**       0.04        -0.03        -0.03         0.02        0.00        -0.06        0.17**      0.22***     -0.35***        …        0.21***     0.52***    0.18***   0.40***    0.20***   0.37***     1.00
 (percent of total)                               [500]       [500]       [504]     [504]       [500]       [508]      [504]        [500]        [500]        [488]       [501]        [500]         [169]       [413]        [377]        […]        [287]       [198]      [503]      [89]      [502]     [502]     [514]
Short-term external debt stocks                   -0.03        0.00        0.05      0.04       -0.03       0.02        0.01         0.01         0.02         0.00        0.01         0.03        -0.09       0.14***       -0.01         …          0.09      -0.16**    0.76*** -0.55***     0.75***     0.01      0.02      1.00
 (percent of reserves)                            [499]       [499]       [504]     [503]       [499]      [508]       [503]        [499]        [499]        [486]       [500]        [499]        [167]        [420]        [377]        […]        [287]       [197]      [504]    [86]        [503]     [502]     [504]     [514]
Total external debt stocks                        -0.03        0.00        0.03      0.04       -0.05       0.01        0.02         0.01         0.02         0.01        0.01         0.03        -0.09       0.15***       -0.01         …          0.05      -0.16**    0.80*** -0.72***     0.79***    -0.02      0.00    0.93***     1.00
 (percent of reserves)                            [498]       [498]       [504]     [503]       [498]      [508]       [503]        [498]        [498]        [485]       [499]        [498]        [169]        [419]        [376]        […]        [286]       [198]      [508]    [85]        [507]     [502]     [502]     [507]     [514]
Total external debt stocks                        -0.06       -0.03        0.00     -0.01      -0.08*      -0.04       -0.03        -0.02        -0.02        -0.03       -0.04         0.00        -0.13*      0.15***        0.04         …          0.07      -0.14**    0.78*** -0.73***     0.76***     0.00     -0.03    0.91***   0.99***     1.00
 (percent of reserves excluding gold)             [498]       [498]       [504]     [503]       [498]      [508]       [503]        [498]        [498]        [485]       [499]        [498]         [169]       [419]        [376]        […]        [286]       [198]      [508]    [85]        [507]     [502]     [502]     [507]     [514]     [514]
5-year sovereign CDS spreads                     -0.44***    -0.18*** -0.17*** -0.25***       -0.49***    -0.28***   -0.32***     -0.19***     -0.17***     -0.43***     -0.29***      -0.10*        0.03       -0.14**      0.19***        …         -0.03      0.18**     0.19***   0.33***    0.11**      0.02     -0.09      0.08     0.11*    0.16***      1.00
  (basis points)                                   [334]       [336]    [338]    [336]          [335]       [338]      [334]        [336]        [336]        [327]        [337]        [336]       [123]        [295]        [282]        […]        [229]       [157]      [326]      [62]      [326]     [337]     [327]     [327]     [324]     [324]      [342]
Foreign currency long-term sovereign debt        0.13***     0.23***    0.21***    0.22***    0.15***     0.24***      0.10**     0.17***      0.12***       0.11**      0.30***        0.04       -0.24***     0.31***     -0.20***        …          0.12       0.17*      -0.08    -0.47***    -0.06    0.29***    0.11*     -0.08     -0.08     -0.09    -0.52***      1.00
 ratings (index)                                  [537]       [549]      [556]      [582]      [537]       [580]        [579]      [535]         [536]        [494]       [535]        [536]         [139]       [283]        [261]        […]        [164]       [130]      [319]      [47]      [318]     [600]     [317]     [318]     [318]     [318]      [246]      [650]
                                                                                                                     -0.117***                -0.114***    -0.290***    -0.402***

Note: *, ** and *** denote statistical significance at the 10 percent, 5 percent and 1 percent levels, respectively. The number of observations is presented in bracket below the
corresponding coefficient. Observations smaller than the 1st percentile and larger than the 99th percentile are excluded. Due to the potential trends in the level, indicators of
government debt level (percent of GDP and percent of tax revenues) are first difference series and multiplied by negative one to make it in line with fiscal and primary balances.




                                                                                                                                                                                       37
                                                                                                            Correlations among indicators of fiscal space, EMDEs
                                                                                                Table A3.C. Correlations
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  Short-              Total
                                                                                                                                 Sustainability                                                             General                                                     Central   Total                               Short-term term      Total    external              Foreign
                                                                                                General   Fiscal                 gap, primary Sustainability Sustainability Sustainability Sustainability government   Debt        General                  Sovereign government external External Private Domestic external external external debt stocks 5-year        currency
                                                  General               Cyclically-           government balance / Sustainability balance, gap, primary gap, primary gap, primary gap, primary              debt in  securities government Concessional       debt debt maturing debt      debt in external credit to    debt      debt     debt   / reserves sovereign long-term
                                                government   Primary    adjusted    Fiscal     debt / tax   tax     gap, fiscal    country-     balance,       balance,       balance,       balance,       foreign   held by    debt held by external debt average in 12 months stocks / foreign    debt    private   stocks /  stocks / stocks / excluding    CDS     sovereign
                                                debt / GDP   balance     balance balance       revenues revenues     balance       specific     historical     current        stressed        benign       currency nonresidents nonresidents    stocks      maturity   or less   GDP currency stocks        sector      total  reserves reserves      gold    spreads debt ratings
General government gross debt                      1.00
 (percent of GDP)                                 [2,820]
Primary balance                                  0.25***      1.00
 (percent of GDP)                                [2,696]     [3,271]
Cyclically-adjusted balance                      0.27***     0.82***      1.00
 (percent of potential GDP)                      [2,228]     [2,657]     [2,689]
Fiscal balance                                   0.27***     0.88***    0.97***     1.00
  (percent of GDP)                               [2,765]     [3,259]    [2,689]    [3,407]
General government gross debt                    0.79***     0.23***    0.24***    0.27***       1.00
 (percent of average tax revenues)               [2,762]     [2,675]    [2,232]    [2,738]      [2,795]
Fiscal balance                                   0.17***     0.60***    0.63***    0.67***     0.29***      1.00
  (percent of average tax revenues)              [2,727]     [3,213]    [2,668]    [3,341]     [2,740]     [3,378]
Sustainability gap, fiscal balance               0.44***     0.70***    0.75***    0.80***     0.40***     0.55***      1.00
 (percent of GDP)                                [2,765]     [3,238]    [2,674]    [3,366]     [2,741]     [3,322]     [3,390]
Sustainability gap, primary balance, country-    0.31***     0.81***    0.66***    0.68***     0.22***     0.44***     0.59***       1.00
 specific conditions (percent of GDP)            [1,340]     [1,607]    [1,531]    [1,606]     [1,333]     [1,595]     [1,599]      [1,607]
Sustainability gap, primary balance              0.29***     0.85***    0.67***    0.70***     0.21***     0.45***     0.61***     0.97***        1.00
 historical conditions (percent of GDP)          [1,340]     [1,607]    [1,530]    [1,605]     [1,333]     [1,595]     [1,599]     [1,606]       [1,607]
Sustainability gap, primary balance              0.42***     0.68***    0.49***    0.56***     0.33***     0.40***     0.86***     0.71***      0.72***        1.00
 current conditions (percent of GDP)             [1,088]     [1,157]    [1,099]    [1,156]     [1,082]     [1,151]     [1,156]     [1,152]      [1,151]       [1,157]
Sustainability gap, primary balance              0.23***     0.65***    0.48***    0.50***     0.17***     0.31***     0.38***     0.61***      0.62***      0.45***        1.00
 stressed conditions (percent of GDP)            [1,331]     [1,605]    [1,524]    [1,600]     [1,324]     [1,592]     [1,598]     [1,585]      [1,585]      [1,139]       [1,606]
Sustainability gap, primary balance              0.28***     0.74***    0.58***    0.60***     0.20***     0.40***     0.55***     0.88***      0.91***      0.63***      0.40***        1.00
 benign conditions (percent of GDP)              [1,338]     [1,607]    [1,529]    [1,604]     [1,329]     [1,593]     [1,599]     [1,601]      [1,602]      [1,148]      [1,582]       [1,607]
General government debt in foreign                 0.09       -0.05     0.24***    0.28***        0.10      0.12*       0.12*      -0.39***     -0.41***     -0.23***       0.04       -0.56***       1.00
 currency (percent of total)                      [212]       [215]      [207]      [215]        [213]      [215]       [215]        [152]        [152]        [145]       [150]         [152]       [215]
Debt securities held by nonresidents              -0.09        0.04        0.07      0.07         0.06       0.08        0.03         0.06         0.03         0.01       0.16**       -0.02         0.06         1.00
 (percent of total)                               [161]       [160]       [160]     [161]        [160]      [156]       [161]        [155]        [155]        [147]        [155]       [158]         [23]        [162]
General government debt held by                    0.03        0.05     0.20***    0.23***        0.04     0.17***     0.09**       -0.09*       -0.13**       -0.02        0.05       -0.23***     0.88***       -0.03         1.00
 nonresidents (percent of total)                  [430]       [434]      [427]      [434]        [432]      [434]       [434]        [365]        [365]        [356]       [355]         [365]       [200]        [118]        [434]
Concessional external debt stocks                0.10***     -0.12***     0.02      0.04       0.08***      0.00        -0.01      -0.16***     -0.24***     -0.16***       0.03       -0.30***     0.63***       -0.12       0.57***       1.00
 (percent of general government gross debt)      [2,016]      [2,084]    [1,813]   [2,124]     [2,025]     [2,124]     [2,121]      [1,143]      [1,143]       [909]       [1,136]      [1,139]      [153]         [80]        [310]       [2,165]
Sovereign debt average maturity                  0.20***     0.28***    0.19***    0.21***     0.13***     0.16***     0.21***     0.23***      0.21***      0.18***        0.04       0.24***       -0.12        -0.15*      0.21***     -0.33***      1.00
 (years)                                          [738]       [768]      [753]      [777]       [734]       [770]       [775]       [766]        [766]        [748]        [756]        [766]        [112]         [131]       [303]        [578]      [807]
Central government debt maturing in               -0.05       -0.03     -0.24*** -0.20***        -0.03     -0.13***   -0.17***     -0.14***     -0.16***       -0.07        0.06       -0.14***     -0.29***      -0.15      -0.24***     -0.21***    -0.14**       1.00
 12 months or less (percent of GDP)               [577]       [567]       [506]    [575]         [564]       [556]      [570]        [352]        [352]        [341]       [347]         [352]        [130]        [70]        [216]        [383]      [294]       [579]
Total external debt stocks                       0.12***     0.04**      -0.05**   -0.07***    0.09***     -0.07***   -0.09***       -0.02        -0.02      -0.11***       -0.01        -0.01        0.09         0.06       0.27***      0.22***      0.00      0.22***      1.00
 (percent of GDP)                                [2,256]     [2,647]     [2,317]    [2,720]    [2,264]      [2,726]    [2,717]      [1,456]      [1,456]      [1,080]      [1,454]      [1,454]      [193]        [146]        [411]       [2,131]     [749]       [481]      [3,136]
External debt in foreign currency                  0.07        0.07     0.17***    0.15**         0.06       0.09      0.17***        0.08         0.09       0.11*        -0.05         0.09       0.54***        0.03       0.33***      0.33***      0.10      -0.20**     0.11*       1.00
 (percent of total)                               [287]       [289]      [289]      [289]        [288]      [289]       [289]        [259]        [259]       [250]        [250]        [259]         [76]        [102]        [209]        [189]      [220]       [146]      [292]      [292]
Private external debt stocks                     -0.07***     0.02        0.04      0.01       -0.07***    0.09***    -0.08***       -0.01        -0.01      -0.07**       -0.05*        0.03         0.03        0.16*       0.15***     -0.17***    -0.12***    0.12**     0.41***      0.08     1.00
 (percent of GDP)                                 [1,594]    [1,824]     [1,654]   [1,875]      [1,592]    [1,870]     [1,871]      [1,295]      [1,295]      [960]        [1,284]      [1,292]      [167]        [144]        [386]       [1,496]      [705]      [369]     [2,161]     [289]    [2,193]
Domestic credit to private sector                -0.19***     0.00      -0.06***   -0.04**     -0.14***     -0.01     -0.15***     -0.09***     -0.07***     -0.08**      0.08***      -0.10***      -0.09       0.31***     -0.36***     -0.34***    -0.24***    0.10**     -0.09*** -0.28***    0.31***    1.00
 (percent of GDP)                                 [2,625]    [3,067]     [2,541]   [3,140]      [2,608]    [3,112]     [3,127]      [1,557]      [1,557]     [1,122]      [1,556]       [1,557]      [209]        [145]        [417]       [2,052]      [777]      [543]      [2,927]   [289]     [2,042]   [3,621]
Short-term external debt stocks                  -0.05**      0.01        -0.01     0.02         -0.02      0.02        0.04*        0.01         0.00         0.05       -0.06**        0.05*      -0.15**        0.08      -0.32***     -0.38***     -0.01      0.16***     -0.03*    -0.12**   0.12***   0.30***     1.00
 (percent of total)                              [2,182]     [2,573]     [2,244]   [2,632]      [2,193]    [2,639]     [2,625]      [1,429]      [1,429]      [1,053]     [1,424]       [1,426]      [189]        [139]        [405]       [2,086]     [726]       [449]      [2,990]    [292]    [2,118]   [2,860]    [3,105]
Short-term external debt stocks                  0.07***     0.05**       0.01      0.02       0.09***      -0.01      0.07***       0.04         0.03         0.01         -0.03        0.05*       -0.01        -0.07       0.11**      -0.07***    0.15***      -0.07     0.24***     0.11*    -0.05**   -0.10***   0.21***    1.00
 (percent of reserves)                           [2,110]     [2,504]     [2,184]   [2,540]     [2,121]     [2,548]     [2,537]      [1,436]      [1,436]      [1,056]      [1,435]      [1,433]      [189]        [145]        [406]       [2,006]     [731]       [445]     [2,885]     [292]    [2,035]    [2,810]   [2,903]   [2,929]
Total external debt stocks                       0.11***      0.02        -0.01     -0.02      0.15***     -0.05***    0.04**        0.02         0.01       -0.07**        -0.03        0.01        0.13*        -0.13       0.32***       0.01      0.22***      -0.07     0.37***    0.16***   -0.07*** -0.19***    0.06***   0.80***    1.00
 (percent of reserves)                           [2,178]     [2,568]     [2,235]   [2,622]     [2,189]      [2,630]    [2,619]      [1,440]      [1,440]     [1,068]       [1,435]      [1,438]      [194]        [146]        [412]       [2,049]     [746]       [473]     [2,971]     [292]     [2,060]  [2,891]    [2,873]   [2,896]   [3,011]
Total external debt stocks                       0.09***      0.01        -0.03     -0.02      0.13***     -0.10***     0.00         0.01         -0.01      -0.09***       -0.04        -0.01       0.13*        -0.14*      0.30***       0.00      0.20***      -0.07     0.32***    0.15**    -0.07*** -0.17***    0.08***   0.72***   0.96***     1.00
 (percent of reserves excluding gold)            [2,177]     [2,568]     [2,234]   [2,622]     [2,188]      [2,631]    [2,620]      [1,439]      [1,439]      [1,067]      [1,434]      [1,437]      [194]         [145]       [411]       [2,050]     [745]       [473]     [2,969]     [292]     [2,059]  [2,893]    [2,873]   [2,893]   [3,008]    [3,011]
5-year sovereign CDS spreads                       0.03      -0.24*** -0.23*** -0.27***           0.00     -0.15***   -0.15***     -0.18***     -0.15***     -0.14***     -0.34***     -0.12***     0.52***       -0.12         0.07       -0.09*     0.14***       0.04       0.03     0.17**     -0.08*   -0.25***    -0.02      0.05    0.19***    0.30***      1.00
  (basis points)                                  [540]        [551]    [527]    [560]           [528]       [548]      [559]        [520]        [520]        [491]        [505]        [520]        [78]        [140]        [282]        [382]      [473]       [199]      [509]      [210]      [490]     [540]     [493]     [502]     [509]      [508]      [567]
Foreign currency long-term sovereign debt        -0.06**     0.09***    0.18***    0.26***       0.03      0.22***     0.15***       0.05*        0.05*         0.04       0.07**       0.08**      -0.53***     0.35***     -0.42***     -0.43***     -0.06*     -0.13***   -0.15*** -0.45***    0.19***   0.47***    0.25***    0.02     -0.24***   -0.23***   -0.51***    1.00
 ratings (index)                                 [1,513]     [1,596]    [1,468]    [1,624]      [1,491]    [1,593]      [1,622]     [1,141]      [1,142]       [952]       [1,132]      [1,144]       [194]       [156]        [408]       [1,116]      [743]       [466]     [1,409]   [276]     [1,217]   [1,654]    [1,347]   [1,330]    [1,382]    [1,381]     [556]    [1,759]
                                                                                                                      -0.117***                -0.114***    -0.290***    -0.402***    -0.402***

Note: *, ** and *** denote statistical significance at the 10 percent, 5 percent and 1 percent levels, respectively. The number of observations is presented in bracket below the
corresponding coefficient. Observations smaller than the 1st percentile and larger than the 99th percentile are excluded. Due to the potential trends in the level, indicators of
government debt level (percent of GDP and percent of tax revenues) are first difference series and multiplied by negative one to make it in line with fiscal and primary balances.




                                                                                                                                                                                        38
                               Table A4. Volatility of fiscal space indicators
                                                            All countries     Advanced economies        EMDEs
                                                           Cross- Within-       Cross- Within-       Cross- Within-
                                                          Country Country      Country Country      Country Country
Government debt sustainability
General government gross debt (percent of GDP)               38.2      22.8        33.0     14.7        39.4    24.8
Primary balance (percent of GDP)                              5.0       4.9         2.3      2.8         5.5     5.4
Cyclically-adjusted balance (percent of potential GDP)        4.8       4.3         3.3      2.7         5.2     4.7
Fiscal balance (percent of GDP)                               5.5       5.1         4.1      3.0         5.8     5.6
General government gross debt                               982.3     277.4       174.7     65.7     1,082.9   329.6
   (percent of average tax revenues)
Fiscal balance (percent of average tax revenues)            117.2      76.8        19.2     13.2      130.5     92.5
Sustainability gap, fiscal balance (percent of GDP)           5.7       7.2         4.8      4.4        6.0      8.0
Sustainability gap, primary balance                           2.9       3.1         2.4      2.9        3.1      3.2
   country-specific conditions (percent of GDP)
Sustainability gap, primary balance                           2.9       3.1         2.4      2.9        3.1      3.2
   historical conditions (percent of GDP)
Sustainability gap, primary balance                           3.1       5.3         2.4      4.5        3.3      5.7
   current conditions (percent of GDP)
Sustainability gap, primary balance                           4.2       3.1         2.8      2.9        4.5      3.2
   stressed conditions (percent of GDP)
Sustainability gap, primary balance                           4.0       3.1         2.6      2.9        4.5      3.2
   benign conditions (percent of GDP)
Balance sheet composition
General government debt in foreign currency                  30.7       4.7        15.1      3.8       24.7      5.2
   (percent of total)
Debt securities held by nonresidents (percent of total)       2.8       1.6         2.9      1.9        0.9      0.8
General government debt held by nonresidents                 21.2       6.5        19.6      7.4       22.1      5.9
   (percent of total)
Concessional external debt stocks                            25.8       9.5          ...      ...      25.8      9.5
   (percent of general government gross debt)
Sovereign debt average maturity (years)                       3.7       2.0         2.0      1.0        4.0      2.4
Central government debt maturing in                           7.1       1.8         9.5      1.9        5.4      1.8
   12 months or less (percent of GDP)
External and private sector debt
Total external debt stocks (percent of GDP)                  349.1     41.4       723.0     79.3        45.7    31.6
External debt in foreign currency (percent of total)          27.3      3.3        25.9      4.1        11.7     2.9
Private external debt stocks (percent of GDP)                348.3     20.4       720.4     71.5        25.5     7.1
Domestic credit to private sector (percent of GDP)            36.7     12.5        37.6     22.2        21.8    10.1
Short-term external debt stocks (percent of total)            15.6      6.8        14.5      6.8         9.2     6.9
Short-term external debt stocks (percent of reserves)     16,508.7 2,228.1     32,271.0 5,243.4      7,294.6 1,410.1
Total external debt stocks (percent of reserves)          36,494.2 5,100.0     71,384.0 8,635.2     16,011.8 4,140.8
Total external debt stocks                                44,221.0 10,285.6    84,391.3 13,785.8    21,593.9 9,336.0
   (percent of reserves excluding gold)
Market perception
5-year sovereign CDS spreads (basis points)                1,005.4    692.4       643.8    506.7     1,190.6   831.8
Foreign currency long-term sovereign debt ratings              4.9      1.1         2.6      1.3         3.2     1.0
   (index ranging 1-21 [best])
Note: Volatility is measured as standard deviation of respecitve variables in specified sample period and
country group. Observations smaller than the 1st percentile and larger than the 99th percentile are excluded.




                                                                39
             Table A5. Changes in fiscal space, share of countries, all countries
                                                             1995-2016                  2000-07             2000-16              2007-16
                                                            Share                     Share               Share                Share
                                                            ∆- [∆+] Obs.              ∆- [∆+] Obs.        ∆- [∆+] Obs.         ∆- [∆+] Obs.
Government debt sustainability
General government gross debt (percent of GDP)            44.7 [55.3]       85    77.7 [22.3]     157   52.6 [46.8]     156   25.8 [74.2]   182
Primary balance (percent of GDP)                          62.3 [37.7]      122    41.6 [57.8]     166   66.1 [32.7]     165   75.1 [23.8]   181
Cyclically-adjusted balance (percent of potential GDP)    56.3 [41.1]      112    40.0 [55.2]     145   60.7 [39.3]     145   65.4 [33.3]   153
Fiscal balance (percent of GDP)                           52.3 [45.3]      128    31.0 [66.1]     174   60.1 [38.7]     173   75.9 [21.4]   187
General government gross debt                             44.7 [55.3]       85    77.7 [22.3]     157   53.2 [46.8]     156   26.1 [73.9]   180
   (percent of average tax revenues)
Fiscal balance (percent of average tax revenues)          53.1 [46.9] 128         32.2 [67.8] 174       61.3 [38.7] 173       78.0 [21.5] 186
Sustainability gap, fiscal balance (percent of GDP)       77.6 [22.4] 125         23.7 [75.7] 169       63.7 [34.5] 168       89.3 [10.7] 187
Sustainability gap, primary balance                       61.8 [38.2] 76          43.4 [56.6] 99        69.7 [29.3] 99        78.5 [21.5] 107
   country-specific conditions (percent of GDP)
Sustainability gap, primary balance                       61.8 [38.2] 76          43.4 [56.6] 99        69.7 [29.3] 99        78.5 [21.5] 107
   historical conditions (percent of GDP)
Sustainability gap, primary balance                       38.7 [61.3] 31          29.2 [69.4] 72        57.7 [39.4] 71        87.1 [10.9] 101
   current conditions (percent of GDP)
Sustainability gap, primary balance                       61.8 [38.2] 76          43.4 [56.6] 99        69.7 [29.3] 99        78.5 [21.5] 107
   stressed conditions (percent of GDP)
Sustainability gap, primary balance                       61.8 [38.2] 76          43.4 [56.6] 99        69.7 [29.3] 99        78.5 [21.5] 107
   benign conditions (percent of GDP)
Balance sheet composition
General government debt in foreign currency                    ... [...]    7      69.2 [7.7] 13        66.7 [25.0] 12        40.0 [40.0] 15
   (percent of total)
Debt securities held by nonresidents (percent of total)        ... [...]    0         ... [...] 0           ... [...] 0       51.2 [39.0] 41
General government debt held by nonresidents                   ... [...]    8     30.8 [69.2] 13        15.4 [84.6] 13        45.1 [54.9] 51
   (percent of total)
Concessional external debt stocks                         75.7 [24.3] 37          60.4 [38.5] 96        72.7 [23.2] 99        69.9 [29.2] 113
   (percent of general government gross debt) 1/
Sovereign debt average maturity (years)                   90.0 [10.0] 10          54.5 [45.5] 22        47.8 [52.2] 23        48.3 [51.7] 58
Central government debt maturing in                           ... [...] 0             ... [...] 0           ... [...] 0       32.5 [62.4] 117
   12 months or less (percent of GDP) 2/
External and private sector debt
Total external debt stocks (percent of GDP)               50.9 [49.1]       55    70.5 [29.5]     129   44.8 [55.2]      67   34.0 [66.0]    94
External debt in foreign currency (percent of total)          ... [...]      0        ... [...]     4       ... [...]     4   56.5 [43.5]    23
Private external debt stocks (percent of GDP)             23.6 [69.1]       55    36.4 [31.8]     129   25.4 [68.7]      67   44.7 [51.1]    94
Domestic credit to private sector (percent of GDP)         7.6 [92.4]      158    25.7 [72.6]     175   16.5 [83.5]     164   24.3 [75.1]   169
Short-term external debt stocks (percent of total)        40.0 [56.4]       55    34.6 [61.5]     130   45.5 [54.5]      66   61.3 [33.3]    93
Short-term external debt stocks                           55.6 [44.4]       54    62.9 [33.9]     124   62.1 [36.4]      66   59.1 [38.7]    93
   (percent of reserves)
Total external debt stocks (percent of reserves)          74.5 [25.5] 55          78.2 [21.8] 124       77.6 [22.4] 67        46.8 [53.2] 94
Total external debt stocks                                74.5 [25.5] 55          78.2 [21.8] 124       74.6 [25.4] 67        45.7 [54.3] 94
   (percent of reserves excluding gold)
Market perception
5-year sovereign CDS spreads (basis points)                   ... [...] 0          93.3 [0.0] 15        66.7 [33.3] 15         1.9 [98.1] 53
Foreign currency long-term sovereign debt ratings         41.1 [51.8] 56          19.4 [61.2] 103       37.6 [53.5] 101       51.9 [28.7] 129
   (index ranging 1-21 [best])

Note: Share shows the percent shares of countries with negative change (∆-) and with positive change
(∆+) (in bracket) over the denoted periods. The percent shares are not computed, when the number
of observations is less than 10. A negative (positive) change refers to a change at least by 0.1
percenrage point for variables expressed in percent (or 10 basis points for CDS spreads). For sovereign
debt average maturity and long-term sovereign debt ratings, a change by 0.1 percent is used. Because
of small or no change in some indicators, they do not always add up to 100. 1/ Data for 2015 are
used, instead of 2016. 2/ Data for 2011 are used, instead of 2007.




                                                                                 40
      Table A6. Changes in fiscal space, share of countries, advanced economies
                                                            1995-2016                 2000-07              2000-16               2007-16
                                                           Share                    Share                Share                 Share
                                                           ∆- [∆+] Obs.             ∆- [∆+] Obs.         ∆- [∆+] Obs.          ∆- [∆+] Obs.
Government debt sustainability
General government gross debt (percent of GDP)            30.0 [70.0]     30    69.7 [30.3]       33   18.2 [81.8]      33   13.5 [86.5]      37
Primary balance (percent of GDP)                          37.9 [62.1]     29    48.5 [51.5]       33   63.6 [36.4]      33   77.8 [22.2]      36
Cyclically-adjusted balance (percent of potential GDP)    32.3 [64.5]     31    55.9 [38.2]       34   50.0 [50.0]      34   51.4 [45.7]      35
Fiscal balance (percent of GDP)                           22.6 [74.2]     31    38.2 [58.8]       34   55.9 [44.1]      34   78.4 [18.9]      37
General government gross debt                             30.0 [70.0]     30    69.7 [30.3]       33   18.2 [81.8]      33   13.9 [86.1]      36
   (percent of average tax revenues)
Fiscal balance (percent of average tax revenues)          22.6 [77.4] 31        38.2 [61.8] 34         55.9 [44.1] 34        81.1 [18.9] 37
Sustainability gap, fiscal balance (percent of GDP)       51.7 [48.3] 29        35.3 [61.8] 34         67.6 [29.4] 34         91.9 [8.1] 37
Sustainability gap, primary balance                       37.9 [62.1] 29        48.5 [51.5] 33         63.6 [36.4] 33        77.1 [22.9] 35
   country-specific conditions (percent of GDP)
Sustainability gap, primary balance                       37.9 [62.1] 29        48.5 [51.5] 33         63.6 [36.4] 33        77.1 [22.9] 35
   historical conditions (percent of GDP)
Sustainability gap, primary balance                       22.7 [77.3] 22        42.9 [53.6] 28         70.4 [29.6] 27        76.5 [17.6] 34
   current conditions (percent of GDP)
Sustainability gap, primary balance                       37.9 [62.1] 29        48.5 [51.5] 33         63.6 [36.4] 33        77.1 [22.9] 35
   stressed conditions (percent of GDP)
Sustainability gap, primary balance                       37.9 [62.1] 29        48.5 [51.5] 33         63.6 [36.4] 33        77.1 [22.9] 35
   benign conditions (percent of GDP)
Balance sheet composition
General government debt in foreign currency                   ... [...]   6      72.7 [0.0] 11         70.0 [20.0] 10        33.3 [41.7] 12
   (percent of total)
Debt securities held by nonresidents (percent of total)       ... [...]   0         ... [...] 0            ... [...] 0       56.7 [36.7] 30
General government debt held by nonresidents                  ... [...]   7     33.3 [66.7] 12         16.7 [83.3] 12        39.3 [60.7] 28
   (percent of total)
Concessional external debt stocks                             ... [...]   0           ... [...]   0         ... [...]   0         ... [...]   0
   (percent of general government gross debt)
Sovereign debt average maturity (years)                       ... [...]   0           ... [...]   0         ... [...]   0    30.0 [70.0] 20
Central government debt maturing in                           ... [...]   0           ... [...]   0         ... [...]   0    54.5 [39.4] 33
   12 months or less (percent of GDP) 1/
External and private sector debt
Total external debt stocks (percent of GDP) 2/                ... [...] 0        9.4 [90.6]       32    9.4 [90.6]      32   50.0 [50.0]      32
External debt in foreign currency (percent of total)          ... [...] 0           ... [...]      2       ... [...]     2       ... [...]     5
Private external debt stocks (percent of GDP) 2/              ... [...] 0       12.5 [87.5]       32   31.3 [68.8]      32   75.0 [25.0]      32
Domestic credit to private sector (percent of GDP)         8.6 [91.4] 35        25.7 [74.3]       35   22.9 [77.1]      35   50.0 [50.0]      36
Short-term external debt stocks (percent of total) 2/         ... [...] 0       40.6 [59.4]       32   59.4 [40.6]      32   68.8 [28.1]      32
Short-term external debt stocks                               ... [...] 0        6.3 [93.8]       32   46.9 [53.1]      32   78.1 [21.9]      32
   (percent of reserves) 2/
Total external debt stocks (percent of reserves) 2/           ... [...]   0      3.1 [96.9] 32         40.6 [59.4] 32        75.0 [25.0] 32
Total external debt stocks                                    ... [...]   0      3.1 [96.9] 32         28.1 [71.9] 32        75.0 [25.0] 32
   (percent of reserves excluding gold) 2/
Market perception
5-year sovereign CDS spreads (basis points)                   ... [...] 0           ... [...] 0            ... [...] 0       0.0 [100.0] 20
Foreign currency long-term sovereign debt ratings         45.2 [41.9] 31         7.9 [63.2] 38         44.7 [39.5] 38        52.5 [20.0] 40
   (index ranging 1-21 [best])

Note: Share shows the percent shares of countries with negative change (∆-) and with positive change
(∆+) (in bracket) over the denoted periods. The percent shares are not computed, when the number
of observations is less than 10. A negative (positive) change refers to a change at least by 0.1
percenrage point for variables expressed in percent (or 10 basis points for CDS spreads). For sovereign
debt average maturity and long-term sovereign debt ratings, a change by 0.1 percent is used. Because
of small or no change in some indicators, they do not always add up to 100. 1/ Data for 2015 are
used, instead of 2016. 2/ Data for 2011 are used, instead of 2007. 3/ Data for 2003 are used, instead
of 2000.




                                                                               41
                Table A7. Changes in fiscal space, share of countries, EMDEs
                                                             1995-2016                  2000-07               2000-16               2007-16
                                                            Share                     Share                 Share                 Share
                                                            ∆- [∆+] Obs.              ∆- [∆+] Obs.          ∆- [∆+] Obs.          ∆- [∆+] Obs.
Government debt sustainability
General government gross debt (percent of GDP)            52.7 [47.3]      55     79.8 [20.2]       124   61.8 [37.4]      123   29.0 [71.0]     145
Primary balance (percent of GDP)                          69.9 [30.1]      93     39.8 [59.4]       133   66.7 [31.8]      132   74.5 [24.1]     145
Cyclically-adjusted balance (percent of potential GDP)    65.4 [32.1]      81     35.1 [60.4]       111   64.0 [36.0]      111   69.5 [29.7]     118
Fiscal balance (percent of GDP)                           61.9 [36.1]      97     29.3 [67.9]       140   61.2 [37.4]      139   75.3 [22.0]     150
General government gross debt                             52.7 [47.3]      55     79.8 [20.2]       124   62.6 [37.4]      123   29.2 [70.8]     144
   (percent of average tax revenues)
Fiscal balance (percent of average tax revenues)          62.9 [37.1] 97          30.7 [69.3] 140         62.6 [37.4] 139        77.2 [22.1] 149
Sustainability gap, fiscal balance (percent of GDP)       85.4 [14.6] 96          20.7 [79.3] 135         62.7 [35.8] 134        88.7 [11.3] 150
Sustainability gap, primary balance                       76.6 [23.4] 47          40.9 [59.1] 66          72.7 [25.8] 66         79.2 [20.8] 72
   country-specific conditions (percent of GDP)
Sustainability gap, primary balance                       76.6 [23.4] 47          40.9 [59.1] 66          72.7 [25.8] 66         79.2 [20.8] 72
   historical conditions (percent of GDP)
Sustainability gap, primary balance                            ... [...]    9     20.5 [79.5] 44          50.0 [45.5] 44          92.5 [7.5] 67
   current conditions (percent of GDP)
Sustainability gap, primary balance                       76.6 [23.4] 47          40.9 [59.1] 66          72.7 [25.8] 66         79.2 [20.8] 72
   stressed conditions (percent of GDP)
Sustainability gap, primary balance                       76.6 [23.4] 47          40.9 [59.1] 66          72.7 [25.8] 66         79.2 [20.8] 72
   benign conditions (percent of GDP)
Balance sheet composition
General government debt in foreign currency                    ... [...]    1           ... [...]    2         ... [...]    2        ... [...]    3
   (percent of total)
Debt securities held by nonresidents (percent of total)        ... [...]    0           ... [...]    0         ... [...]    0    36.4 [45.5] 11
General government debt held by nonresidents                   ... [...]    1           ... [...]    1         ... [...]    1    52.2 [47.8] 23
   (percent of total)
Concessional external debt stocks                         75.7 [24.3] 37          60.4 [38.5] 96          72.7 [23.2] 99         69.9 [29.2] 113
   (percent of general government gross debt) 1/
Sovereign debt average maturity (years)                   90.0 [10.0] 10          54.5 [45.5] 22          47.8 [52.2] 23         57.9 [42.1] 38
Central government debt maturing in                           ... [...] 0             ... [...] 0             ... [...] 0        23.8 [71.4] 84
   12 months or less (percent of GDP) 2/
External and private sector debt
Total external debt stocks (percent of GDP)               50.9 [49.1]       55    75.0 [25.0]       120   50.0 [50.0]       58   25.8 [74.2]      62
External debt in foreign currency (percent of total)          ... [...]      0        ... [...]       2       ... [...]      2   50.0 [50.0]      18
Private external debt stocks (percent of GDP)             23.6 [69.1]       55    38.3 [27.5]       120   25.9 [67.2]       58   29.0 [64.5]      62
Domestic credit to private sector (percent of GDP)         7.3 [92.7]      123    25.7 [72.1]       140   14.7 [85.3]      129   17.3 [82.0]     133
Short-term external debt stocks (percent of total)        40.0 [56.4]       55    33.1 [62.8]       121   38.6 [61.4]       57   57.4 [36.1]      61
Short-term external debt stocks                           55.6 [44.4]       54    67.8 [28.7]       115   59.6 [38.6]       57   49.2 [47.5]      61
   (percent of reserves)
Total external debt stocks (percent of reserves)          74.5 [25.5] 55          83.5 [16.5] 115         77.6 [22.4] 58         32.3 [67.7] 62
Total external debt stocks                                74.5 [25.5] 55          83.5 [16.5] 115         74.1 [25.9] 58         30.6 [69.4] 62
   (percent of reserves excluding gold)
Market perception
5-year sovereign CDS spreads (basis points)                   ... [...] 0          93.3 [0.0] 15          66.7 [33.3] 15          3.0 [97.0] 33
Foreign currency long-term sovereign debt ratings         36.0 [64.0] 25          26.2 [60.0] 65          33.3 [61.9] 63         51.7 [32.6] 89
   (index ranging 1-21 [best])

Note: Share shows the percent shares of countries with negative change (∆-) and with positive change
(∆+) (in bracket) over the denoted periods. The percent shares are not computed, when the number
of observations is less than 10. A negative (positive) change refers to a change at least by 0.1
percenrage point for variables expressed in percent (or 10 basis points for CDS spreads). For sovereign
debt average maturity and long-term sovereign debt ratings, a change by 0.1 percent is used. Because
of small or no change in some indicators, they do not always add up to 100. 1/ Data for 2015 are
used, instead of 2016. 2/ Data for 2011 are used, instead of 2007.




                                                                                 42
                                                                                        Table A8. List of crisis episodes
Advanced economies (25)                              EMDEs (94)

                  Banking     Currency       Debt                           Banking     Currency         Debt                         Banking          Currency        Debt                           Banking        Currency          Debt
                    crises       crises   distress                            crises       crises     distress                          crises            crises    distress                            crises          crises      distress

Austria               2008                           Albania                    1994        1997                 Gabon                                       1994     2002     Pakistan                                               1999
Belgium               2008                           Algeria                                1994                 Gambia, The                                 2003              Papua New Guinea                           1995
Czech Republic        1996                           Angola                                 1996                 Georgia                                     1999              Paraguay                  1995             2002
Denmark               2008        1993               Argentina            1995, 2001        2002         2001    Ghana                           1993, 2000, 2009              Philippines               1997             1998
Finland                           1993               Armenia                    1994                             Grenada                                              2004     Romania                                    1996
France                2008                           Azerbaijan                 1995                             Guinea                  1993               2005               Russian Federation  1998, 2008             1998        1998
Germany               2008                           Belarus                    1995   1997, 2009                Guinea-Bissau           1995               1994               Sao Tome & Principe                        1997
Greece                2008                  2012     Benin                                   1994                Guyana                  1993                                  Senegal                                    1994
Iceland               2008        2008               Bolivia                    1994                             Haiti                   1994               2003               Serbia                                     2000
Ireland               2008                           Brazil                     1994        1999         2002    Hungary                 2008                                  Seychelles                                 2008        2008
Italy                 2008        1995               Bulgaria                   1996        1996                 India                   1993                                  Sierra Leone                               1998
Japan                 1997                           Burkina Faso                           1994                 Indonesia               1997               1998      1998     South Africa                                           1993
Korea, Rep.           1997   1997, 2008              Burundi                    1994                             Iran, Islamic Rep.                   1993, 2000               Sri Lanka                                              1996
Latvia          1995, 2008                           Cabo Verde                 1993                             Jamaica                 1996                         2010     Sudan                                      1993
Lithuania             1995                           Cameroon                   1995        1994                 Kazakhstan              2008               1999               Suriname                             1995, 2001
Luxembourg            2008                           Central African Rep.       1995        1994                 Kenya                                      1993               Swaziland                 1995
Netherlands           2008                           Chad                                   1994                 Kyrgyz Republic         1995               1997               Tajikistan                                 1999
Portugal              2008                           China                      1998                             Lao PDR                                    1997               Thailand                  1997             1998
Slovak Republic       1998                           Colombia                   1998                             Libya                                      2002               Togo                      1993             1994
Slovenia              2008                           Comoros                                 1994                Macedonia, FYR          1993                                  Turkey                    2000             2001        2001
Spain                 2008        1995               Congo, Dem. Rep.           1994   1994, 2009                Madagascar                           1994, 2004               Turkmenistan                               2008
Sweden                2008                           Congo, Rep.                             1994                Malawi                                     1994               Uganda                    1994
Switzerland           2008                           Costa Rica                 1994                             Malaysia                1997               1998               Ukraine             1998, 2008       1998, 2009        1998
United Kingdom        2007                           Cote d'Ivoire                          1994          2000   Mali                                       1994               Uruguay                   2002             2002        2003
United States         2007                           Croatia                    1998                      1993   Mauritania                                 1993               Uzbekistan                                 2000
                                                     Dominica                                             2002   Mexico                  1994               1995               Venezuela, RB             1994 1994, 2002, 2010   1998, 2005
                                                     Dominican Republic         2003        2003          2005   Moldova                                    1999      2002     Vietnam                   1997
                                                     Ecuador                    1998        1999    1999, 2008   Mongolia                2008               1997               Yemen, Rep.               1996             1995
                                                     Equatorial Guinea                      1994                 Myanmar                              2001, 2007               Zambia                    1995       1996, 2009
                                                     Eritrea                    1993                             Nicaragua               2000                                  Zimbabwe                  1995             2003
                                                     Ethiopia                               1993                 Niger                                      1994
                                                     Fiji                                   1998                 Nigeria                 2009               1997      2001

Note: Financial crises are based on Gourinchas and Obstfeld (2012) and Laeven and Valencia (2013). Only the crisis episodes considered in Figure 6 and Tables A9 and A10 are listed.
The total numbers of crises are: 25 banking crises, 7 currency crises, and 1 debt distress episodes in advanced economies, and 54 banking crises, 82 currency crises, and 24 debt distress
episodes in EMDEs.




                                                                                                                   43
              Table A9. Changes in fiscal space during financial crises, before vs after
                         Before            After                                           Before          After
                                                        Difference                                                      Difference
                      Mean        N   Mean         N    (P-value)                        Mean       N   Mean       N    (P-value)
Advanced economies                                                   EMDEs
 General government gross debt (percent of GDP)
   Banking crises      48.6     45      65.6       46     0.01         Banking crises     37.0   37      52.7    54       0.03
   Currency crises     47.8     13      63.3       14     0.26         Currency crises    68.9   77      71.2   103       0.79
   Debt distress                                                       Debt distress      72.6   34      70.1    42       0.75
 Primary balance (percent of GDP)
   Banking crises        0.7    45      -4.8       46     0.00         Banking crises      0.3    66     -0.4    82       0.34
   Currency crises       0.9    14      -0.8       14     0.23         Currency crises    -8.4   110     -0.2   131       0.09
   Debt distress                                                       Debt distress       1.7    39      3.0    46       0.19
 Sustainability gap, primary balance, historical conditions (percent of GDP)
   Banking crises        0.9    45      -4.6       46     0.00         Banking crises      2.3   51       1.9      59     0.66
   Currency crises       1.1    14      -0.6       14     0.22         Currency crises     0.1   59       2.3      70     0.00
   Debt distress                                                       Debt distress       2.9   31       3.5      38     0.62
 Sustainability gap, primary balance, current conditions (percent of GDP)
   Banking crises        3.0    40      -8.0       41     0.00         Banking crises      2.3   26      -2.7      41     0.04
   Currency crises      -1.6    12      -1.8       12     0.93         Currency crises     0.0   32       3.1      45     0.07
   Debt distress                                                       Debt distress       1.8   20       0.5      28     0.68
 Sovereign debt average maturity (years)
   Banking crises        7.9    30       8.2       30      0.61        Banking crises     11.7   32      11.4      44     0.83
   Currency crises                                                     Currency crises    13.8   32      12.4      39     0.30
   Debt distress                                                       Debt distress      15.9   25      12.2      30     0.03
 Total external debt stocks, change (percent points of GDP)
   Banking crises      49.7     38      11.4       39      0.18        Banking crises      1.1    96      1.1   105        0.99
   Currency crises                                                     Currency crises     2.0   150     -3.5   153        0.15
   Debt distress                                                       Debt distress       1.6    40     -3.0    43        0.17
 Domestic credit to private sector, change (percentage points of GDP)
   Banking crises        5.8    47      -0.6       48     0.01         Banking crises      2.8    94     -3.0   104       0.00
   Currency crises       1.8    14      -4.8       14     0.37         Currency crises     0.9   141     -1.9   156       0.00
   Debt distress                                                       Debt distress       1.0    44     -1.1    48       0.06
 Short-term external debt stocks (percent of total)
   Banking crises      41.0     38      38.3       40      0.46        Banking crises     14.7    99     11.5   108        0.10
   Currency crises                                                     Currency crises    14.6   152     12.6   154        0.17
   Debt distress                                                       Debt distress      14.8    40     12.8    44        0.40
 Foreign currency long-term sovereign debt ratings (index ranging 1-21 [best])
   Banking crises      19.2     46      17.8       49     0.05         Banking crises     10.9   48       8.7      59     0.00
   Currency crises     18.5     14      16.5       14     0.04         Currency crises     9.2   50       7.0      64     0.00
   Debt distress                                                       Debt distress       7.9   32       5.7      36     0.00

Note: Mean value is the average of each variable before and after the onset of crises. The period coverage is two
years, meaning that averages for “Before” cover t-2 and t-1 and those for “After” do t+1 and t+2. N is the number
of observations used to compute mean values. P-values of Wald tests where the null hypothesis is that the two
mean values are equal are reported. The values in bold show that the two means are statistically significantly
different at least at the 10 percent level. When the number of observations is less than five in a year, that year is
excluded from the calculation.




                                                                  44
                                                          pre-crisis vs current period
                      Table A10. Changes in fiscal space, pre-
                       Before crisis   Current period                                    Before crisis   Current period
                                                        Difference                                                        Difference
                       Mean       N    Mean       N     (P-value)                        Mean      N     Mean      N      (P-value)
Advanced economies                                                   EMDEs
  General government gross debt (percent of GDP)
   Banking crises       48.6     45      71.4     37       0.01        Banking crises     37.0    37      52.7    148       0.00
   Currency crises      47.8     13      71.4     37       0.08        Currency crises    68.9    77      52.7    148       0.03
   Debt distress                         71.4     37                   Debt distress      72.6    34      52.7    148       0.00
  Primary balance (percent of GDP)
   Banking crises         0.7    45       0.6     37       0.86        Banking crises      0.3    66       -3.5   146       0.00
   Currency crises        0.9    14       0.6     37       0.81        Currency crises    -8.4   110       -3.5   146       0.31
   Debt distress                          0.6     37                   Debt distress       1.7    39       -3.5   146       0.00
  Sustainability gap, primary balance, historical conditions (percent of GDP)
   Banking crises         0.9    45       1.0     35       0.93        Banking crises      2.3    51       -2.0    72       0.00
   Currency crises        1.1    14       1.0     35       0.91        Currency crises     0.1    59       -2.0    72       0.00
   Debt distress                          1.0     35                   Debt distress       2.9    31       -2.0    72       0.00
  Sustainability gap, primary balance, current conditions (percent of GDP)
   Banking crises         3.0    40       1.6     34       0.07        Banking crises      2.3    26       -3.0    70       0.00
   Currency crises       -1.6    12       1.6     34       0.16        Currency crises     0.0    32       -3.0    70       0.02
   Debt distress                          1.6     34                   Debt distress       1.8    20       -3.0    70       0.04
  Sovereign debt average maturity (years)
   Banking crises         7.9    30       7.8     23       0.87        Banking crises     11.7    32       9.0     62       0.03
   Currency crises                        7.8     23                   Currency crises    13.8    32       9.0     62       0.00
   Debt distress                          7.8     23                   Debt distress      15.9    25       9.0     62       0.00
  Total external debt stocks (percent of GDP)
   Banking crises      441.7     38     397.3     35       0.85        Banking crises     64.4    99      59.7     67        0.54
   Currency crises                      397.3     35                   Currency crises    71.0   150      59.7     67        0.20
   Debt distress                        397.3     35                   Debt distress      54.1    40      59.7     67        0.38
  Domestic credit to private sector (percent of GDP)
   Banking crises      114.0     48     110.7     36       0.78        Banking crises     29.4    97      43.0    134       0.00
   Currency crises     115.8     14     110.7     36       0.82        Currency crises    19.3   149      43.0    134       0.00
   Debt distress                        110.7     36                   Debt distress      24.9    45      43.0    134       0.00
  Short-term external debt stocks (percent of total)
   Banking crises       41.0     38      36.9     35       0.28        Banking crises     14.7    99      14.4     67        0.88
   Currency crises                       36.9     35                   Currency crises    14.6   152      14.4     67        0.90
   Debt distress                         36.9     35                   Debt distress      14.8    40      14.4     67        0.85
  Foreign currency long-term sovereign debt ratings (index ranging 1-21 [best])
   Banking crises       19.2     46      17.4     40       0.01        Banking crises     10.9    48       9.8     99       0.04
   Currency crises      18.5     14      17.4     40       0.12        Currency crises     9.2    50       9.8     99       0.30
   Debt distress                         17.4     40                   Debt distress       7.9    32       9.8     99       0.00

Note: Mean value is the average of each variable over two years before the crises (t-2 and t-1) and in 2016 (for the
current period). N is the number of observations used to compute mean values. P-values of Wald tests where the
null hypothesis is that the two mean values are equal are reported. The values in bold show that the two means are
statistically significantly different at least at the 10 percent level. When the number of observations is less than five
in a year, that year is excluded from the calculation.




                                                                  45
       Table A11. Changes in fiscal space over oil price plunges
                                                     Oil price plunge

                                               Before              After
                                                                                 Difference
                                             Mean         N   Mean          N    (P-value)

General government gross debt (percent
                                              47.1      164     52.4       208      0.25
of GDP)
Primary balance (percent of GDP)               2.9      198     -2.5       231     0.03
Sustainability gap, primary balance,
                                               5.1      105      2.0       125     0.00
historical conditions (percent of GDP)
Sustainability gap, primary balance,
                                               6.5       64     -0.3       82      0.00
current conditions (percent of GDP)
General government debt in foreign
                                                                31.4        4
currency (percent of total)
Debt securities held by nonresidents
                                                                 0.7        8
(percent of total)
General government debt held by
                                              36.3        8     31.0       12       0.37
nonresidents (percent of total)
Sovereign debt average maturity (years)       12.6       44     11.3       51       0.20
Total external debt stocks (percent of
                                              59.5      153     57.0       180      0.69
GDP)
Private external debt stocks (percent of
                                               9.2      153      9.7       180      0.74
GDP)
Domestic credit to private sector (percent
                                              24.9      215     26.8       252      0.45
of GDP)
Short-term external debt stocks (percent
                                              13.9      156     14.2       182      0.81
of total)
Foreign currency long-term sovereign
                                              11.0      109     10.8       128      0.74
debt ratings (index ranging 1-21 [best])
Note: Mean value is the average of each variable before and after oil price plunges.
The period coverage is two years, meaning that averages for “Before” cover t-2 and
t-1 and those for “After” do t+1 and t+2. N is the number of observations used to
compute mean values. P-values of Wald tests where the null hypothesis is that the
two mean values are equal are reported. The values in bold show that the two means
are statistically significantly different at least at the 10 percent level. When the
number of observations is less than five in a year, that year is excluded from the
calculation.




                                                              46
