                                                 WPS8123


Policy Research Working Paper                   8123




        Approximating Income Distribution
         Dynamics Using Aggregate Data
                               Aart Kraay
                            Roy Van der Weide




Development Research Group
Macroeconomics and Growth Team
June 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 8123


  Abstract
 This paper proposes a methodology to approximate indi-                             of mobility directly estimated from the micro data with
 vidual income distribution dynamics using only time series                         approximations based only on aggregate data. Bounds on
 data on aggregate moments of the income distribution.                              mobility are estimated for a large cross-section of coun-
 Under the assumption that individual incomes follow a                              tries, using data on aggregate moments of the income
 lognormal autoregressive process, this paper shows that                            distribution available in the World Wealth and Income
 the evolution over time of the mean and standard devi-                             Database and the World Bank’s PovcalNet database. The
 ation of log income across individuals provides sufficient                         estimated bounds on mobility imply that conventional
 information to place upper and lower bounds on the                                 anonymous growth rates of the bottom 40 percent (top
 degree of mobility in the income distribution. The paper                           10 percent) that do not account for mobility substantially
 demonstrates that these bounds are reasonably informative,                         understate (overstate) the expected growth performance of
 using the U.S. Panel Study of Income Dynamics where the                            those initially in the bottom 40 percent (top 10 percent).
 panel structure of the data allows us to compare measures




  This paper is a product of the Macroeconomics and Growth Team, Development Research Group. It is part of a larger
  effort by the World Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions
  around the world. Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The authors
  may be contacted at akraay@worldbank.org and rvanderweide@worldbank.org.




         The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
         issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
         names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
         of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
         its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                       Produced by the Research Support Team
        Approximating Income Distribution Dynamics Using Aggregate Data


                                          Aart Kraay (World Bank)

                                     Roy Van der Weide (World Bank)




Keywords: mobility, inequality, top incomes, poverty

JEL Codes: D3, I3



___________________
1818 H Street NW, Washington DC 20433, akraay@worldbank.org, rvanderweide@worldbank.org. We are grateful
to Luis Servén for helpful comments. The views expressed here are the authors’ and do not reflect those of the
World Bank, its Executive Directors, or the countries they represent.
1. Introduction

        Understanding the extent of mobility – defined here as changes in individuals’ relative incomes –
is crucial to interpreting movements over time in average incomes in different parts of the income
distribution. For example, the policy implications, and even the political acceptability, of a given change
in average income in the top 1 percent of the income distribution depends crucially on whether the
identity of those in the top income group is stable over time, or instead whether some of the initially rich
fall out of the top group and are replaced with those who were initially poorer. This distinction also
matters at the lower end of the income distribution. Consider for example the World Bank’s declared goal
of promoting “shared prosperity”, defined as growth in the bottom 40 percent of a country’s income
distribution.1 This emphasis on the bottom 40 percent sits well with the World Bank’s focus on the
conditions of the poorest in a country. However, to the extent that the role of such a goal is to evaluate
the efficacy of interventions targeted towards the initially-poor members of the bottom 40 percent, it is
necessary to know whether membership in this group is stable over time, or whether the initially-poor
beneficiaries of these interventions become richer and move out of the bottom 40 percent and are
replaced by those who started out richer and became relatively poorer.

        The ability to document and analyze income distribution dynamics at the individual or household
level is severely constrained by the scarcity of panel data sets that track individual or household incomes
over time.2 In advanced economies such as the United States, long and high-quality panel data on
household incomes is available in the Panel Study on Income Dynamics (PSID). However, such high-quality
long panel data sets in developing countries are rare. Instead, it is much more common for survey data
to be available in the form of repeated cross-sections, with different samples of individuals appearing in
each round of the survey. In cases where researchers have access to record-level survey data, it is possible
to deploy a variety of pseudo-panel estimation techniques to obtain approximations to income
distribution dynamics at the individual level.3 In many cases, however, access to record-level data from

1
  See for example Basu (2013).
2
  The different datasets we work with in this paper have different units of observation at the micro level, including
individuals, households, and tax units. They also differ in whether they measure consumption or income. For
terminological convenience we will refer to income distribution dynamics at the individual level wherever it is
possible to do so without confusion.
3
  See for example Dang, Lanjouw, Luoto and McKenzie (2014) for a recent application of such techniques to
transitions into and out of poverty. Another approach is to move away from measures of income mobility and instead
focus on measures of occupational and/or educational mobility, based on comparison of occupations and/or
education levels of parents and children, using individual surveys in which information on the occupations and/or
education of multiple generations in the same family can be obtained at a single point in time. See for example Long
and Ferrie (2013) for a comparison of the US and Great Britain, and Sinha (2017) for evidence from India.

                                                         2
the survey is restricted, making it difficult to deploy pseudo-panel techniques that rely on micro data from
repeated cross sections. In yet other cases, particular for older datasets such as historical income tax
records, the micro data may simply no longer exist, and therefore cannot be analyzed to measure mobility
directly. In these cases, researchers may only have access to summary statistics on the distribution of
income such as the mean and the Gini coefficient, or alternatively grouped data on the proportion of
individuals in different income brackets, but not the record-level data from the entire micro dataset itself.

        This paper proposes and implements a method for approximating individual-level income
distribution dynamics in these situations where only aggregate summary statistics on the distribution of
income are available. Specifically, we consider a situation in which the researcher only has access to time
series data on the mean of the income distribution, as well as some measure of dispersion of income
across individuals, such as the Gini coefficient or the income share of a particular subgroup. We assume
that the underlying surveys are sufficiently comparable that the observed aggregate moments
characterize the same population across the successive surveys.

        Our key identifying assumption is that individual incomes follow an autoregressive lognormal
process with individual fixed effects. Under this data generating process, the joint distribution of individual
incomes in any two periods is fully characterized by the mean and standard deviation of log incomes in
the two periods (which can be inferred from the observed aggregate moments of the income distribution),
and a mobility parameter characterizing the covariance of individual incomes between the two periods
(that we cannot observe directly in the aggregate data). This mobility parameter depends on two
underlying parameters of the data generating process: the autoregressive coefficient on log income, and
the cross-sectional variance of the individual effects. We show that the limited information embodied in
the evolution over time of the observed aggregate moments is sufficient to allow us to estimate the
autoregressive coefficient on log income as well as to place bounds on the variance of the individual
effects. This in turn permits us to place bounds on the extent of mobility in the income distribution, even
though we do not observe income dynamics at the individual level.

        In order to assess the usefulness of these bounds, we use record-level data from the PSID that
permits us to directly measure mobility using micro-level panel data. We then discard all of the
information in the record-level data, and use only the two time-series on the mean and standard deviation
of log income to retrieve bounds on mobility based on aggregate data. We show that these bounds
contain the point estimates obtained using the record-level data, and moreover are reasonably tight.
Encouraged by these findings, we apply our methodology to two large cross-country datasets. The first

                                                      3
of these is the World Wealth and Income Database (WID), constructed by Thomas Piketty and his
collaborators4, which reports summary statistics on average income and top income shares compiled from
tabulated data on tax records. From this database, we retrieve time-series data on mean income and the
bottom 90% income share for 19 countries with reasonably complete annual time series data during the
post-World War II period. For the median country in this sample, we have 60 years of annual data on
aggregate moments on which to base our estimates of mobility. The second data source is the
compendium of household survey data for a large set of mostly developing countries in the World Bank’s
PovcalNet database.     This dataset provides summary statistics on the distribution of income (or
consumption, depending on the survey) for over 1400 household surveys in a large cross-section of
developing countries, in some cases extending back to the 1980s. We retrieve data on mean income (or
consumption) and the Gini coefficient for these surveys, and restrict attention to the set of 28 countries
for which we have at least 10 surveys. The median country in this sample has 16 household surveys
spanning a period of 17 years.

        We apply our methodology to find bounds on mobility for the countries in these two datasets.
Our estimates confirm that among the high income countries in the WID database, the US ranks as the
country with the lowest income persistence, while countries with high income persistence include all of
the Scandinavian countries. Interestingly, when we correlate our estimates with GDP per capita, we find
that lower income persistence is associated with higher income. This observation applies both to the WID
and the PovcalNet estimates. As we discuss in more detail below, this observation is not an obvious
consequence of our assumptions, and suggests that countries with greater persistence must have other
characteristics conducive to more rapid growth.

        We use these estimated bounds on mobility to generate bounds on the difference between
“anonymous” growth rates of group average incomes (that do not require membership in the group to be
stable over time) with corresponding “non-anonymous” growth rates (that track the performance of the
same initial group of individuals over time). When we compare estimates of anonymous income growth
rates among the bottom 40% (the World Bank’s measure of Shared Prosperity) to their non-anonymous
counterparts, the difference is substantial: on average, non-anonymous growth rates exceed anonymous
ones by four percentage points in the WID and three percentage points in PovcalNet in annual terms. This
means that by tracking shared prosperity anonymously, policy makers could inadvertently overlook the


4
 The full team behind the WID database includes Facundo Alvaredo, Lucas Chancel, Thomas Piketty, Emmanuel
Saez, and Gabriel Zucman.

                                                    4
successes with which originally poor households have been able to increase their incomes. This ordering
is reversed when we examine growth of average incomes at the top of the income distribution –
anonymous top incomes grow faster than non-anonymous top incomes do. Also here the magnitude of
the differences we observe is considerable, at over 10 percentage points in the WID and 8 percentage
points in PovcalNet. This suggest that anonymous top income growth rates, while a good indicator of
changes in inequality in society, are not well-suited for estimating the expected income success of those
who occupy the top of the income distribution at any given point in time.

        Our paper provides an alternative approach to the large literature on estimating income
distribution dynamics using pseudo-panel data techniques that track the evolution of cohorts over time.5
This literature circumvents the need for true panel data that tracks individuals over time, but it does
assume that the researcher has access to microdata from repeated series of cross-sectional household
surveys. In contrast, our approach does not require access to any record level data, but instead shows
how the parameters governing individual income distribution dynamics can be retrieved from time series
data on aggregate moments only.6            The obvious advantage of this is that by reducing the data
requirements to a minimum, it significantly expands the number of countries where this approach can be
applied. It also makes it possible to obtain estimates for historic periods for which aggregate moments
have been preserved, but record level data will be hard if not impossible to come by. The price we pay
for working with time series rather than pseudo-panel data is that we have to work with a much smaller
number of observations. We make the most of the data that we have by relying on finite sample
estimation methods (Andrews, 1993), and optimizing the trade-off between bias and precision. Finally,
while we are by no means the first to notice that anonymous and non-anonymous growth rates can in
principle diverge widely in the presence of mobility, we are – to our knowledge – the first to be able to
provide estimates of the gap between the two for a large cross-section of countries.7

        The rest of this paper proceeds as follows. In Section 2 we state our main assumptions regarding
the lognormal data generating process for individual incomes, and show how mobility is fully


5
  See for example Deaton (1985), Moffitt (1993), Collado (1997), Verbeek and Vella (2005), Antman and McKenzie
(2007), Inoue (2008), and Dang, Lanjouw, Luoto and McKenzie (2014).
6
  In this respect, our work is similar in spirit to Caselli and Ventura (2000), study a series of growth models with
heterogenous agents and show that under fairly general heterogeneity, (1) the aggregate economy behaves as if
aggregate variables represent the decisions of a representative agent; and (2) the evolution of the aggregate
variables characterizing the decisions of the representative are informative about the individual-level dynamics of
income, consumption, and wealth.
7
  See Jenkins and Van Kerm (2006), Grimm (2007), Van Kerm (2009), and Bourguignon (2011) for discussions of the
difference between anonymous growth incidence curves and their non-anonymous counterparts.

                                                         5
characterized by the observed aggregate moments of the income distribution, together with a single key
unobserved mobility parameter. In Section 3, we show how to obtain bounds on this mobility parameter
using only information embedded in the evolution over time of the aggregate moments of the income
distribution. Section 4 validates our methodology in the PSID data, and Section 5 provides estimates of
mobility for a large cross-section of countries based only on the aggregate summary statistics on the
distribution of income available in the WID and PovcalNet databases. In Section 6 we apply the
lognormality assumption and the estimates of mobility from the previous sections to document the
differences between anonymous and non-anonymous growth rates of group average incomes. Section 7
concludes.



2. Lognormal Income Distribution Dynamics



          Throughout the paper, we rely on the following assumption regarding the process generating
individual incomes:

Assumption A1: The logarithm of income of individual         at time ,        , is generated by the following
autoregressive process:

 (1)                                            =        +   +      +     ,



where       is an autoregressive parameter satisfying 0 ≤    < 1;   is a common factor; the innovations
and       are independent and normally distributed with zero mean and variances            and    ; and initial

income is       =      +    +    .

          Although very simple, this data generating process gives rise to non-trivial income distribution
dynamics through the interplay of two forces. On the one hand, realizations of the idiosyncratic shock
generate changes in individuals’ relative incomes over time. On the other hand, there are two sources of
persistence over time in relative incomes: the autoregressive term              , and the individual effect   .
Overall income distribution dynamics will reflect the balance of these sources of changes and persistence
in relative incomes. Note also that we allow the common factor,         , and the variance of the idiosyncratic
errors,      , to vary over time, but we require the autoregressive parameter        and the variance of the
individual effect     to be stable over time.


                                                     6
          Since the innovations in log income, as well as initial log income, are assumed to be normally
distributed, log incomes are normally distributed in every period, as summarized in the following
proposition:

Proposition 1: Assumption A1 implies that log individual incomes               and          are jointly normally
distributed:


    (2)                                     ~             ,                          ,




where        and      denote the cross-sectional mean and variance of log income at time , and 0 ≤             ≡

    +          ≤ 1.


Proof: See Appendix A

          Proposition 1 states that log incomes in any two consecutive periods are normally distributed.8
The proof in the appendix generalizes this to the case of any two non-consecutive periods, which will be
useful when applying our methodology to irregularly-spaced survey data. In addition to establishing
lognormality of income at all points in time, Proposition 1 introduces a key composite parameter
which summarizes the comovement of individual incomes over time. This composite parameter can be
interpreted as the OLS estimator of the slope of a regression of individual income on lagged individual
                           (   ,   )
income, i.e.          =             . This regression coefficient captures two distinct sources of persistence

in individual incomes. First, higher values of the autoregressive parameter              naturally imply greater

persistence in individual incomes. Second, higher values of                imply that a greater share of the

dispersion across individuals in          is generated by dispersion in the individual effect,    . This implies
greater persistence, since by definition individuals receive the same individual effect in each period. Note
that since         summarizes persistence in individual incomes, it is closely negatively related with mobility.
In fact, one of the most common empirical summary statistics of mobility in panel datasets where



8
 See Lopez and Serven (2006) for cross-country evidence that the lognormal distribution matches well the reported
data on quintile shares for a large compilation of household surveys across countries and over time. Battistin,
Blundell and Lewbel (2009) focus on US microdata and show that the distribution of income is close to, but not
exactly, lognormal, and that the distributions of permanent income and consumption are very close to lognormal.
See also Cowell and Flachaire (2015), Section 6.3.1.2.

                                                        7
individual incomes are tracked over time is 1 −                               . For this reason, we will refer to the composite
parameter          as a “mobility parameter”, as it is the workhorse empirical measure of relative mobility.

         Let Φ(. ) denote the cumulative normal distribution function, and define the quantile function
  ( ) =	      +     Φ      ( ), which returns the log income level associated with each percentile                              of the
income distribution. Define the random variable                           |       ( ) as log income at time of an individual who
was at the        percentile of the income distribution at time − 1. The probability distribution of                        |     ( )
fully characterizes the mobility prospects of an individual who starts out at the                                  percentile of the
income distribution, and is summarized in Proposition 2.

Proposition 2: Given Assumption A1,                    |       ( ) is distributed normally with the following mean and
variance:

 (3)                                        |       ( )≡        |        ( ) =         +           Φ   ( )

 (4)                                   |        ≡          |   ( )−           |     ( )    =     −           ,

Proof: See Appendix A.

Proposition 2, which follows immediately from applying the properties of conditional mean and variance
of the bivariate normal distribution to Equation (2), shows a key feature of the lognormal data generating
process in Assumption A1 -- the distribution of                     |      ( ) depends only on aggregate moments (the mean
and variance of log income), and a single mobility parameter                               . In the following section, we show that
it is possible to retrieve empirical bounds on                          using only information in the evolution over time of the
aggregate moments of the income distribution. This in turn implies that we can empirically characterize
income mobility using only data on aggregate moments of the income distribution, i.e. using only the time
series data on       and      .

         Proposition 2 also helps to clarify the relative mobility interpretation of                         . To see this, subtract
       ( )=         +       Φ         ( ) from both sides of Equation (3) to obtain:




 (5)                              |        ( )−        ( )=(              −         )+(        − 1)     Φ    ( )



This expression decomposes the expected change in log income of an individual starting at the
percentile of the income distribution at time                           − 1 into two components. The first term              −

                                                                          8
corresponds to the change in the mean of log income, which by definition contributes equally to
everyone’s income growth, and thus leaves relative incomes unchanged. This term can be thought of as
capturing absolute mobility. The second term (                − 1)    Φ       ( ) corresponds to the expected
change in relative income, and thus captures relative mobility. In the benchmark case of             = 1, the
expected change in relative income is zero, i.e. there is no relative mobility in expectation. The lower is
       , the greater is relative mobility since the expected change in relative incomes becomes larger in
absolute value. In particular, when         < 1, individuals starting out in the bottom half of the income
distribution at time − 1 will expect to see faster-than-average income growth (since when           < 0.5 we
have Φ      ( ) < 0 and (     − 1)      Φ    ( ) > 0). That is, the initially poor (in expectation) get richer
in relative terms. Conversely, an individual starting in the top half of the income distribution with   > 0.5
can expect to have income growth below the average. That is, the initially rich (in expectation) get poorer
in relative terms.

          The mobility parameter        also governs uncertainty about changes in relative incomes. From
Equation (4) it is clear that for a given initial dispersion in incomes        , higher values of   imply less
uncertainty about changes in relative incomes. The intuition for this is straightforward. Given an initial
dispersion in incomes, higher values of          are due to higher values of the autoregressive parameter ,
and higher values of the variance of the individual effect,          , both of which are sources of greater
persistence in individual incomes. This in turn means a smaller role for idiosyncratic shocks to income,
  , and therefore less uncertainty about relative incomes.




3. Estimating Upper and Lower Bounds on Mobility Using Aggregate Data

          A key feature of the data generating process in Assumption A1 is that it implies a simple
autoregressive processes for the evolution over time of the aggregate moments of the income
distribution, as summarized in the following proposition:

Proposition 3: Assumption A1 implies that the mean and variance of log income follow:

 (6)                                                  =         +



                                                              1+
 (7)                                         =            +               +
                                                              1−


                                                       9
Proof: See Appendix A

Proposition 3 shows how the evolution over time of aggregate moments of the income distribution
reflects the parameters of the underlying data generating process. In this section we show that, given
time series data on the aggregate moments          and        , we can use Proposition 3 to recover estimates of
the autoregressive parameter, , as well as bounds on the variance of the individual effect,                 . This in
turn means that we can recover bounds on the key mobility parameter                          , and thereby obtain
approximate income distribution dynamics using only aggregate data.

          We consider situations in which time series data on mean income and a summary statistic on
dispersion, such as the Gini coefficient or a group income share, are available for a series of surveys of the
same population. We assume that the unobserved movements over time in the common component of
income,       , can be approximated with a linear function of time plus an i.i.d. zero-mean error term, i.e.
   =      +      +    . Similarly, we assume that we can approximate the unobserved movements over time
in the variance of the idiosyncratic shock to income,             with a linear function of time plus an i.i.d. zero-
mean error term. Since the variance of the individual effect,             , is constant over time, this means that

we can write the second and third terms in Equation (7) as                 	    +     =     +      +    .

          Inserting these approximations into Equations (6) and (7) results in the following system of two
equations:

 (8)                                           =          +        +      +



 (9)                                           =              +     +      +



Given time series data on the mean and variance of log income, we can obtain an estimate of                 by simply
regressing      on its lag and a time trend (i.e. from Equation (8)), or we can obtain an estimate of             by
regressing       on its lag and a time trend (i.e. from Equation (9)). In some of our empirical applications,
notably the PSID and the PovcalNet data, the available time series are quite short, rarely longer than 20
years, and frequently shorter. This has two implications for our estimation strategy. First, the short time
series raises concerns about small-sample bias in the estimation of . Specifically, Andrews (1993) shows
that the OLS estimator of the autoregressive coefficient in a linear AR(1) process around a deterministic

                                                         10
trend is biased downwards in finite samples, and that this bias can be substantial. Andrews (1993)
proposes a bias-corrected estimator that addresses this problem, though at the cost that the bias-
corrected estimator has higher variance than the OLS estimator. We balance this tradeoff between bias
and precision by taking a linear combination of the OLS estimator and the bias-corrected estimator that
minimizes mean squared error. We apply this procedure to obtain an estimator of               from Equation (8),
and an estimator of     from Equation (9). Second, the scarcity of time series data on aggregate moments
suggests that it is important to combine information from the dynamics of        and        into a single estimate
of . We do this by taking a mean squared error-minimizing linear combination of the estimators based
on Equation (8) and Equation (9), to arrive at a single estimate of      reflecting the dynamics of both the
mean and the variance of log income. Further details on the estimation strategy are in Appendix B.

         Given this estimate of , which we denote , we next obtain bounds on the mobility parameter

     =    +           . Note that        is an increasing function of the variance of the individual effect      .

Thus, a lower bound on          can be obtained by setting         = 0, i.e.           = . This lower bound
corresponds to the benchmark of the highest degree of mobility consistent with our estimate of             based
on aggregate data, since we have turned off any additional persistence coming from the individual effect.

         We obtain an upper bound          , i.e. a lower bound on mobility, by finding a corresponding upper
bound on the variance of the individual effect. To do this, note that the variance of the idiosyncratic
component of the error term in Equation (7) must be weakly positive, i.e.              ≥ 0. Using Equation (7)

and the estimate of , this implies that        ≤       (    −         ). Given our assumption that        and

are stable over the estimation sample, this upper bound must hold for every period                 ∈ , where
represents the time periods that comprise the estimation sample. This means that the tightest possible

upper bound for the variance of the individual effect is               ≤ min            (     −         ) ≡      .
                                                                           ∈

Inserting this into the expression for         , and recalling that our data generating process implies that

     ≤ 1, we have            = min 1, +                .


         Note that the bounds            and          depend only on the aggregate moments of the income
distribution,   and       , as well as the estimate , which as discussed above can also be obtained using
only aggregate moments. This means that we can obtain bounds on the mobility parameter                     and in
turn approximate individual-level income distribution dynamics using only aggregate data. Whether these


                                                       11
bounds are useful, in the sense of delineating a reasonably narrow range of values for            , is an empirical
question to which we turn in the remainder of the paper.




4. Comparing Actual and Approximate Mobility in the PSID

        In this section, we verify that our methodology for placing bounds on the mobility parameter
provides reasonably informative bounds on true mobility, using data from the US Panel Study of Income
Dynamics (PSID). We first estimate bounds on              by applying the approach described in the previous
sections to the time-series of the cross-sectional mean and standard deviation of log income in the PSID.
We then take advantage of the panel structure of the PSID micro data to estimate the mobility parameter
     directly, and compare these micro estimates with the bounds obtained using only aggregate data.

        We work with annual rounds of the PSID between 1977 and 1997.9 The unit of observation in the
PSID is the household, and we take nominal family income per capita deflated by the national consumer
price index as our measure of real income per capita. Since measures of inequality are sensitive to
extreme observations, we discard a small number of household-year observations corresponding to
implausibly low and implausibly high per capita incomes.10 We then compute the mean and variance of
log per capita income, using the sampling weights provided in the PSID, and apply our methodology for
estimating    and obtaining bounds on           to the resulting two time-series of aggregate moments.

        Table 1 summarizes our results. Panel A reports the estimates and standard errors of the
autoregressive parameter . We first report estimates based on the dynamics of the mean of log income
(Equation (8)) and the variance of log income (Equation (9)). The three columns correspond to the OLS
estimates, the small sample bias-corrected OLS estimates, and the MSE-minimizing linear combination of
the two. Comparing the first two columns suggests that the bias correction is important – the bias
corrected estimates of     are substantially larger than the OLS estimates, increasing from 0.65 to 1 (based
in the dynamics of     ), and increasing from 0.76 to 0.96 (based on the dynamics of            ). However, the

9
  After 1997, the PSID switches to biannual frequency. We also considered working with a biannual version of the
PSID from 1977 to the present. However, over this longer time series, there is clear evidence of a structural break
in the time series for the standard deviation of log income. Accommodating this trend break in a series of only 17
biannual observations led to estimates of based on Equations (8) and (9) that were highly imprecise. For this
reason, we work with the shorter 1977-1997 time period with annual data. In the following subsection, we allow
for structural breaks when estimating Equation (8) and (9) using longer time series on aggregate moments available
in the World Wealth and Income Database.
10
   Specifically, we drop households log per capita income below $400 or above $440,000, corresponding to the
bottom 0.8 percent and top 0.04 percent of the household-year observations in the raw data.

                                                        12
comparison also reveals that the bias-corrected estimates are much less precise than the OLS estimates.
Recognizing this bias versus precision tradeoff, we calculate a MSE-minimizing combination of the OLS
and bias corrected-OLS estimates, reported in the third column. The last column reports the MSE-
minimizing weight on the OLS estimator, which is 1.07 for the first equation, and 0.80 for the second.11
This results in MSE-minimizing estimates closer to the OLS estimates, at 0.63 and 0.80 in the two
equations. These are our preferred estimates of              based on the observed dynamics of the mean and
variance of log income.

           Despite the short time series, these estimates are reasonably precise, with standard errors of 0.07
and 0.17 respectively.12       However, since these combined estimates minimize MSE, they remain
downward-biased. Comparing the MSE-minimizing estimates in the third column with the bias-corrected
OLS estimates in the second column suggests this downward bias is non-trivial, at 0.37 for the estimate
based on the dynamics of the mean of log income, and at 0.20 for the estimate based on the dynamics of
the variance of log income. To further improve the precision of our estimates, we combine the two single-
equation MSE-minimizing estimates into a single estimate by taking an MSE-minimizing linear
combination of the two, which is reported in the last row of Table A. This results in our final estimate,
which is     = 0.81 with a standard error of 0.18.

           In the bottom panel of Table 1 we report our upper-bound estimate of the variance of the

individual effect given our preferred estimate of           = 0.81, which is                 = 0.021. To put this estimate in
perspective, it is useful to consider a benchmark version of Equation (7) in which the variance of the
idiosyncratic shock to income is constant, i.e.          =           . In this case, the cross-sectional variance of log
                                                   ∗                                                    ∗
income converges to a steady-state value               =(        )
                                                                     +(      )
                                                                                 , and   (      )
                                                                                                    /       can be interpreted as

the share of steady-state inequality due to the variation in the individual effect. In our sample, the average
                                                                                                             ∗
over time of the variance of log income is 0.73, and using this as an estimate of                                together with our
preferred estimate of       results in an upper bound of 83 percent of steady state inequality is due to the
variance of the individual effect.




11
  As discussed in Appendix B, the MSE-minimizing weights need not be between zero and one.
12
  A somewhat surprising feature of the estimates in the first row of Table 2 is that the standard error of the preferred
estimator (which denotes the MSE-minimizing combination of the OLS and BC estimators) is notably smaller than
the standard errors of both the OLS and the BC estimator. To interpret this, it is important to recall that we are
minimizing MSE, and so the standard error of the combined estimator is not a good summary of the desirability of
the estimator since it does not reflect the bias that also is present.

                                                            13
        In the next two columns of the bottom panel of Table 1, we report the lower bound and the
average over time of the upper bound on the mobility parameter,                , which are 0.81 and 0.97,
respectively.   In Figure 1, we display the time-evolution of our estimated bounds on mobility based on
the aggregate moments. Recall that the lower bound is , which is constant over time, while the upper

bound is equal to          = min 1, +                and varies over time with the observed data on         .

Purely for visual reference, the dashed line indicates the midpoint of the range between the lower and
upper bound estimates.

        The key question of interest is how these bounds on the mobility parameter            compare with
actual mobility as measured at the household level. To answer this question, recall that        is simply the
slope coefficient from an OLS regression of household-level log per capita income on its lagged value.
Given the panel structure of the PSID, we can immediately retrieve a time series of estimates of          by
regressing income on lagged income at the household level in successive rounds of the PSID. In our
baseline specification, we estimate this series of OLS regressions in each period using all households with
the requisite per capita income data in the current and previous period. These baseline estimates are
superimposed on the macro estimates based on aggregate data in the top panel of Figure 1. These
baseline micro estimates of       fall within the bounds estimated using the macro data for all but the last
four years of the sample. Over the entire time period, the micro estimates of        average to 0.83, falling
within the range of the average lower and upper bounds of 0.80 and 0.97. However, as is apparent from
Figure 1, these baseline micro estimates fall closer to the bottom of the range based on the macro
estimates.

        There are two features of the PSID microdata that suggest relevant variants on these baseline
micro estimates of mobility. The first is that the PSID is a rotating panel, and only around a quarter of the
household-year observations correspond to households that appear in all 21 rounds between 1977 and
1997, while the median household is observed for 16 of the 21 PSID rounds. In our baseline specification,
the number of households in each cross-sectional regression ranges from 5,570 to 7,587. This raises the
possibility that at least some of the fluctuations over time in the micro estimates of       reflect changes
in the composition of households in the PSID from year to year.         To investigate the possible role of
changing sample composition, we generate an alternative set of micro estimates of             by estimating
the same series of cross-sectional regressions of household per capita income on lagged income, but
restricting attention to the much-reduced sample of 1,637 households that appear in all 21 rounds of the
PSID.

                                                     14
         The second issue concerns the interpretation of year-to-year fluctuations in household per capita
income. These fluctuations in part reflect changes in household size, as well as changes in the number of
income earners in the household, which may not be well-captured by our simple lognormal data
generating process. While it is possible to directly observe household size, it is not possible to cleanly
identify fluctuations in household income per capita due to changes in the number of income earners in
the household.13 Beyond these concerns, there are also perennial thorny questions concerning the effects
of measurement error in family income on the estimates of                  , which could lead to different biases
depending on its correlation with income and over time.14 One crude way of partially addressing both
these concerns simultaneously is to filter our estimation sample for influential observations. We do this
using a Cook’s distance criterion, and drop all household-year observations in our pooled baseline
regression sample corresponding to the top one percent of observations on the Cook’s distance statistic.

         The bottom panel of Figure 1 superimposes these two alternative micro estimates of                    on the
same grey shaded region corresponding to the bounds on mobility based on aggregate data. Both variants
result in slightly higher micro estimates of           , with both averaging to 0.86, as opposed to 0.83 in the
baseline. These alternative micro estimates of              now fall closer to the center of the range based on
the macro data, and particularly so in the middle decade of our 20-year sample. Overall, the picture that
emerges from Figure 1 is that the bounds on mobility we can estimate using only data on the evolution of
aggregate moments of the income distribution are reasonably narrow, and for the most part include
estimates of mobility estimated from the micro panel data.




5. Cross-Country Estimates of Mobility Using Only Aggregate Data

         Encouraged by the results of the previous section, which show that our approach delivers
reasonable bounds on mobility in the PSID where mobility can be directly observed in the record-level
panel data, in this section we obtain bounds on the mobility parameter               in two multi-country datasets
where we have data only on aggregate moments of the income distribution. We work with two such
datasets. The first is the World Wealth and Income Database (WID), which assembles estimates of top


13
   This is because the PSID collects information on family income and income of the household head, but does not
collect data separately on incomes of other household members.
14
   The limited available information based on linking survey incomes with administrative data in the US suggests that
the overall effect of measurement error on mobility measures is small (see Jantti and Jenkins (2015), Section 10.4.1),
although these authors caution that this evidence is best interpreted as a reflection of how little is known about this
issue.

                                                          15
income shares based on tabulations of income tax records for a large number of countries, based on the
work of Anthony Atkinson, Thomas Piketty, and their collaborators.15 We retrieve time series data on
mean income and the income share of the bottom 90 or 99 percent of income earners (depending on data
availability), for a set of 19 countries with long annual time series data on these aggregate moments in
the post World War II period.16 We convert these two summary statistics into the mean and variance of
log income using our maintained assumption of lognormality.17 The WID predominantly contains data
from advanced economies, and our set of 19 countries from this source includes only three developing
countries: China, India, and Mauritius.

         Our task of estimating        based on the evolution over time of these aggregate moments is
complicated by the fact that the time period covered for many of these countries is long, and likely spans
some structural breaks. Most of the countries in our sample have data beginning shortly after World War
II, and visual inspection of trends in the mean and variance of log income suggest a trend break in these
series around the 1970s for many countries (see Figure 2). Three countries in our sample (United States,
France, and Germany) also have fairly long time series data prior to World War II, where again it seems
plausible that income dynamics may have been different relative to the post-war period. We therefore
divide the data into sub-periods, and allow for different time trends by sub-period. For the three countries
with pre-World War II data, we consider the available data up to 1939 as one distinct period. For the post-
World War II period, we allow the data to select a single structural break in the time trends. Figure 2
illustrates this process of identifying trend breaks for different time periods for the three countries in our
sample with pre-World War II data. The left and right panels of the figure report the time series of the
mean and standard deviation of log income, with the trend lines for different sub-periods superimposed.

         We impose the restriction that is the same over the entire time-series available for each country,
but we allow the intercept and time trend in Equations (8) and (9) to differ across the sub-periods for each



15
   See for example Atkinson and Piketty (2007, 2010), Atkinson et al. (2011), Banerjee and Piketty (2005), and Roine
and Waldenstrom (2008).
16
   Our default is to use the bottom 90 percent share when available. We use data on bottom 99 percent for 5
countries (United Kingdom, India, Japan, Mauritius, and Singapore), for which data on bottom 90 percent is either
limited or not available in the WID database.
17
   While the top incomes data in the WID is based on tabulated tax records, mean income is an estimate of income
of all individuals including those who do not file tax returns, often based on national accounts measures of household
income (see e.g. Atkinson et al. (2011) for details). The WID report data for income shares higher than the top 10%
that we use here, and the very top income shares are based on fitting a Pareto distribution to the highest observed
income groups. We use the top 10% share since it is least likely to reflect the Pareto imputation of the top tail of
the income distribution, and therefore is more likely to be consistent with our lognormality assumption.

                                                         16
country.18 We compute OLS and bias-corrected OLS estimates of           based on the evolution over time of
the mean of log income, and based on the evolution over time of the variance of log income, for each
country. We also compute the MSE-minimizing weighted average of the two for each equation separately,
and the MSE-minimizing weighted average of these across the two equations to arrive at our preferred
estimate of   for each country.

        Our second application of this approach draws on the PovcalNet database maintained by the
World Bank. This database is a large compendium of household survey data for developing countries, and
is the basis for the World Bank’s global poverty estimates. The database, as accessed in September 2016,
contains records corresponding to 1,411 household surveys covering virtually the entire developing world,
and for some countries extends back to the 1980s. For each survey, the PovcalNet database reports the
mean of either per capita income or per capita consumption, depending on the welfare measure used in
the survey, as well a number of summary measures of poverty and inequality. We extract time series data
on mean income and the Gini coefficient for 28 countries with at least 10 household surveys. Two
countries in our sample, China and Indonesia, have separate surveys for rural and urban populations,
resulting in a total of 30 time-series of household surveys to which to apply our methodology.19 Again
relying on the assumption of lognormality, we convert these series into series for the mean and variance
of log income, and then we implement the procedure described in Section 3 to obtain estimates of          and
upper and lower bounds on mobility. Because the available time series in PovcalNet is much shorter than
in the WID, we do not allow for trend breaks when estimating Equations (8) and (9). A visual inspection of
the time-series of the mean and variance of log income for these countries shows no obvious signs of
structural breaks in the data. As with the WID dataset, we generate OLS and bias-corrected OLS estimates
of , as well as an MSE-minimizing combination of the two, for each of the 30 surveys.

        We report the results of these two empirical applications of our methodology in Tables 2 and 3.
In the first column of both tables we present our preferred estimate of for each country. The underlying
OLS and bias-corrected OLS estimates from the equations for the evolution of the mean and variance of
log income, and the corresponding MSE-minimizing weighted averages, are reported in Appendix Tables


18
   To minimize the influence of a small number of observations corresponding to large swings in the mean and
variance of log income, we eliminate from our estimation sample observations for which Cook’s Distance exceeds
0.2 and/or the Studentized residuals exceed 3.5.
19
   Most of the countries we selected from the PovcalNet database have annual household surveys, but a few have
regularly surveys once every two or three years. We annualize our estimates of and       for these countries to
make them comparable to those based on annual data. Expressions for the irregularly-spaced versions of our main
results are detailed in Appendix A.

                                                      17
B1 and B2, together with details on the estimation sample and the MSE-minimizing weights. The next two

columns of Tables 2 and 3 report our upper-bound estimate of the variance of the individual effect,
and its contribution to steady-state inequality, and the final two columns report the lower bound and the
average over time of the upper bound on the mobility parameter,                and          .

        Figure 3 provides a useful visual summary of our estimates. In the top panel, we plot our preferred
estimate of   (on the vertical axis) against log real GDP per capita (on the horizontal axis). The red circles
correspond to our estimates for developing countries, while the blue squares correspond to advanced
economies. The bottom panel plots the over-time average of the mid-point of our range for                , i.e.
         −           /2 (on the vertical axis) against log real GDP per capita (on the horizontal axis). Our
estimates of persistence    tend to be higher in the WID data than those based on the PovcalNet data –
the mean estimate across countries of         is 0.86 in the WID sample, while it is only 0.63 within the
PovcalNet sample. It is difficult to say whether this reflects an actual tendency for persistence to be lower
in the developing countries covered in PovcalNet when compared with the largely OECD countries in the
WID sample. An alternative interpretation is that our OLS estimates of , as well as the MSE-minimizing
combination of the OLS and bias-corrected OLS estimates, have greater small-sample downward bias in
the PovcalNet sample where the available time series is much shorter than in the WID sample. However,
within each group, there is a tendency for persistence to be lower in richer countries, and this correlation
is significant at the 10 percent level within the WID sample of countries. The bottom panel of Figure 3,
which plots the mobility parameter          against log real GDP per capita, looks broadly similar to the top
panel, with the exception that the negative relationship with per capita income is less pronounced in the
PovcalNet sample for        as it is for   in the top panel. Recall that      is a function of   and the share

of the variance of the individual effect in overall inequality,       . The similarity between the top and

bottom panels of Figure 3 suggests that cross-country differences in             is much smaller than cross-

country differences in .

        Figure 4 plots the evolution over time of the bounds on            for the United States derived from
the WID data. The bounds are displayed as a grey-shaded region. The lower bound of this range is the
point estimate of    = 0.66, while the upper bound varies over time with             . As in Figure 1, we also
plot the mid-point of the range as a dashed line. Finally, we superimpose on this graph the mobility
estimates based on the PSID micro data, for the 1997-1997 period. Although the bounds on mobility
displayed in Figure 4 are based on very different data than the PSID (tabulated tax records versus a

                                                      18
household panel survey), it is interesting to note that the micro estimates of mobility fall mostly within
the bounds based on macro data (although more towards the upper half of the range). It is also useful to
interpret the movements over time in the upper bound on the mobility parameter. Recall that this upper

bound is          =    +          and moves inversely with the variance of log income,         . For example,

the decline in           since 1980, i.e. the increase in our upper-bound estimate of mobility, is driven
entirely by the increase in overall inequality during this period, i.e. the increase in    . The rationale for
this is straightforward. Given our identifying assumption that          and      are constant over time, we
interpret the increase in overall inequality as reflecting an increase over time in the variance of the
idiosyncratic shock,    . Since these shocks are independent over time, they have only transitory effects
on income, and as a result mobility is higher.




6. Application: Anonymous and Non-Anonymous Growth in a Cross-Section of Countries

        Popular discussions of trends in inequality frequently refer to income growth rates of “the rich”
(defined as the top X% of the income distribution) and income growth rates of “the poor” (defined as the
bottom Y% of the income distribution). One prominent example is the World Bank’s declared goal of
promoting “shared prosperity”, defined as growth in the bottom 40 percent of the income distribution.
Similarly, a body of work by Thomas Piketty and his collaborators has drawn widespread attention to
trends in “top incomes”, defined as average incomes in the upper percentiles of the income distribution.

        Measuring and interpreting the income growth rates of such population subgroups is complicated
by the basic data problem that motivates this paper: true panel data tracking individuals over time is
rarely available. Absent such panel data, group-average growth rates typically are calculated based on
repeated cross sections. For example, the growth rate of “the poor” would be calculated by comparing
average incomes in the bottom Y% at two points in time. Since growth rates calculated in this way do not
track individuals over time, they are referred to as “anonymous” growth rates. In contrast, “non-
anonymous” growth rates track the same individuals in an initial reference group over time, and can be
very different from their “anonymous” counterparts when there is mobility in the income distribution.20


20
  We are by no means the first to notice this distinction -- see Jenkins and Van Kerm (2006), Grimm (2007), Van
Kerm (2009), and Bourguignon (2011) for discussions of the difference between anonymous growth incidence curves
and their non-anonymous counterparts. The novelty in this section of our paper is that we are able to compute
estimates of the difference between anonymous and non-anonymous growth rates for a large sample of countries,
using our estimates of mobility based only on aggregate moments of the income distribution.

                                                      19
However, given the scarcity of true panel data, these non-anonymous growth rates are rarely observed
directly.

        This distinction can have significant policy implications as well, precisely because it reflects the
underlying degree of mobility in the income distribution. For example, rapid growth in top incomes might
be more politically acceptable if it were accompanied by significant mobility of individuals into and out of
the top income bracket. Similarly, if the policy objective is to track the effectiveness of an intervention
aimed at raising incomes in the poorest Y% of the population, conclusions could be quite different using
the anonymous and non-anonymous growth rates, since the latter track the performance of the initial
beneficiaries of the intervention while the former does not.

        In this section we obtain analytical expressions for the difference between anonymous and non-
anonymous growth rates implied by the lognormal data generating process described in Assumption A1.
These expressions depend only on aggregate moments and the mobility parameter                    . We then use
our bounds on         from the previous section to obtain bounds on the difference between anonymous
and non-anonymous growth rates in a cross-section of countries, even though the true panel data
required to track individuals over time is not available for most of these countries.

        We begin by defining the anonymous and non-anonymous versions of the growth incidence curve.
The anonymous growth incidence curve, as defined in Ravallion and Chen (2003), returns the proportional
change in income at every percentile      of the income distribution:

 (10)                        ( )≡      ( )−        ( )=      −        +(     −      )Φ    ( )



This growth incidence curve is termed “anonymous” since the individual at the               percentile at time
will generally be different from the individual at the same percentile in the previous period − 1. Note
that the curve is increasing in if inequality increases, i.e. if    >        , and is decreasing in if inequality
falls. Because the anonymous growth incidence curve does not track individuals over time, a given curve
could be consistent with low mobility (if the same individuals occupy the same percentiles of the income
distribution at two points in time) or high mobility (if the identity of individuals at a given percentile
changes over time).

        In contrast, the non-anonymous growth incidence curve tracks the expected growth rate of
individuals at each percentile    of the initial income distribution, i.e.



                                                       20
 (11)                      ( )=         |   ( ) −         ( )	=       −      +(        − 1)      Φ      ( )



This expression is the same as Equation (5), as is the intuition. The second term measures the extent of
mobility in the income distribution. In the benchmark case of no mobility (in expectation), i.e.                = 1,
the non-anonymous growth incidence curve is flat, and expected income growth is the same at every
point in the initial income distribution. When the mobility parameter                   < 1, individuals starting out
below the mean of log income expect higher-than-average growth, while those starting out above the
mean expect lower-than-average growth.

           The difference between the two growth incidence curves is:

 (12)                          ( )−         ( )=     ( )−        |   ( )=(    −            )Φ    ( )



It is straightforward to verify that our data generating process implies               −             ≥ 0, and so the
anonymous growth incidence curve will fall below the non-anonymous growth incidence curve for the
bottom half of the income distribution (since Φ              ( ) < 0 when         < 0.5).21 That is, the anonymous
growth incidence curve understates the actual growth rate of any individual starting out in the bottom
half of the income distribution. Symmetrically, the anonymous growth incidence curve overstates the
actual growth rate of any individual starting out in the top half of the income distribution. Note that the
difference between the two growth incidence curves is monotonic in                            at every percentile       .
Therefore, the upper and lower bounds for                obtained in the previous section will map into upper and
lower bounds on the difference between the two growth incidence curves.

           Figure 5 illustrates the difference between anonymous and non-anonymous growth incidence
curves using the PSID microdata and our estimates of mobility based on the aggregate moments of this
dataset from Section 4. The left and right panels of the graph show the 10-year average annual growth
incidence curves over the periods 1977-1987 and 1987-1997. In each panel, the dashed line shows the
anonymous growth incidence curve. In both periods, the anonymous growth incidence curve is weakly
upward-sloping, reflecting the increase in overall inequality over this time. The two solid lines show the
non-anonymous growth incidence curves based on the actual micro data, calculated in two different ways.
The thin line is a kernel-weighted local polynomial smoothed average of the actual growth rates of all



21
     This is because the positive semi-definiteness of the covariance matrix in Equation (2) requires    ≥          .

                                                            21
individuals at each percentile of the initial income distribution. The bold line is the lognormal version of
this curve, i.e. Equation (11), but using the estimate of      based on the PSID micro data. Interestingly,
this lognormal version of the growth incidence curve tracks the non-parametric smoothed estimate of the
growth incidence curve fairly closely, suggesting that our assumption of lognormality provides a
reasonable approximation to the true income distribution dynamics in this particular setting. As expected,
the non-anonymous growth incidence curves indicate much higher (lower) growth for those initially in the
bottom (top) half of the income distribution. Finally, we plot the lower and upper bounds on the growth
incidence curve based on our bounds on          calculated using only aggregate data. These bounds include
the two versions of the actual non-anonymous growth incidence curve based on micro data almost
everywhere. It is also useful to note that they exclude the anonymous growth incidence curve everywhere
except for very close to the middle of the income distribution where the anonymous and non-anonymous
growth incidence curves are very close to each other.

        We next consider growth rates of group average incomes, such as the bottom 40 or the top 10
percent of the income distribution. The anonymous and non-anonymous growth rates of group average
incomes are simply weighted averages of the corresponding anonymous and non-anonymous growth
incidence curves, as summarized in the following proposition:

Proposition 4: Let 0 ≤     <     ≤ 1 denote percentiles of the income distribution. The anonymous and non-
anonymous growth rate of group average incomes of those between the                  and         percentiles of the
income distribution are:


 (13)                                ( , )≈        ( )       ( )   ,       = ,

where       ( ) is the share of percentile in total income of those between the            and       percentiles of
the income distribution at time − 1.       ( , ) may also be represented as:         ( , )=        ( ( , ,      )),
where ( , , ) satisfies:       ≤ ( , , )≤ .

Proof: See Appendix A.

        It follows immediately from Proposition 4 and Equations (10) and (11) that the difference between
the anonymous and non-anonymous growth incidence curves for group average incomes is:


                               ( , )−     ( , )≈(        −             )   Φ   ( )     ( )
 (14)



                                                     22
That is, the difference between the two growth rates of group average incomes is also a weighted average
of the difference between the anonymous and non-anonymous growth incidence curve. As before, the
difference between the anonymous and non-anonymous growth incidence curves depends on                    −
            ≥ 0. Whether the anonymous growth rate exceeds or is smaller than the non-anonymous rate
now depends on the sign of the integral       Φ    ( )       ( )   . While a closed-form solution for this

integral exists and is given in the proof of Proposition 4 in Appendix A, this term cannot be signed in
general. However, for the particular case where 0 ≤      <    ≤ 0.5, it is clear that   Φ   ( )   ( )    ≤

0 since Φ     ( ) ≤ 0 for 0 ≤   ≤ 0.5. This means that for any subgroup in the bottom half of the income
distribution, the anonymous group average growth rate is lower than the corresponding non-anonymous
growth rate. Naturally, this argument is symmetric: when 0.5 ≤        <    ≤ 1, the anonymous growth rate
of group average incomes for any subgroup in the top half of the income distribution exceeds the
corresponding non-anonymous growth rate.

        We can quantify the difference between anonymous and non-anonymous growth rates using our
estimates of the mobility parameter           based on aggregate data from the WID and PovcalNet
databases. We begin by calculating the average annual anonymous growth rate of the bottom 40 and top
10 percent over the most-recent 10-year period available for each country. These anonymous growth
rates would be the ones typically reported when true panel data are not available. We then compute the
lower and upper bounds on the corresponding annual average non-anonymous growth rates, using the
bounds on         reported in Tables 2 and 3. The results of this calculation are summarized in Figure 6.
The top and bottom panels report results from the WID and PovcalNet samples, respectively. In each
panel, we plot the anonymous growth rate on the horizontal axis, the non-anonymous growth rate on the
vertical axis, and the diagonal line corresponds to the 45-degree line. The points above the 45-degree line
correspond to growth rates of the bottom 40 percent, reflecting our result that non-anonymous growth
rates exceed their anonymous counterparts for group averages within the bottom half of the income
distribution. Conversely, the points below the 45-degree line correspond to growth rates of the top 10
percent, for which the non-anonymous growth rate is smaller than the anonymous growth rate. The
triangles (for the bottom 40 percent) and squares (for the top 10 percent) indicate the midpoint of our
range for the non-anonymous growth rate, and the vertical lines display the range between the lower-
and upper-bound estimates of the non-anonymous growth rates. The anonymous growth rates and the
bounds on the anonymous growth rates are reported by country in Tables 4 and 5.




                                                    23
        The most striking feature of Figure 6 and Table 4 is the magnitude of the gap between the non-
anonymous and anonymous growth rates. For example, in the WID database, the mean difference
between the midpoint of our estimated range for the non-anonymous growth rate, and the corresponding
anonymous growth rate of the bottom 40 percent is 4.1 percent per year, while for the top 10 percent it
is -10.7 percent per year. These differences are very large when compared with the standard deviation
of anonymous growth rates across countries, which is only 2.8 percent per year for the bottom 40 percent,
and 2.1 percent per year for the top 10 percent. Similar gaps are observed for the PovcalNet sample,
where the mean difference between the non-anonymous and anonymous growth rate of the bottom 40
percent is 3.1 percent per year, and for the top 10 percent the gap is 8.1 percent per year. Equivalently,
given the extent of mobility that we have inferred from the aggregate data, we can conclude that the
anonymous growth rate of the bottom 40 percent understates the actual growth rate of those initially in
the bottom 40 percent by 3.1 percent per year on average. And conversely, anonymous growth in average
incomes of the top 10 percent overstates the average growth rate of those initially in the top 10 percent
by 8.1 percent per year on average.




7. Conclusions

        This paper demonstrates the feasibility of approximating individual-level income distribution
dynamics when the researcher only has access to time-series data on aggregate moments of the income
distribution such as the mean and the Gini coefficient or top income shares. Our key identifying
assumption is that individual incomes follow an autoregressive lognormal process with individual fixed
effects. We show that the limited information embodied in the time-series of these aggregate moments
is sufficient to place bounds on the extent of mobility in the income distribution, even though we do not
observe income dynamics at the individual level. An empirical application using data from the PSID
confirms that these bounds generally contain the point estimates that are obtained using the record-level
panel data, and moreover are reasonably tight. Encouraged by these findings, we apply our methodology
to two large cross-country datasets, namely the WID (including mostly high income countries) and the
World Bank’s PovcalNet (including mostly developing countries). Some of the cross-country patterns we
observe in estimates of mobility seem quite plausible given our priors. For example, among the high
income countries, the Scandinavian countries and much of Europe show relatively high levels of income
persistence, while the United States, Singapore and Taiwan rank among the countries with low levels of
income persistence. When comparing estimates between the WID and PovcalNet, our estimates suggest


                                                   24
that income persistence is lower in the developing world. However, this comparison is difficult to interpret
given the differences between the two databases. Specifically, a possible interpretation is that our OLS
estimates of , as well as the MSE-minimizing combination of the OLS and bias-corrected OLS estimates,
have greater small-sample downward bias in the PovcalNet sample where the available time series is
much shorter than in the WID sample.

        When we correlate our estimates of income persistence with per capita GDP across countries, we
find a negative correlation within the WID and PovcalNet samples – higher persistence is associated with
lower incomes. The reason for this is not obvious, and it is unlikely to be mechanical. Note that if countries
were identical in all parameters but the income persistence parameter, then lower persistence would be
associated with lower average income (since lower persistence implies both a lower mean and lower
cross-sectional variance of log income in the steady state, and therefore lower mean income given our
lognormality assumption). This seems to suggest that countries with lower income persistence differ from
countries with higher persistence in other ways that benefit their income growth.

        Our approach to approximating individual-level distribution dynamics with aggregate data makes
it possible for the first time to compare anonymous and non-anonymous growth rates in a wide cross
section of countries. We show that the anonymous growth rate of the bottom 40 percent (corresponding
to the World Bank’s definition of ”shared prosperity”) understates the growth rate of those initially in the
bottom 40 percent by 3 to 4 percentage points per year. This implies that the anonymous growth rate is
a poor approximation to the success of those initially in the bottom of the income distribution, and is not
a good tool for tracking the effects of policy interventions that were targeted to the initially-poor. The
exact opposite holds true when tracking growth at the top end of the income distribution. Growth of top
incomes will be larger when measured anonymously. Our estimates suggest that for the top 10% the
difference is as large as 10 percentage points in annual terms. Thus, tracking anonymous top income
shares substantially overstates the expected income growth rates realized by the average individual in the
top end of the distribution.

        Approximating income distribution dynamics, under the assumption that individual incomes
follow a lognormal autoregressive process, can also be applied to an inter-generational context. The
advantage of working with analytical approximations in this case is that it provides a means of rationalizing
some of the empirical regularities that have been reported in recent studies on inter-generational
mobility. One prominent example of such a regularity is that higher levels of inter-generational mobility
are more likely to be observed in countries with lower levels of income inequality (see e.g. Corak, 2013;

                                                     25
Chetty et al., 2014). In an ongoing companion study, we verify analytically how growth and inequality
jointly determine mobility. This in turn allows us to verify how much growth it would take to offset a rise
in inequality, and use this framework to interpret the results of a recent study by Chetty et al. (2017)
which reports a dramatic decline in absolute mobility in the United States over the last 60 years. In a
separate study we also use our lognormal framework and empirical bounds on mobility to investigate the
welfare consequences of cross-country differences in mobility, using the welfare metrics suggested by
Atkinson and Bourguignon (1982) and Gottschalk and Spolaore (2002).




                                                    26
References
Andrews, Donald (1993). “Exactly median-unbiased estimation of first order autoregressive/unit root
models”. Econometrica. 61: 139-165
Antman, Francisca, and David McKenzie (2007). “Earnings mobility and measurement error: A pseudo-
panel approach”, Economic Development and Cultural Change. 56: 125-161
Atkinson, Anthony and Francois Bourguignon (1982). “The Comparison of Multidimensional Distributions
of Economic Status”. Review of Economic Studies. 49:183-201.
Atkinson, Anthony, Thomas Piketty, ed. (2007). “Top incomes over the Twentieth Century: A contrast
between continental European and English speaking countries”. Oxford and New York: Oxford University
Press.
Atkinson, Anthony, Thomas Piketty, ed. (2010). “Top incomes: A global perspective”. Oxford and New
York: Oxford University Press
Atkinson, Anthony, Thomas Piketty, and Emmanuel Saez (2011). “Top incomes in the Long Run of History”.
Journal of Economic Literature. 49:3-71
Attanasio, Orazio, Erik Hurst, and Luigi Pistaferri (2012). “The evolution of income, consumption, and
leisure inequality in the US, 1980-2010”. NBER Working Paper Series, 17982
Auten, Gerald, and Geoffrey Gee (2009). “Income Mobility in the United States: New Evidence from
Income Tax Data”. National Tax Journal. 62:301-328
Auten, Gerald, Geoffrey Gee, and Nicholas Turner (2013). “Income inequality, mobility, and turnover at
the top in the US, 1987-2010”. American Economic Review: Papers & proceedings. 103: 168-172
Banerjee, Abhijit, and Thomas Piketty (2005). “Top Indian incomes, 1922-2000”. World Bank Economic
Review. 19: 1-20
Basu, Kaushik (2013). “Shared Prosperity and the Mitigation of Poverty”. World Bank Policy Research
Department Working Paper No. 6700.
Battistin, Erich, Richard Blundell, and Arthur Lewbel (2009). “Why Is Consumption More Lognormal Than
Income? Gibrat’s Law Revisited”. Journal of Political Economy. 117(6):1140-1154.
Bourguignon, Francois (2010). “Non-Anonymous Growth Incidence Curves, Income Mobility, and Social
Welfare Dominance”. Journal of Economic Inequality. 9:605-627.
Caselli, Francesco and Jaume Ventura (2000). “A Representative Consumer Theory of Distribution”.
American Economic Review. 90(4):909-926.
Chetty, Raj, Nathaniel Hendren, Patrick Kline, and Emmanuel Saez (2014). “Where is the land of
opportunity? The geography of intergenerational mobility in the United States”. Quarterly Journal of
Economics. 129: 1553-1623
Chetty, Raj, David Grusky, Maximilian Hell, Nathaniel Hendren, Robert Manduca, and Jimmy Narang
(2017). “The fading American dream: Trends in absolute income mobility since 1940”. Science. 356: 398-
406
Collado, Dolores (1997). “Estimating dynamic models from time series of independent cross-sections”.
Journal of Econometrics. 82: 37-62

                                                 27
Corak, Miles (2013). “Income inequality, equality of opportunity, and inter-generational mobility”. Journal
of Economic Perspectives. 27: 79-102
Cowell, Frank and Emmanuel Flachaire (2015). “Statistical Methods for Distributional Analysis”, in
Francois Bourguignon and Anthony Atkinson, eds. The Handbook of Income Distribution. Elsevier.
Dang, Hai-Anh, Peter Lanjouw, Jill Luoto, and David McKenzie (2014). “Using repeated cross-sections to
explore movements in and out of poverty”. Journal of Development Economics. 107:112-128
Deaton, Angus (1985). “Panel data from time series of cross-section”. Journal of Econometrics. 30: 109-
126.
Gottschalk, Peter and Enrico Spolaore (2002). “On the Evaluation of Economic Mobility”. Review of
Economic Studies. 69(1):191-208.
Gottschalk, Peter, and Robert Moffitt (2009). “The Rising Instability of U.S. Earnings”. Journal of Economic
Perspectives. 23: 3-24
Grimm, Michael (2007). “Removing the Anonymity Axiom in Assessing Pro-Poor Growth”. Journal of
Economic Inequality. 5:179-197.
Inoue, Atsushi (2008). “Efficient estimation and inference in linear pseudo-panel data models”. Journal of
Econometrics. 142: 449-466
Jantti, Markus and Stephen Jenkins (2015). “Income Mobility”, in Francois Bourguignon and Anthony
Atkinson, eds. The Handbook of Income Distribution. Elsevier.
Jenkins, Stephen, and Philippe Van Kerm (2006). “Trends in income inequality, pro-poor income growth,
and income mobility”. Oxford Economic Papers. 58:531-548
Kopczuk, Wojciech, Emmanuel Saez, and Jae Song (2010). “Earnings inequality and mobility in the United
States: Evidence from Social Security data since 1937”. Quarterly Journal of Economics. 125:91-128
Leigh, Andrew (2007). “How closely do top income shares track other measures of inequality?”. Economic
Journal. 117:619-633
Long, Jason and Joseph Ferrie (2013). “Intergenerational Occupation Mobility in Great Britain and the
United States Since 1850”. American Economic Review. 103(4): 1109-1137.
Lopez, Humberto and Luis Serven (2006). “A Normal Relationship? Poverty, Growth, and Inequality”.
World Bank Policy Research Department Working Paper No. 3814.
Moffitt, Robert (1993). “Identification and estimation of dynamic models with a time series of repeated
cross-sections”. Journal of Econometrics. 59:99-123
Ravallion, Martin, and Shaohua Chen (2003). “Measuring pro-poor growth”. Economics Letters. 78:93-99
Roine, Jesper, and Daniel Waldenstrom (2008). “The evolution of top incomes in an egalitarian society:
Sweden, 1903-2004”, Journal of Public Economics, 92: 366-387
Sinha, Rishabh (2017). “Closer, But No Cigar: Intergenerational Mobility Across Caste Groups in India”.
Manuscript, World Bank.
Van Kerm, Philippe (2009). “Income mobility profiles”. Economics Letters. 102: 93-95


                                                    28
Verbeek, Marno, and Francis Vella (2005). “Estimating dynamic models from repeated cross-sections”.
Journal of Econometrics. 127: 83-102




                                                29
                                   Table 1: Estimates of Mobility from the PSID

                                Panel A: Estimates of         Based on Aggregate Data
                                                           Estimate of ρ:                        MSE-Minimizing
                                             OLS                BC-OLS            Min-MSE           Weight
         Estimates based on:

         Equation for Mean                   0.652                1.000             0.628              1.070
         of Log Income                       0.196                1.964             0.073

         Equation for Variance               0.760                0.956             0.802              0.802
         of Log Income                       0.136                0.282             0.170

         MSE-Minimizing                                                             0.812             -0.058
         Combination of Both                                                        0.180
                                 Panel B: Estimates of Mobility Parameter
             Upper Bound on                                                 Mobility Parameter β
       Variance of Individual Effect                                        Average 1977-1997
      Estimate           Average Share of          Lower          Upper                        Micro Estimates
                         Variance of log y         Bound          Bound           Baseline        Balanced        Cook's D

        0.021                 0.826                0.812           0.968           0.826            0.857           0.863
Notes: The first two rows of panel A reports estimates of based on the dynamics of the mean of log income (Equation (8))
and the variance of log income (Equation (9)). OLS refers to ordinary least squares and BC-OLS refers to small-sample bias-
corrected estimates using the procedure in Andrews (1993). Min-MSE refers to the mean-squared-error-minimizing linear
combination of the OLS and BC-OLS estimates described in Appendix B. The final column reports the MSE-minimizing weight
on the OLS estimator. The third row of panel A the MSE-minimizing linear combination of the estimates in Panel A, together
with the MSE-minimizing weight on the estimator based on the dynamics of the mean of log income. Standard errors are
reported below point estimates. The first two columns of Panel B report the upper bound on the variance of the individual
effect ( ), and its share in the the steady-state variance of log income. The remaining columns of Panel B report the lower
bound on         (i.e. the preferred estimate of from Panel A), the average over time of the upper bound on        , and the
average over time of three alternative estimates of       based on the micro data. The “Baseline” estimates use data for all
households in each year. The “Balanced Panel” estimates use only the subset of households available in all 21 years. The
“Cook’s-D” estimates drop households in the top 1 percent of the distribution of Cook’s Distance statistic (a measure of
influence) in the baseline OLS estimates.




                                                             30
              Table 2: Estimates of Mobility from the World Wealth and Income Database

                                                                      Upper Bound on                     Mobility Parameter
                              Preferred Estimate of ρ            Variance of Individual Effect                      Average
                              Estimate    Standard Error        Estimate        Average Share of         Lower        Upper
                                                                                Variance of log y        Bound        Bound

Australia                       0.756              0.090            0.019                 0.685              0.756       0.928
Canada                          0.808              0.075            0.025                 0.704              0.808       0.944
China                           0.978              0.038            0.000                 0.000              0.978       0.978
Denmark                         0.889              0.054            0.003                 0.558              0.889       0.955
France                          0.824              0.054            0.011                 0.432              0.824       0.909
Germany                         0.769              0.062            0.031                 0.712              0.769       0.940
Great Britain                   0.837              0.100            0.013                 0.457              0.837       0.919
India                           0.768              0.079            0.015                 0.280              0.768       0.841
Ireland                         0.784              0.040            0.019                 0.585              0.784       0.915
Italy                           0.950              0.067            0.000                 0.165              0.950       0.959
Japan                           0.996              0.013            0.000                 0.000              0.996       0.996
Mauritius                       0.880              0.051            0.000                 0.000              0.880       0.880
New Zealand                     0.900              0.079            0.001                 0.175              0.900       0.918
Norway                          0.893              0.087            0.000                 0.000              0.893       0.893
Singapore                       0.780              0.060            0.040                 0.643              0.780       0.924
Spain                           0.960              0.076            0.000                 0.000              0.960       0.960
Sweden                          0.929              0.055            0.000                 0.000              0.929       0.929
Taiwan                          0.701              0.127            0.025                 0.484              0.701       0.860
United States                   0.655              0.057            0.068                 0.565              0.655       0.869
Notes: The first two columns report our preferred estimate of and its standard error. This estimate is an MSE-minimizing
weighted average of the estimates based on the evolution over time of the mean and variance of log income. The underlying
estimates and MSE-minimizing weights are reported in Appendix Table B1. The third and fourth columns report the upper
bound on the variance of the individual effect ( ), and its share in the the steady-state variance of log income. The remaining
columns report the lower bound on          (i.e. the preferred estimate of from Column 1), and the average over time of the
upper bound on       .




                                                             31
                         Table 3: Estimates of Mobility from the PovcalNet Database

                                                                      Upper Bound on                    Mobility Parameter
                               Preferred Estimate of ρ           Variance of Individual Effect                       Average
                               Estimate    Standard Error       Estimate        Average Share of       Lower          Upper
                                                                                Variance of log y      Bound          Bound

Argentina                        0.581             0.178           0.107                0.733              0.581        0.896
Armenia                          0.673             0.138           0.026                0.668              0.673        0.900
Belarus                          0.405             0.278           0.077                0.812              0.405        0.895
Bolivia                          0.171             0.316           0.521                0.681              0.171        0.764
Brazil                           0.576             0.093           0.184                0.823              0.576        0.929
Chile                            0.907             0.127           0.007                0.758              0.907        0.983
China (Rural)                    0.680             0.152           0.035                0.769              0.680        0.917
China (Urban)                    0.999             0.004           0.000                0.000              0.999        0.999
Colombia                         0.485             0.218           0.278                0.859              0.485        0.931
Costa Rica                       0.661             0.127           0.079                0.829              0.661        0.944
Ecuador                          0.467             0.323           0.206                0.758              0.467        0.880
El Salvador                      0.455             0.240           0.179                0.719              0.455        0.866
Georgia                          0.745             0.080           0.033                0.878              0.745        0.969
Honduras                         0.698             0.127            0.067               0.618              0.698        0.886
Indonesia (Rural)                0.531             0.124           0.040                0.704              0.531        0.876
Indonesia (Urban)                0.725             0.063           0.018                0.517              0.725        0.872
Kazakhstan                       0.604             0.116           0.034                0.718              0.604        0.898
Kyrgyzstan                       0.609             0.167           0.029                0.491              0.609        0.827
Moldova                          0.524             0.263           0.059                0.631              0.524        0.839
Mexico                           0.626             0.225           0.102                0.833              0.626        0.939
Panama                           0.490             0.220           0.254                0.891              0.490        0.949
Peru                             0.504             0.325           0.172                0.740              0.504        0.882
Philippines                      0.969             0.066           0.000                0.471              0.969        0.984
Poland                           0.932             0.040           0.001                0.638              0.932        0.976
Paraguay                         0.508             0.231           0.186                0.722              0.508        0.875
Romania                          0.891             0.167           0.003                0.927              0.891        0.992
Russia                           0.563             0.244           0.084                0.790              0.563        0.911
Thailand                         0.676             0.181           0.055                0.830              0.676        0.949
Turkey                           0.677             0.077           0.050                0.857              0.677        0.955
Ukraine                          0.884             0.143           0.001                0.424              0.884        0.934
Notes: The first two columns report our preferred estimate of and its standard error. This estimate is an MSE-minimizing
weighted average of the estimates based on the evolution over time of the mean and variance of log income. The underlying
estimates and MSE-minimizing weights are reported in Appendix Table B2. The third and fourth columns report the upper
bound on the variance of the individual effect ( ), and its share in the the steady-state variance of log income. The remaining
columns report the lower bound on          (i.e. the preferred estimate of from Column 1), and the average over time of the
upper bound on       .




                                                             32
   Table 4: Anonymous and Non-Anonymous Growth Rates of the Bottom 40 and Top 10 Percent
                        from the World Income and Wealth Database

                                              Average Annual Growth During Most Recent 10 Years of:
                                Bottom 40%                                                Top 10%
                      Anonymous      Non-Anonymous        Difference       Anonymous        Non-Anonymous            Difference
                                   Lower       Upper    (Using β-Mid)                      Lower      Upper         (Using β-Mid


Australia                -0.001        0.059        0.026       0.043             0.021       -0.124      -0.045       -0.105
Canada                    0.004        0.072        0.031       0.047             0.003       -0.185      -0.072       -0.132
China                     0.098        0.108        0.108       0.009             0.079        0.053       0.053       -0.026
Denmark                   0.005        0.042        0.018       0.026             0.015       -0.074      -0.016       -0.060
France                   -0.001        0.049        0.017       0.034            -0.005       -0.128      -0.049       -0.084
Germany                  -0.003        0.067        0.024       0.048             0.017       -0.166      -0.053       -0.127
Great Britain             0.014        0.083        0.060       0.057             0.010       -0.191      -0.124       -0.168
India                     0.013        0.081        0.061       0.058             0.026       -0.154      -0.099       -0.153
Ireland                  -0.023        0.041        0.009       0.048            -0.014       -0.180      -0.097       -0.124
Italy                    -0.010        0.018        0.015       0.027             0.001       -0.071      -0.062       -0.067
Japan                    -0.012       -0.003       -0.003       0.009             0.010       -0.014      -0.014       -0.024
Mauritius                -0.012        0.041        0.041       0.053             0.039       -0.088      -0.088       -0.127
New Zealand               0.016        0.053        0.047       0.034             0.005       -0.089      -0.073       -0.086
Norway                    0.024        0.063        0.063       0.039             0.036       -0.057      -0.057       -0.093
Singapore                 0.050        0.127        0.086       0.056             0.032       -0.201      -0.079       -0.172
Spain                     0.008        0.026        0.026       0.018            -0.005       -0.052      -0.052       -0.046
Sweden                    0.004        0.039        0.039       0.035             0.026       -0.058      -0.058       -0.085
Taiwan                    0.000        0.071        0.044       0.057             0.040       -0.135      -0.069       -0.142
United States            -0.022        0.068        0.034       0.073             0.011       -0.250      -0.152       -0.212

Mean                     0.008        0.058        0.039        0.041            0.018        -0.114      -0.064       -0.107
Std. Dev.                0.028        0.030        0.027        0.017            0.021         0.074       0.043        0.051
Notes: This table reports anonymous growth rates and bounds on non-anonymous growth rates for the bottom 40 percent
(left panel) and top 10 percent (right panel). Growth rates are calculated as annual averages over the most recently-available
ten years of data for each country. For details on the time period covered by the available data see Appendix Table B1. Within
each panel, the first column reports the anonymous growth rate, and the second and third columns report the lower and
upper bounds on the non-anonymous growth rate. The fourth column in each panel reports the difference between the
midpoint of the bounds on the non-anonymous growth rate and the anonymous growth rate.




                                                             33
   Table 5: Anonymous and Non-Anonymous Growth Rates of the Bottom 40 and Top 10 Percent
                               from the PovcalNet Database

                                             Average Annual Growth During Most Recent 10 Years of:
                               Bottom 40%                                                Top 10%
                     Anonymous      Non-Anonymous        Difference       Anonymous         Non-Anonymous            Difference
                                  Lower       Upper    (Using β-Mid)                      Lower       Upper         (Using β-Mid

Argentina               0.089        0.146        0.103        0.036             0.022       -0.135       -0.018       -0.098
Armenia                 0.041        0.087        0.055        0.029             0.034       -0.072        0.003       -0.068
Belarus                 0.109        0.147        0.115        0.022             0.088        0.000        0.075       -0.050
Boliva                  0.082        0.147        0.099        0.041             0.021       -0.163       -0.028       -0.117
Brazil                  0.066        0.138        0.075        0.040             0.033       -0.173        0.007       -0.116
Chile                   0.049        0.090        0.054        0.023             0.022       -0.090        0.008       -0.064
China (Rural)           0.066        0.122        0.085        0.038             0.074       -0.063        0.027       -0.091
China (Urban)           0.063        0.066        0.066        0.003             0.073        0.065        0.065       -0.008
Colombia                0.046        0.121        0.049        0.039             0.040       -0.166        0.033       -0.107
Costa Rica              0.042        0.110        0.058        0.042             0.037       -0.144       -0.004       -0.112
Ecuador                 0.068        0.132        0.084        0.040             0.021       -0.159       -0.022       -0.111
El Salvador             0.045        0.105        0.059        0.037             0.002       -0.158       -0.036       -0.100
Georgia                 0.022        0.077        0.026        0.030             0.025       -0.110        0.014       -0.073
Honduras                0.027        0.098        0.055        0.049            -0.006       -0.210       -0.085       -0.142
Indonesia (Rural)       0.026        0.075        0.041        0.032             0.060       -0.048        0.026       -0.071
Indonesia (Urban)       0.013        0.075        0.046        0.048             0.062       -0.085       -0.017       -0.113
Kazakhstan              0.086        0.124        0.095        0.024             0.051       -0.038        0.028       -0.055
Kyrgyzstan              0.068        0.109        0.081        0.026             0.053       -0.038        0.025       -0.060
Moldova                 0.076        0.117        0.085        0.025             0.041       -0.056        0.020       -0.059
Mexico                  0.036        0.103        0.047        0.039             0.028       -0.150        0.000       -0.103
Panama                  0.061        0.131        0.068        0.039             0.031       -0.169        0.010       -0.110
Peru                    0.073        0.134        0.085        0.036             0.019       -0.149       -0.014       -0.100
Philippines             0.007        0.022        0.014        0.012             0.001       -0.038       -0.018       -0.029
Poland                  0.027        0.050        0.034        0.015             0.019       -0.035        0.002       -0.035
Paraguay                0.064        0.130        0.079        0.040             0.019       -0.165       -0.022       -0.113
Romania                 0.066        0.098        0.068        0.017             0.066       -0.005        0.062       -0.037
Russia                  0.064        0.125        0.075        0.036             0.088       -0.059        0.063       -0.086
Thailand                0.053        0.107        0.057        0.029             0.038       -0.099        0.028       -0.073
Turkey                  0.048        0.105        0.058        0.033             0.041       -0.099        0.017       -0.082
Ukraine                 0.067        0.091        0.080        0.018             0.046       -0.008        0.018       -0.041

Mean                    0.055        0.106        0.067        0.031            0.038        -0.094       0.009        -0.081
Std. Dev.               0.024        0.030        0.023        0.011            0.024         0.066       0.034         0.032
Notes: This table reports anonymous growth rates and bounds on non-anonymous growth rates for the bottom 40 percent
(left panel) and top 10 percent (right panel). Growth rates are calculated as annual averages over the most recently-available
ten years of data for each country. For details on the time period covered by the available data see Appendix Table B2. Within
each panel, the first column reports the anonymous growth rate, and the second and third columns report the lower and
upper bounds on the non-anonymous growth rate. The fourth column in each panel reports the difference between the
midpoint of the bounds on the non-anonymous growth rate and the anonymous growth rate.




                                                             34
           Figure 1: Estimates of Mobility from the PSID Based on Micro and Aggregate Data




Notes: This figure reports estimates of the mobility parameter     based on aggregate moments and true panel micro data,
using annual rounds of the Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) over the period 1977-1997. In both panels, the grey-shaded
area is the range between the lower and upper-bound estimates of            based on the evolution over time of the cross-
sectional mean and variance of log income, and the dashed line marks the mid-point of the grey-shaded range. The solid lines
report three alternative estimates of mobility based on micro panel data. All three are based on a series of cross-sectional
OLS regressions of log income on lagged log income at the household level. The “Baseline” estimates use data for all
households in each year. The “Balanced Panel” estimates use only the subset of households available in all 21 years. The
“Cook’s-D” estimates drop households in the top 1 percent of the distribution of Cook’s Distance statistic (a measure of
influence) in the baseline OLS estimates.




                                                            35
           Figure 2: Evolution of Mean and Variance of Log Income, Selected WID Countries

                  Mean of Log Income                                             Variance of Log Income




Notes: This figure plots the evolution over time of the mean (left column) and standard deviation (right column) of log income
for selected countries in our WID sample. The vertical red lines delineate the subperiods corresponding to trend breaks, and
the fitted lines show the estimated linear trends by subperiod. The first period for each country corresponds to all available
pre-World War II data. The year of the post-war trend break is selected country-by-country and separately for the mean and
variance of log income, based on the supremum of the Wald statistics for the null hypothesis that the pre- and post-break
trends are the same.




                                                             36
                           Figure 3: Cross-Country Differences in Estimated Mobility


                                              Autoregressive Parameter




                                              Mid-Point of Range for




Notes: This figure plots the point estimate of (top panel) and the average over time of the mid-point between the upper
and lower bounds on         (bottom panel) on the vertical axis, against the logarithm of real GDP per capita in 2000 on the
horizontal axis. In each panel, the red circles correspond to developing countries, and consist of the countries in our PovcalNet
sample, as well as China, Mauritius, and India from the WID sample. The blue squres correspond to advanced economies in
the WID sample.




                                                              37
                          Figure 4: Estimated Mobility Trends in the United States




Notes: This figure reports the evolution over time of the estimated bounds on the mobility parameter        for the United
States. The grey-shaded region contains the range between the lower and upper bounds on      , and the dashed line indicates
the midpoint of the range. The two shorter superimposed time series are the estimates of actual mobility based on the PSID
microdata, as described in Section 4.




                                                            38
               Figure 5: Anonymous and Non-Anonymous Growth Incidence Curves, PSID




Notes: This figure plots growth incidence curves for the US, based on the PSID microdata and using the bounds on mobility
based on aggregate data. The horizontal axis corresponds to percentiles of the income distribution and the vertical axis plots
the average annual growth rate over the period 1987-1997 at each percentile. The dashed line reports the anonymous growth
incidence curve. The two solid lines report two versions of the actual non-anonymous growth incidence curve based on the
PSID micro data. The thin line is a local polynomial smoothed average of the growth rates of households at each percentile of
the initial income distribution. The bold line is a lognormal approximation to the non-anonymous growth incidence curve, i.e.
Equation (11), using the estimate of        	obtained using the PSID microdata. The shaded region corresponds to the region
between the lower and upper bounds on the non-anonymous growth incidence curve based only on aggregate data.




                                                             39
     Figure 6: Anonymous and Non-Anonymous Growth Rates of Bottom 40 and Top 20 Percent

                                           Estimates Based on WID Data




                                        Estimates Based on PovcalNet Data




Notes: This figure plots average annual anonymous growth rates (on the horizontal axis) against average annual non-
anonymous growth rates (on the vertical axis). The solid diagonal line represents the 45-degree line. The top panel reports
results from the WID sample, while the bottom panel reports results from the PovcalNet sample. The blue triangles above
(below the 45-degree line represent the mid-point estimate of the non-anonymous growth rate of the bottom 40 percent (top
10 percent), over the most recent 10-year period available for each country. The vertical lines represent the range from the
lower to the upper-bound estimates of the non-anonymous growth rate.




                                                            40
Appendix A: Proofs
         In the main text we assumed for notational convenience that survey data are available in
consecutive periods and − 1. In reality however, survey data often are available at irregular
frequencies that differ over time and across countries, and in the empirical part of the paper we work
with such irregularly-spaced data. In this appendix we provide proofs for the case of irregularly-spaced
data, i.e. for two surveys available in periods and − . The propositions as stated in the main text
obtain for the special case of = 1.
Preliminaries
         Iterating the data generating process in Equation (1) backwards for                         periods results in:


                                                                       1−
 (15)                                           =             +                    +     +	 ̃
                                                                       1−


where ≡ ∑                 and ̃ ≡ ∑             . For the case = −                              and       = − , and using the
assumption on initial income in Assumption A1, Equation (15) becomes:


                                                                                 1−
                              =                      +        +         +                      +          + ̃
                                                1−                                1−
 (16)
                                        =            +        (        +     )+        + ̃
                                            1−


Proof of Proposition 1:
Given Equation (16) which states that      is a linear combination of                    ,…,            	 and , and Assumption
A1 that these shocks are jointly normally distributed, it follows that                             is normally distributed for all
 −      ≥ 0. Equation (16) also implies that              [        ,        ]=     . To complete the proof of Proposition 1
we need to find       [   ,       ]. Using Equation (15) we have:


                                                                             1−
                                    [       ,        ]=                +                   [          ,   ]
                                                                             1−

 (17)                                                          1−
                                                 =        +
                                                              (1 − )

                                                              =         ,




                                                                  41
Setting    = 1 and adopting the more compact notational convention that                                        ,   =       gives   =
  +          as in the main text.



Proof of Proposition 2
From the irregularly-spaced version of Proposition 1 we have:

                                                                                              ,
 (18)                                          ~                 ,
                                                                           ,




Using the standard properties of the conditional mean and variance of the bivariate normal distribution,
as well as the definition of the quantile function  ( )=       +       Φ ( ) we have:


 (19)              |       ( )≡           |    ( ) = [       |         =            ( )] =        +        ,           Φ   ( )



 (20)          |       ≡          |   ( )−         |   ( )           = [       |      =           ( )] =           −       ,




Setting   = 1 retrieves the result in the main text.


Proof of Proposition 3
       Taking unconditional expectations of both sides of Equation (15) gives the following irregularly-
spaced analog of Equation (6).


 (21)                                                        =                 +


Taking unconditional variances of both sides of Equation (15) gives the following irregularly-spaced analog
of Equation (7):

                                              1−                       1−
                       =              +                  +2                               (           ,   )+
                                              1−                       1−
                                               1−                              1−
 (22)                      =              +                  +2                                   +
                                               1−                              1−      1−
                                                                     1−
                                                   =             +                   +
                                                                     (1 − )



                                                                 42
where      ≡∑                . Setting          = 1 retrieves the result in the main text.


Proof of Proposition 4
To prove Proposition 4 we first show that the anonymous growth rate of group average incomes is a
weighted average of the anonymous growth incidence curve:
                                                                       ( , )−       ( , )
                                                    ,     ( , )≡
                                                                               ( , )
                                                 1                ( )−      ( )      ( )
                                        =
                                                 −                      ( )         ( , )
 (23)
                                                ≈                ( )−                ( )               ( )

                                                         =            ,        ( )          ( )


                              ( )
where        ( )≡            ( , )
                                     is the share of percentile in the total income of the group at time − .
Similarly the non-anonymous growth rate of group average incomes is the same weighted average of the
non-anonymous growth incidence curve:

                                                                           |        ( , ) −                  ( , )
                                            ,       ( , )≡
                                                                                        ( , )
                                                                          ( )               ( )                ( )
                                        1                         |             −
                                    =                                                             		
                                        −                                         ( )                        ( , )
 (24)
                                        ≈                    |        ( ) −                ( )               ( )

                                                         =            ,        ( )          ( )

The expression for the difference between the anonymous and non-anonymous group average growth
rates in Equation (14) follows from subtracting Equations (23) and (24).
To complete the proof we need to evaluate the integral
                                                                  1     1                                                    ( )
 (25)                    Φ    ( )        ( )            =                                     Φ         ( )
                                                                  ( , ) −


                                                                                                                    ( , )≡         ( )
To      evaluate    this     remaining                  integral,              recall       that                                         =
                     ( )                                         ( , ) with respect to
                             . Differentiating                                                                     yields:

                                            ( , )
                                             1                            ( )
 (26)                                               Φ ( )=
                                             −
This means that we can find the integral we need simply by differentiating group average income with
respect to    . Combining Equations (25) and (26) and using the property of the truncated lognormal


                                                                          43
distribution   that       ( , )=                        Φ(Φ              ( )−         ) − Φ(Φ       ( )−     ) /( − ),    we
obtain:
                                                                                     ( , )       1
                                       Φ        ( )         ( )          =
                                                                                                 ( , )
                                                                                                               1
 (27)            =                            Φ(Φ       ( )−                 ) − Φ(Φ         ( )−        )
                                                                                                               ( , )
                                                 (Φ     ( )−                 ) − (Φ ( ) −                )
                             =              −
                                                Φ(Φ     ( )−                 ) − Φ(Φ ( ) −               )


For the particular case of average incomes in the bottom                         percent this expression simplifies to
                                                                                      (Φ ( ) −           )
 (28)                             Φ     ( )           ( )       =                −
                                                                                     Φ(Φ ( ) −           )


while for the particular case of average incomes in the top                       percent this expression simplifies to
                                                            (Φ ( ) −       )
 (29)                         Φ       ( )        ( )        =                +  .
                                                         1 − Φ(Φ ( ) −       )
Finally, the fact that ( , ) can also be represented as: ( , ) = ( ( , ,        )), where ( , , )
satisfies: ≤ ( , , ) ≤ , follows directly from the fact that ( ) is a monotonic function of z.


Appendix B: Details of OLS, Bias-Corrected, and MSE-Minimizing Estimates of
        This appendix described our approach to estimating the autoregressive coefficient in log
individual incomes using aggregate data. Let ,        denote the OLS estimator of based on Equation (8),
and let     ,
                denote the OLS estimator of based on Equation (9). Given that the available time series
is short, these estimators will exhibit downwards finite-sample bias. We therefore also generate
corresponding bias-corrected estimators , and              ,
                                                               using the procedure suggested in Andrews
(1993). At the core of this procedure is the fact that the distribution of the OLS estimator is exclusively a
function of the true autoregressive parameter and the sample size, and thus is independent of the
parameters that describe the distribution of the error term and the time-trend. We refer the interested
reader to Andrews (1993) for a proof. We take advantage of this result, as suggested by Andrews (1993),
by computing the median bias of the OLS estimator as a function of for each sample size separately
(using numerical simulations), and then inverting this function to obtain a median-unbiased estimator for
  .
        Comparing the OLS and bias-corrected estimators highlights a tradeoff between bias and
variance: while the OLS estimator is substantially downward biased, the bias-corrected estimator is much
less precisely estimated. We address this tradeoff by defining the following two weighted averages of the
OLS and bias-corrected estimators:

 (30)                                             =             ,        + 1−                ,




                                                                    44
 (31)                                       =            ,
                                                              + (1 −     )     ,



with the weights     and      chosen to minimize the mean squared error of the corresponding linear
combination of estimators. Finally, we combine the two estimators in Equation (30) into a single preferred
estimator of as follows:

 (32)                                           =        + (1 − )


with a weight   again chosen to minimize mean squared error.
        To derive the specific expressions for the MSE-minimizing weights , , and , it is convenient
to work with a generic case of two possibly correlated estimators,       and , with biases      and ;
variances and ; and covariance           . With this notation, the MSE of a weighted average of the two
estimators is:


                       [    + (1 − )        ]≡       [        + (1 − )       ] 	+ [     + (1 − )   ]
 (33)
                           =(    + (1 − ) ) +                 + 2 (1 − )           + (1 − )


Setting the derivative of this expression with respect to equal to zero, followed by some straightforward
algebra, results in this expression for the MSE-minimizing weight:



                                        ∗
                                                     (       − )+ −
 (34)                                       =
                                                (   −        ) + −2 +


Using this weight, the MSE-minimizing weighted average of the two estimators is ∗ + (1 − ∗ ) , and
has bias ∗ + (1 − ∗ ) and variance ∗             + 2 ∗ (1 − ∗ )    + (1 − ∗ ) . Note that the weight
need not lie between 0 and 1. In particular when the two estimators are highly correlated, a weight larger
than 1 on one of the two estimators, and a corresponding weight less than 0 on the other, will exploit this
correlation to reduce the variance of the combined estimator.

           To apply this generic expression to Equation (30) we assume that the bias-corrected estimator
eliminates the bias in the OLS estimator, so that        = 0 and      = ,      − , . Let        =      ,
denote the variance of the OLS estimator. Since the bias-corrected estimator is a function of the OLS
estimator, we can linearize to obtain         =       ,    ≈∇       ,     and       =         ,   , ,    ≈
∇        ,     , where ∇ is the gradient of the bias corrected estimator as a function of the OLS estimator
evaluated at the OLS estimate, that we compute numerically. Inserting these into Equation (34) results
in this MSE-minimizing weight:




                                                         45
                                   ∗                               ,           ∇ (∇ − 1)
 (35)                                  =
                                                   ,   −       ,               +       ,           ∇ −1


Applying the same reasoning to Equation (31) gives this corresponding MSE-minimizing weight:

                                                           [           ,
                                                                               ]∇ (∇ − 1)
                              ∗
 (36)                              =
                                               ,
                                                       −       ,
                                                                               +           ,
                                                                                                       (∇ − 1)


Finally, to obtain the MSE-minimizing weight in Equation (32), note that two MSE-minimizing estimators

from Equations (30) and (31) are both biased with                          =       −           ,   and          =       −   ,
                                                                                                                                 . In

addition we have     =       and       =                       			 ≈                                        and we assume   = 0. This

results in

                                                                                                                    1
                         −                                 −                       −               −    ,       +
                               ,                                           ,                                        2
             ∗
 (37)            =
                                                                                                            1
                              −                        −           −       ,           +                +
                                           ,                                                                2




                                                               46
                                Appendix Table B1: Estimation Details for WID Sample

                     Estimation Sample                                Estimate of ρ Based on Equation for:                          Preferred Estimate of ρ
                Time Period Break Point for:           Mean of log Income                           Variance of log income                         Weight on
                First Last Mean Var-           OLS      BC-OLS Min-MSE Weight                 OLS      BC-OLS Min-MSE Weight        Estimate     Estimate Based
                Year Year             iance                                   on OLS                                       on OLS             Mean of log Incom

Australia       1958   2013   1982    1974     0.723      1.000      0.719    1.015        0.667      0.772      0.759     0.131     0.756          0.066
                                               0.100      1.000      0.086                 0.096      0.097      0.096               0.090
Canada          1950   2010   1974    1992     0.694      0.896      0.844    0.259        0.714      0.811      0.797     0.151     0.808          0.230
                                               0.094      0.166      0.148                 0.083      0.088      0.088               0.075
China           1978   2015   1989    2002     0.928      1.000      0.921    1.089        0.807      1.000      0.805     1.012     0.978          1.493
                                               0.056      0.563      0.011                 0.077      0.618      0.068               0.038
Denmark         1950   2010   1966    1974     0.717      0.934      0.870    0.296        0.885      1.000      0.895     0.920     0.889          0.239
                                               0.093      0.183      0.156                 0.030      0.263      0.051               0.054
France          1915   2013   1978    1968     0.693      0.868      0.844    0.137        0.741      0.825      0.818     0.092     0.824          0.245
                                               0.072      0.112      0.106                 0.060      0.063      0.063               0.054
Germany         1891   2011   1979    1996     0.489      0.658      0.640    0.107        0.888      1.000      0.885     1.025     0.769          0.471
                                               0.103      0.127      0.125                 0.046      0.404      0.035               0.062
Great Britain   1950   2012   1968    1996     0.582      0.737      0.713    0.154        1.006      1.000      1.000     0.000     0.837          0.568
                                               0.109      0.137      0.132                 0.015      0.154      0.154               0.100
India           1950   1999   1983    1983     0.343      0.492      0.461    0.212        0.738      0.868      0.849     0.155     0.768          0.208
                                               0.148      0.176      0.170                 0.077      0.091      0.089               0.079
Ireland         1975   2009   1997    1999     0.796      1.000      0.784    1.059        0.787      1.000      0.783     1.016     0.784          0.726
                                               0.102      1.022      0.048                 0.088      0.691      0.075               0.040
Italy           1974   2009   2000    1984     0.724      1.000      0.740    0.944        0.888      1.000      0.879     1.071     0.950          -0.505
                                               0.073      0.729      0.109                 0.068      0.607      0.025               0.067
Japan           1945   2010   1974    1974     0.837      1.000      0.831    1.040        0.964      1.000      0.961     1.100     0.996          -0.270
                                               0.069      0.690      0.044                 0.041      0.394      0.004               0.013
Mauritius       1952   2011   1974    1976     0.869      1.000      0.858    1.079        0.876      1.000      0.878     0.983     0.880          -0.077
                                               0.085      0.851      0.024                 0.041      0.357      0.047               0.051
New Zealand     1950   2013   1967    1990     0.809      1.000      0.803    1.035        0.823      0.933      0.906     0.261     0.900          0.061
                                               0.078      0.782      0.054                 0.063      0.090      0.084               0.079
Norway          1950   2011   1986    1993     0.788      1.000      0.782    1.028        0.822      0.932      0.899     0.310     0.893          0.050
                                               0.083      0.826      0.062                 0.071      0.100      0.091               0.087
Singapore       1950   2012   1997    1997     0.687      0.874      0.850    0.131        0.668      0.759      0.751     0.097     0.780          0.297
                                               0.070      0.113      0.107                 0.070      0.072      0.072               0.060
Spain           1981   2012   1992    2005     0.692      1.000      0.687    1.015        0.871      1.000      0.864     1.049     0.960          -0.543
                                               0.111      1.111      0.096                 0.063      0.550      0.036               0.076
Sweden          1945   2013   1990    1975     0.790      1.000      0.802    0.944        0.847      0.944      0.931     0.141     0.929          0.016
                                               0.055      0.554      0.083                 0.041      0.058      0.056               0.055
Taiwan          1977   2013   1996    1993     0.449      0.711      0.635    0.290        0.600      0.773      0.729     0.279     0.701          0.301
                                               0.160      0.249      0.223                 0.146      0.159      0.155               0.127
United States   1917   2015   1970    1976     0.440      0.559      0.551    0.071        0.642      0.725      0.717     0.100     0.655          0.371
                                               0.084      0.095      0.094                 0.072      0.072      0.072               0.057
Notes: This table reports details of the estimates of in the WID sample. The first four columns indicate the first and last
years of the sample for each country in the post-World War II period, together with the estimated trend break dates for the
mean and variance of log income. Note that three countries shown in Figure 2 also have data for a pre-World War II sub-
period. The next two sets of four columns report the OLS, bias-corrected OLS, the MSE-minimizing weighted average of the
two, and the MSE-minimizing weight on the OLS equation, for dynamics of the mean and variance of log income, respectively.
The last two columns report the MSE-minimizing weighted average of the estimates of from the two equations, together
with the MSE-minimizing weight on the estimate from the equation for the dynamics of the mean of log income. Standard
errors are reported below the coefficient estimates for the OLS, bias-corrected OLS, and MSE-minimizing weighted average
estimators.




                                                                             47
                              Appendix Table B2: Estimation Details for PovcalNet Sample

                          Estimation Sample                           Estimate of ρ Based on Equation for:                            Preferred Estimate of ρ
                          First Last Freq-             Mean of log Income                           Variance of log income                           Weight on
                          Year Year uency      OLS      BC-OLS Min-MSE Weight                 OLS      BC-OLS Min-MSE        Weight   Estimate     Estimate Based
                                                                             on OLS                                          on OLS             Mean of log Income

      Argentina           1991 2013    1      0.327      0.816      0.553     0.538         0.319      0.637      0.586      0.208     0.581          0.129
                                              0.204      0.555      0.366                   0.259      0.195      0.197                0.178
      Armenia             1999 2013    1      0.716      1.000      0.690     1.090         0.564      0.804      0.655      0.663     0.673          0.516
                                              0.232      2.330      0.042                   0.268      0.309      0.281                0.138
      Belarus             1998 2012    1      0.430      0.872      0.448     0.960         0.270      0.547      0.371      0.714     0.405          0.452
                                              0.264      0.910      0.290                   0.556      0.375      0.447                0.278
      Bolivia             2000 2013    1      -0.105     0.077      0.077     0.000         0.275      0.566      0.348      0.813     0.171          0.652
                                              0.310      0.403      0.403                   0.595      0.411      0.507                0.316
      Brazil              1995 2013    1      0.057      0.437      0.230     0.544         0.699      1.000      0.682      1.045     0.576          0.236
                                              0.280      0.490      0.376                   0.208      2.830      0.037                0.093
      Chile               1987 2013    2      0.730      1.000      0.703     1.082         0.826      1.000      0.816      1.045     0.907         -0.816
                                              0.218      1.595      0.058                   0.104      0.587      0.065                0.127
      China (Rural)       1990 2012    2      0.715      1.000      0.684     1.088                    0.669      0.669      0.000     0.680          0.704
                                              0.258      1.844      0.057                              0.495      0.495                0.152
      China (Urban)       1990 2012    2      0.829      1.000      0.812     1.089         0.979      1.000      0.976      1.110     0.999         -0.140
                                              0.147      1.220      0.030                   0.098      0.914      0.001                0.004
      Colombia            1999 2013    1      0.159      0.413      0.245     0.663         0.515      0.752      0.629      0.564     0.485          0.375
                                              0.298      0.424      0.341                   0.285      0.291      0.283                0.218
      Costa Rica          1989 2013    1      0.341      0.499      0.428     0.454         0.667      0.792      0.753      0.334     0.661          0.281
                                              0.204      0.253      0.230                   0.147      0.154      0.152                0.127
      Ecuador             2003 2013    1      0.414      1.000      0.379     1.060                    0.540      0.540      0.000     0.467          0.451
                                              0.295      2.955      0.137                              0.577      0.577                0.323
      El Salvador         1997 2013    1      0.308      0.574      0.484     0.338         0.199      0.457      0.255      0.848     0.455          0.873
                                              0.199      0.291      0.260                   0.754      0.413      0.610                0.240
      Georgia             1997 2013    1      0.467      0.834      0.542     0.795         0.753      1.000      0.741      1.042     0.745         -0.019
                                              0.268      0.589      0.333                   0.124      0.932      0.079                0.080
      Honduras            1989 2013    1      0.529      0.739      0.664     0.355         0.622      0.751      0.712      0.319     0.698          0.299
                                              0.177      0.247      0.222                   0.151      0.155      0.154                0.127
      Indonesia (Rural)   1996 2013    1      0.118      0.300      0.210     0.494         0.763      1.000      0.757      1.023     0.531          0.413
                                              0.247      0.306      0.277                   0.104      0.792      0.083                0.124
      Indonesia (Urban)   1996 2013    1      0.202      0.402      0.306     0.480         0.836      1.000      0.826      1.056     0.725          0.195
                                              0.230      0.301      0.267                   0.088      0.732      0.044                0.063
      Kazakhstan          2001 2013    1      -0.104     0.103      0.103     0.000         0.774      1.000      0.759      1.058     0.604          0.236
                                              0.328      0.447      0.447                   0.128      0.993      0.063                0.116
      Kyrgyzstan          1998 2012    1      0.331      0.669      0.525     0.426         0.684      1.000      0.686      0.994     0.609          0.482
                                              0.229      0.382      0.317                   0.125      0.862      0.132                0.167
      Moldova             1997 2013    1      0.377      0.679      0.573     0.351                    0.189      0.189      0.000     0.524          0.873
                                              0.205      0.319      0.279                              0.782      0.782                0.263
      Mexico              1992 2012    2      0.618      1.000      0.589     1.056                    0.673      0.673      0.000     0.626          0.566
                                              0.243      1.500      0.127                              0.491      0.491                0.225
      Panama              2000 2013    1      0.208      0.514      0.385     0.422         0.600      0.883      0.642      0.875     0.490          0.591
                                              0.235      0.363      0.309                   0.280      0.416      0.300                0.220
      Peru                1997 2013    1      0.150      0.724      0.261     0.807                    0.610      0.610      0.000     0.504          0.303
                                              0.332      0.926      0.447                              0.424      0.424                0.325
      Philippines         1985 2012    3      0.644      1.000      0.599     1.072         0.883      1.000      0.869      1.083     0.969         -0.368
                                              0.343      1.425      0.139                   0.113      0.608      0.030                0.066
      Poland              1998 2012    1      0.404      0.801      0.555     0.619         0.905      1.000      0.895      1.095     0.932         -0.108
                                              0.230      0.517      0.339                   0.093      0.843      0.013                0.040
      Paraguay            1995 2013    1      0.046      0.416      0.237     0.482         0.462      0.865      0.699      0.483     0.508          0.413
                                              0.258      0.444      0.355                   0.279      0.337      0.304                0.231
      Romania             1999 2008    1      0.250      1.000      0.271     0.972         0.711      1.000      0.680      1.088     0.891         -0.517
                                              0.220      2.201      0.276                   0.267      1.895      0.057                0.167
      Russia              1999 2012    1      0.295      0.663      0.375     0.784         0.517      0.783      0.628      0.635     0.563          0.254
                                              0.344      0.608      0.401                   0.289      0.321      0.298                0.244
      Thailand            1988 2012    2      0.681      1.000      0.655     1.066                    0.692      0.692      0.000     0.676          0.436
                                              0.212      1.444      0.090                              0.313      0.313                0.181
      Turkey              2002 2012    1      -0.256     0.000      0.000     0.000         0.812      1.000      0.791      1.099     0.677          0.145
                                              0.360      0.510      0.510                   0.220      1.788      0.025                0.077
      Ukraine             2002 2013    1      0.674      1.000      0.653     1.066         0.776      1.000      0.755      1.080     0.884         -1.269
                                              0.175      1.751      0.072                   0.168      1.306      0.048                0.143
Notes: Notes: This table reports details of the estimates of in the WID sample. The first three columns indicate the first
and last years of the sample for each country, and the frequency of the surveys (every 1, 2 or 3 years). The next two sets of
four columns report the OLS, bias-corrected OLS, the MSE-minimizing weighted average of the two, and the MSE-minimizing
weight on the OLS equation, for dynamics of the mean and variance of log income, respectively. The last two columns report
the MSE-minimizing weighted average of the estimates of from the two equations, together with the MSE-minimizing weight
on the estimate from the equation for the dynamics of the mean of log income. Standard errors are reported below the
coefficient estimates for the OLS, bias-corrected OLS, and MSE-minimizing weighted average estimators. Missing OLS
estimates for the equation for the variance of log income correspond to cases where the OLS estimates are negative. In these
cases the estimates are based on the bias-corrected estimator only.


                                                                                  48
