                                                    WPS8121


Policy Research Working Paper                     8121




                         “Create” or “Buy”
            Internal vs. External Sources of Innovation
                       and Firm Productivity

                                   Jieun Choi




Trade and Competitiveness Global Practice Group
June 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 8121


  Abstract
 The role of innovation in improving productivity might                             that counters literature suggesting that “creating” could
 vary according to a country’s relative position in technology                      enhance firms’ absorptive capacity. The paper considers
 advancement. Frontier countries might benefit more from                            the possibility that “creating” and “buying” substitute for
 policies that promote firms’ internal innovation (create),                         each other in Tunisia, where resources are limited, assuming
 while follower countries would gain more from policies                             the effect of innovation is not linear or requires a certain
 favoring the adoption of existing technologies through                             amount of investment (threshold) to positively affect pro-
 innovation outsourcing (buy). However, in many countries,                          ductivity. The estimation result using the Tobit model
 the government policies to promote innovation narrowly                             supports this assumption. The findings suggest that inno-
 focus on “creating,” regardless of considerations of the                           vation policy in Tunisia should emphasize adoption and
 level of a country’s technological advancement. This paper                         adaptation, rather that creation and innovation. To encour-
 investigates the effect of different sources of innovation on                      age firms’ “buying,” the government can promote exports
 output via productivity with representative manufacturing                          and workers’ skills, whereas incentives that encourage
 firms in Tunisia from 1997 to 2007. It finds that “buying”                         firms to hire more technicians or to acquire foreign invest-
 has a positive effect on productivity whereas “creating” does                      ment might not be efficient ways to encourage “buying.”
 not, which might imply that Tunisian firms do not invest                           Moreover, the fact that there is a minimum requirement
 sufficiently in “creating,” or that “creating” is more difficult                   (threshold) for innovation investment suggests that policies
 for Tunisian firms because they might be too far from the                          that aim to reduce this threshold or support firms around
 technology frontier. Meanwhile, there is no synergy from                           this threshold could catalyze the innovation investment.
 using both sources of innovation simultaneously—finding




  This paper is a product of the Trade and Competitiveness Global Practice Group. It is part of a larger effort by the World
  Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions around the world.
  Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The author may be contacted
  at jieunchoi@worldbank.org.




         The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
         issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
         names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
         of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
         its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                       Produced by the Research Support Team
“Create” or “Buy”: Internal vs. External Sources of Innovation and
                        Firm Productivity

                                              By Jieun Choi1




Key words: innovation, R&D, royalties, productivity, knowledge transfer, firms, Tobit model

JEL codes: D24, L16, L24, M11, M16, O14, O25, O32, O38



1
  The World Bank. The authors may be contacted at jieunchoi@worldbank.org. Special thanks to Xiaolan
Fu and Christopher Adam for their valuable comments and advice. Thanks to the participants of CASE
conference, WBG Trade and Competitiveness Group seminar, Marie Francoise Marie-Nelly, Paulo Correa,
Denis Medvedev, Xavier Cirera and Afef Haddad for their thoughtful comments. I gratefully acknowledge
the Tunisian Institut National de la Statistique for allowing me to access to L'Enquête Nationale sur les
Activités Économiques dataset which this paper was based.

Disclaimer: Policy Research Working Papers are posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The
Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the
exchange of ideas about development issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly,
even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the names of the author and should
be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely
those of the author. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction
and Development/World Bank and its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the
World Bank or the governments they represent.
   1. Introduction

The role of innovation in improving productivity might vary according to a country’s relative
position in technology advancement. Countries close to the technology frontier will grow
faster by investing in innovation, while the follower group of countries will benefit more by
adopting existing frontier technologies (Aghion 2004; Aghion, et al. 2013). Therefore,
depending on their level of technology advancement, the growth rate of the economy will
depend not only on innovation but also on firms’ ability to adopt or diffuse technology
throughout the economy (Griffith et al. 2004).

These considerations suggest the question of whether innovation policy should vary
according to the level of a country’s technological advancement. Frontier countries might
benefit more from policies that promote firms’ internal innovation (create), while follower
countries would gain more from policies favoring efficient adoption of existing technologies
through innovation outsourcing (buy).

Meanwhile, in many countries, the government policies to promote firms’ innovation is
narrowly focusing on the internal innovation, such as tax benefits and subsidies to conduct
research and development (R&D) regardless of considerations of the level of a country’s
technological advancement.

Particularly in a developing country like Tunisia, where firms are constrained by limited
resources and skill levels, it is important to understand which sources of innovation are more
efficient for improving productivity, thus final output. However, the effects of different
sources of innovation on firm productivity and output are under-researched, even in
developed economies, and to my knowledge, have never been examined in Tunisia.

This paper fills this gap in our knowledge of the effects of different sources of innovation on
output, via productivity, in developing countries by examining representative firms in the
manufacturing sector in Tunisia. In this paper, I analyze the determinants of a firm’s decision
to invest in different sources of innovation, and the effects of these different sources on a
firm’s final output, via productivity. Then, I answer the following questions: are there any
differences in the determinants of a firm’s decision to create or to buy? Are the effects on

                                                                                             2
productivity different between create and buy, and if so, which source of innovation is more
effective in increasing final output via productivity?

This paper finds that innovation overall has a positive effect on output productivity, but
different types of innovation have different effects. “Buying” has a positive effect on
productivity whereas “creating” does not, which might imply that Tunisian firms do not
invest sufficiently in “creating”, or that “creating” is more difficult for Tunisian firms because
they might be too far from the technology frontier.

Meanwhile, there is no synergy from using both sources of innovation simultaneously – a
finding that counters literature suggesting that “creating” could enhance firms’ absorptive
capacity. I consider the possibility that “creating” and “buying” substitute for each other in
Tunisia, where resources are limited. In other words, splitting resources between two types
of innovation would actually have a smaller effect compared to concentrating resources on
just one, assuming that the effect of innovation is not linear or requires a certain amount of
investment (threshold) to positively impact output productivity. The estimation result using
the Tobit model supports the assumption that a minimum innovation investment is required.

The above findings suggest that innovation policy in Tunisia should emphasize adoption and
adaptation, rather that creation of innovation. To encourage firms’ investment in “buying”,
the government can promote exports and workers’ skills, whereas incentives that encourage
firms to hire more technicians or that promote FDI might not be efficient ways to encourage
firms’ investment in innovation. Moreover, the fact that there is a minimum requirement
(threshold) for innovation investment suggests that policies that aim to reduce this
threshold or to support firms around this threshold could catalyze the innovation
investment.

The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section two provides the literature review and
an analytical framework. Section three describes the data set and the key variables used,
including the measurement of innovation variables. Section four provides the empirical
strategy, and potential concerns and suggested solutions related to the empirical strategy.
Section five presents the results, and section six provides the conclusion.


                                                                                                3
       2. Literature and Analytical Framework

While innovation’s positive effects on productivity are empirically supported in many
developed economies, 2 evidence is still rare in developing countries, where innovation’s
effect on productivity might be different from that in developed countries. Specifically, in
developing countries, the cost of innovation might be higher because of greater distance
from the technology frontier, and incentives to innovate might be lower because of lower
expected rents of small domestic markets, as well as weak institutions such as patent law or
intellectual properties law meant to protect against imitation by competitors.

In fact, firms in developing countries might be better off improving their ability to acquire
existing external knowledge (buy) instead of trying to innovate within the firms (create)
because innovation is costly, risky, and path-dependent. For these reasons innovation is
highly concentrated in a few developed countries and among a small number of firms, while
external sources of technology account for a large part of productivity growth in developing
countries (Fu et al. 2010).

However, tapping existing knowledge is not easy either. The adaptation of knowledge
requires well-directed technological efforts (Lall 1992) as well as sufficient human and
financial resources and absorptive capacity (Cohen and Levinthal 1990) — essentially the
same prerequisites as for internal innovation. Thus, internal innovation could play the role
of absorptive capacity, thus enhancing the ability of firms to imitate external innovation
(Griffith et al. 2004). There is an additional possibility that it might be better to use a
combination of both sources of innovation, instead of only one source (Cassiman and
Veugelers, 2006, Lokshin, et al., 2008).



2
    . Increased innovation inputs positively influence firm productivity (Crepon, Duguet, and Mairesss, 1998).
More recent literature documents that different innovation inputs lead to different types of innovation outputs,
depending on the specific characteristics of a firm. For instance, R&D and IT investment lead to product
innovation in high-technology industries and process innovations for exporters (Brynjolfsson and Hitt 2003:
Inklaar and Timmer 2008). Also, the type of innovation seems to matter for productivity. Hall (2011) surveyed
empirical work on the relationship between innovation and productivity and found that product innovation
positively impacts output and productivity, but that the impact of process innovation is ambiguous.


                                                                                                              4
In light of these considerations, which of create or buy contributes more to productivity
(thus output) increases in developing countries is unclear. Understanding the effect of
different sources of innovation will provide practical information to firms and policy makers.

However, research on the effect of different sources of innovation on firm productivity,
instead of innovation outcome, with representative firms in more general industries in
developing countries is extremely rare. Moreover, most previous studies have focused only
on a few developed economies and high-technology industries, even though those industries
are not necessarily the most innovative, especially in developing countries. Further, among
those few studies on developing countries, most of them were conducted only for those firms
that responded in the affirmative to innovation outputs, which might produce biased results.


Different sources of innovation and their effects on productivity

Here I review literature on innovation outsourcing, which describes firm’s activities to
acquire external sources of knowledge through purchasing royalties and receiving technical
consulting services. Then I provide views on why different sources of innovation might have
different effects on firm productivity.

Despite rapidly growing innovation outsourcing, 3 there is little systematic research and
analysis of the effects of innovation outsourcing, and specifically, whether the outsourced
innovation produces a different effect than in-house innovation on firms’ productivity. The
existing research on innovation outsourcing focuses largely on its impact on firms’
innovation performance, such as the number of new products or registered patents, rather
than on firms’ overall performance, such as final output and productivity. A firm invests in
innovation primarily to enhance its final output and productivity; however, up to now little
has been known about effects of innovation outsourcing that spread beyond its direct effect
upon a firm’s innovation performance.


3
    . Technological convergence, declining transaction costs of acquiring external R&D inputs, and shortening
product cycle times have driven firms to utilize external sources of knowledge (Narula 2004).




                                                                                                           5
Additionally, research on representative firms in developing countries is particularly rare.
Existing research focuses mainly on a few developed economies and on selected industries,
such as high-technology industries, even though these may not be the most innovative
industries in developing countries. Also, research using innovation survey data is usually
conducted for those firms that are more likely to invest in innovation or had responded in
the affirmative for innovation outputs — which might lead to biased estimates of the effect
of innovation for generic firms.

Moreover, previous research has not explored systematically whether internal and external
innovation produce different effects on the final output and firm productivity, and what
accounts for the differences. While innovation outsourcing has been widely studied in a
number of different fields, such as industrial organization and management, the findings are
fragmented, and there is limited systematic framework to analyze the make or buy decision
on innovation outsourcing separately from decisions on general outsourcing, even though
innovation outsourcing might be very different from general outsourcing.

One advantage of innovation outsourcing, which also applies to general outsourcing, is short-
term cost saving. For instance, outsourcing can reduce production costs because of
economies of scale or lower wages of outsourcing providers. However, there is a certain cost
associated with searching for providers for outsourced activities. Thus, literature in the field
of management and industrial organization has tried to provide an analytical framework for
firms’ make-or-buy decisions using a profit maximization model and its extension. Profit-
maximizing firms decide whether or not to outsource by measuring the trade-off between
operating a larger organization with less specialization or conducting a costly search with
contracting incompleteness (Grossman and Helpman 2003, 2005).

There are several disadvantages in innovation outsourcing, as there are in general
outsourcing. Outsourcing is a trade-off situation and presents a dilemma because it may
damage the capacity for producing new products, and thus the innovation capability of firms
(Bengtsson and Berggren 2008). The outcome of outsourcing is moderated by the strategy
for internal and external integration. The integration needs and mechanisms are themselves
affected by the complexity of products and manufacturing processes (see, for example,

                                                                                              6
Chesbrough and Teece 2002; Ulrich and Ellison 2005). In fact, despite strong arguments for
the advantages of outsourcing, previous studies show few positive or else contradictory
effects of outsourcing on performance (Bengtsson et al. 20094).

In addition to the abovementioned advantages and disadvantages that innovation
outsourcing shares with general outsourcing, it also has certain differentiating
characteristics, such as a diverse motif and risks, which influence the particular way it affects
productivity.

Unlike general outsourcing, in most cases innovation outsourcing activities are identified for
strategic reasons, which is likely to produce a different effect on firm output. Firms choose
to outsource innovation in areas where they do not have in-house ability and use innovation
outsourcing as an instrument to acquire external knowledge, which is subsequently
integrated into a firm's own knowledge base, and to access suppliers' competencies.
Therefore, innovation outsourcing could potentially improve a company’s capacity to stay
current and innovate by interacting with “more advanced knowledge sources.” Also, firms
may need to outsource innovation to gain the capacity to produce unique products or
improve quality. In fact, product innovation is conducted mainly for these strategic reasons;
firms may also benefit from having ability to offer a variety of diversified products they
otherwise do not have the capacity to produce. More firms now outsource globally to tap into
the richer external source of knowledge, probably because rents from acquired new
products or processes may significantly outweigh costs of innovation outsourcing (Quinn
1999; Chesbrough 2003; Fifarek et al. 2008).

However, unlike general outsourcing, there is a risk of information leakage from firms that
receive innovation outsourcing services, and therefore, firms’ innovation outsourcing is at a
less than optimal level where information leakage cannot be monitored (Lai, Riezman, and
Wang 20095). According to a survey conducted by the Shared Services and Business Process




4
 . Related literature is cogently summarized in Bengtsson, et al. 2009.
5
 . Lai, Riezman, and Wang (2009) provides an analytical framework related to the cost-saving aspects of
innovation outsourcing using a principal-agent framework to analyze whether a production firm under

                                                                                                     7
Outsourcing Association in 2003, lack of control and loss of internal knowledge are the main
concerns when considering whether or not to outsource innovation. Further, given that the
provider typically has more knowledge than the buyer, and the buyer sometimes does not
have full control of the innovation process, outsourcing could weaken firms’ integrative
capabilities. Buyers often question their capacity to deal with the experts and become overly
dependent on the provider. Thus, buyers are legitimately concerned about losing the skills
that they outsource (Quinn 1999).

Moreover, benefits of engaging in innovation outsourcing materialize mostly in the long
term. Time must pass before innovation investment actually contributes to the final
outcome. Innovation outsourcing helps firms establish a reputation, builds relationships, or
signals talents to a wide group of innovators (and potential employers), which all take time.
Further, innovation involves uncertainty in an essential way, and the institutional structure
supporting innovation varies greatly from sector to sector (Nelson and Winter 1977).

Innovation outsourcing requires the attention of top management, as it could face internal
resistance from existing employees who are accustomed to the traditional way of working.
Therefore, recommendations for outsourcing innovation are unlikely to come from below.
In fact, lower- to intermediate-level managers tend to be hostile to innovation outsourcing,
as they fear loss of jobs, prestige, or power. Lastly, innovation outsourcing incurs transaction
costs for searching, contracting and controlling, and exposes firms to certain short-term risk,
including introduction delay caused by internal bureaucracies (Quinn 1999; Lacity and
Willcocks 2013).

Meanwhile, innovation outsourcing’s effect on productivity can also be varied by the firm’s
level of technological advancement and its ability to innovate or imitate. As explained by the
Schumpeterian Growth Theory, if the “follower” group of countries will benefit more by
adopting existing technology from the frontier, while countries close to the technology
frontier will grow faster by investing in innovation, it might be more efficient for developing



monopolistic competition should outsource R&D or do it in-house, as well as which type of contract between
fixed or revenue sharing is optimal.


                                                                                                        8
countries like Tunisia to acquire technology created externally (buy), as long as it is easy to
adopt. However, if technology is difficult to transfer and adopt, firms must have the ability to
learn from the external source of innovation (absorptive capacity), which might not exist at
firms in developing countries because of lower levels of initial technology; in these cases,
innovation outsourcing might not be efficient.

Thus, given the diverse motif of conducting innovation outsourcing and its complex
characteristics, it is unclear whether innovation outsourcing would have a positive effect on
firm productivity in developing countries like Tunisia, and which type of innovation is more
efficient in increasing firms’ productivity.

Meanwhile, there is scarce empirical evidence for the effects of innovation outsourcing on
firms’ productivity. The advantages and disadvantages of innovation outsourcing cited
above are identified largely in case studies of a few selected firms from managerial science
literature. Though insightful, these findings are not readily generalized to other contexts.
Also, as previously mentioned, although evidence from developing countries is particularly
rare, the effect of innovation outsourcing on productivity increase could be different
between developed and developing countries. Moreover, to my knowledge, there are few
theoretical explanations regarding what makes a firm innovate internally or externally, and
whether different sources of innovations have different effects on firms’ productivity and
final outputs.

Are there any benefits to creating and buying jointly?

The finding that a firm needs to acquire absorptive capacity to benefit from an external
source of innovation stimulated numerous investigations into a possible complementary
effect of internal and external sources of innovation, given that internal innovation may play
a role in the absorptive capacity of adopting external innovation. However, the evidence of
the complementarity effect between both sources of innovation is mixed.

Earlier literature found that in-house innovation plays a role in absorptive capacity, which
helps a firm to assimilate and integrate external innovation into its own production, and is
thus a prerequisite to deriving benefit from innovation outsourcing (Cohen and Levinthal

                                                                                              9
1990; Griffith et al. 2004; Spithoven et al.2011). Firms using both sources of innovation have
better innovation performance than those using only one source of innovation (Cassiman
and Veugelers 2006). Conditional on a significant level of internal R&D, a firm can achieve
higher productivity gains by combining external and internal R&D; however, there are
decreasing returns to scale at high levels of internal and external R&D (Lokshin et al. 2008).

However, a number of empirical studies report absence of a complementary effect or even a
negative (supplementary) effect of using both sources of innovation. For instance, several
studies document that internal and external innovation can substitute for each other,
especially when resources are limited (Fikkert 1993; Basant and Fikkert 1996; Blonigen and
Taylor 2000). A possible explanation is that, given a limited budget, an increase in either of
one of the two options tends to reduce spending on the other. If the effect on innovation
investment on productivity is not linear or requires a certain amount of investment
(threshold) to produce a positive effect on the final outcome, splitting resources between
two types of innovation would actually have a lower effect than consolidating resources on
just one.

While it is difficult to generalize, evidence of complementary effects seems to be more
common in studies on developed countries, and evidence of substitution effects seems to be
mostly from studies on developing countries. For instance, complementary effects were
documented in studies conducted on firms in Germany, Italy, the United Kingdom, Belgium,
France, and Denmark, while those that document supplementary effects were conducted on
firms in Andean-group countries, India, and China.6

In addition, other studies find that the complementary or substitution effects could be
changed depending on the ratio of the sources of innovation used, the internal innovation
status of the firm, and the external environment. Specifically, in environments in which
learning is less demanding, a firm's in-house R&D has little impact on absorptive capacity. In


6
 . The empirical evidence on supplementary effects includes Mytelka (1987) on Andean-group countries,
Fikkert (1993) on Indian manufacturing firms, and Basant and Fikkert (1996) on Indian firm-level panel data.
Also, a recent study by Hou and Mohnen (2013) found the complementary effect on Chinese manufacturing for
only medium-size firms, but found a supplementary effect for firms overall. There is more evidence of
complementary and supplementary effects beyond this literature review.

                                                                                                         10
the extreme case in which external knowledge can be assimilated without any specialized
expertise, a firm's internal R&D would have no effect on its absorptive capacity (Cohen and
Levinthal 1990). Also, external innovation moderates the internal and especially longer-term
incentives to innovate. Innovation outsourcing, such as R&D outsourcing, and innovation
performance have an inverse U-shaped relationship, which is positively moderated by the
extent to which firms engage in internal R&D and by the breadth of formal R&D
collaborations. Both serve as instruments to increase the effectiveness of R&D outsourcing
(Fu et al. 2010).

   3. Data

The data used in this study come from the annual enterprise survey, L'Enquête Nationale sur
les Activités Économiques, which is conducted by the Tunisian Institute of National Statistics
(L'Institut National de la Statistique, INS).

The data are collected for the period 1997 to 2009, with about 2,300 firms surveyed each
year, including some 1,500 firms in the manufacturing sector. The survey coverage is
extensive, as about 30 percent of firms with six or more employees in each sector, excluding
agriculture, are included in the sample. In each year, a sampling method is applied which
takes into account stratifications by industry and company size in terms of actual employees.
I have confirmed that the sample includes representative Tunisian enterprises by comparing
key firm characteristics of INS data with the aggregated information of firms listed by the
Investment Promotion Agency (Agence de Promotion de l’Industrie, API).

The drawback of the INS data is that the survey provides a repeated cross-section, which
accurately represents the Tunisian economy, but makes it difficult to apply econometric
techniques for the panel data. However, approximately 300 (N) firms are repeatedly selected
for 13 consecutive years (T), and most of the firms appear for at least 2 of the 13 years;
therefore, the whole set of data is a rather weakly balanced panel, which allows me to use
econometric techniques for the panel data.

The advantage of the INS data is that they provide rich information on firm characteristics
(firm creation year, export status, ownership), balance sheets (revenue, labor, capital,

                                                                                           11
expenditure on intermediate goods), and production (goods category, exports, and
ownership status), as well as other information included in standard firm-level surveys. Also,
the INS data uniquely provide variables to identify internal and external innovation, which
will be further described in the next subsection.

Since 2008, the INS has abridged questionnaires to reduce time and cost and to simplify the
survey procedure. Consequently, questions related to internal and external innovation have
been deleted. Therefore, I omitted observations for 2008 and 2009 and kept only those in
manufacturing, with NACE codes between 15 and 36. I also omitted observations with
missing information in labor, capital, material, and internal and external sources of
innovation. Therefore, the total number of observations has been reduced to 16,471 for the
period 1997 to 2007. A firm is repeatedly selected on average around four times during this
period, which makes this data set similar to a weakly balanced panel that observes around
4,100 firms over a four-year period (the higher N, the small T), which is still a large enough
sample to test the questions posed in this paper.

Innovation variables

The concept of innovation is broadly studied in economics and managerial science literature,
and typically understood as introducing new production processes, new products, new
management methods, and new organization of production activities. These concepts have
been measured with various proxies, depending on available data.

In most innovation surveys, such as the Community Innovation Survey (CIS), innovation has
been defined as a process, products, and organizational activities that are new-to-market or
new-to-firm.7 However, innovation surveys are relatively new and have been conducted in a



7
 . There are several limitations to the CIS, although it provides direct measures of innovation. First, the
definition of an innovative firm is somewhat ambiguous. It asks firms if they have undertaken activities new to
market or new to firm to measure innovation, and if the firm answers in the affirmative, it is treated as an
innovator. Based on the new product/process measures in the survey, Cyprus and Portugal have been the most
innovative countries in Europe for the past few years — which might raise concerns about this survey’s
accuracy. Second, the surveys provide limited information. They usually do not give information on multifactor
productivity, although they sometimes provide data on labor productivity. They also do not have information
on organizational innovation or detail expenditures on various kinds of innovation investments.

                                                                                                            12
relatively small number of samples, and mostly in developed countries. In Tunisia, an
innovation survey similar to CIS was conducted in 2005, however, it targeted a specific group
of firms that were most likely to innovate, which cause a sample selection bias.8 Also, the
survey was conducted only once in Tunisia, which makes it harder to understand the time
trend of innovation effects or to apply the panel technique to remove potential effects related
to time trend.

With general firm-level surveys, researchers have used different proxies for innovation.
Most studies have used capitalized R&D as a proxy for innovation input. Fewer studies have
used patents as a proxy for intermediate innovation output. The INS data provide detailed
information about expenses on innovation activities, such as conducting R&D, receiving
consulting services, and purchasing royalties. Hence, I will use the expenses related to
innovation activities as proxies for innovation inputs.

While the concept of innovation could include a wide range of activities, I follow a more
conservative approach and construct an innovation variable using cost items that are
directly related to technical innovation, such as the cost of conducting R&D, cost of receiving
technical consulting services, and cost of purchasing royalties. Specifically, I consider cost of
conducting R&D as internal innovation (create), and purchasing royalties and receiving
technical consulting services as external innovation (buy). Then, I create a total innovation
(all) variable by calculating the total cost of these three activities. Therefore, my innovation
variable is limited to innovation inputs on technical innovation. This narrow definition of



8
 . The first innovation survey of Tunisia was carried out in 2005 by the Ministry of Scientific Research and
Technology. The survey asked firms about various aspects of innovation for the period 2002 to 2004, modeling
the CIS survey. The survey was given to 739 firms likely to conduct innovative and/or R&D activity. Their
sample criteria include manufacturing firms with high technology intensity and/or strong value addition, with
firms with over 10 employees registered in the Agency for Investment Promotion (API) and the Institutes of
National Statistics (INS). Among these, 586 firms took the survey and 322 firms (around 55 percent) responded
in the affirmative to innovation. The survey included questions about product and process innovation. Firms
were asked if they have introduced a new product or process during the three years preceding the survey. The
firms taking the survey were predominantly in textiles (19 percent of respondents), food and agro-processing
(17 percent), electrical and equipment (17 percent), and IT (4 percent). Like the CIS, this survey included
subjective questions and qualitative variables that are difficult to codify and interpret. Also, the sample was
restricted to certain types of firms.


                                                                                                            13
innovation allows me to compare the effects of similar innovation activities between both
sources of innovation.

These proposed innovation variables have commonly been used as innovation input
variables in previous literature. Specifically, R&D and royalties are most widely used proxies
for innovation. Receiving technical consulting services has also been recognized as
innovation outsourcing in several studies, since if technology is uncodified, merely
purchasing existing technology is insufficient to adopt the technology, and also requires
consulting services9 (Quinn 1999; Bloom and Van Reenen 2007, 2010).

Table 1 provides the mean value and number of observations of internal and external
innovation variables from 1997 to 2007.

Table 1. Innovation Variables, 1997 to 2007
           Data                      Create                          Buy                            All
                             (Internal innovation)          (External innovation)            (Total innovation)
    Year      Number      Mean log   Number      Ratio    Mean log   Numbe       Rati    Mean log   Numbe         Ratio
              of firms    amount      of firms   (%)      amount       r of         o    amount       r of        (%)
                           (TD)                            (TD)       firms      (%)      (TD)       firms
    1997          1,580       2.09        407        26       5.11         882      56       5.60         924       58
    1998          1,574       2.95        573        36       5.73    1,010         64       6.47    1,093          69
    1999          1,503       2.99        557        37       5.94         984      62       6.56    1,043          66
    2000          1,777       2.80        632        36       5.63    1,101         70       6.25    1,170          74
    2001          1,810       2.86        644        36       5.64    1,106         70       6.28    1,179          75
    2002          1,427       3.06        525        37       5.69         852      54       6.38         907       57
    2003          1,199       3.06        433        36       5.71         712      45       6.38         752       48
    2004          1,352       3.49        572        42       6.26         879      56       6.96         926       59
    2005          1,368       3.19        521        38       6.13         872      55       6.86         918       58
    2006          1,501       2.88        518        35       5.77         932      59       6.60         993       63
    2007          1,382       2.73        458        33       5.59         823      52       6.34         861       54
    Mean          1,498       2.92        531        36       5.75         923      58       6.43         979       62
Note: TD=Tunisian dinar.




9
 . Also, recent literature finds that receiving consulting services enhances firms’ productivity (Bloom and Van
Reenen 2007, 2010; Bloom et al. 2012).


                                                                                                                      14
On average, approximately 62 percent of Tunisian firms engaged in either internal or
external innovation between 1997 and 2007. During this period, about 36 percent of firms
engaged in internal innovation, and about 58 percent in external innovation. Among those
firms that invested in external innovation, most paid for consulting services, and only a few
for royalties. This ratio of firms that engage in innovation is relatively large and similar to
the ratios in developed economies, and similar to the result of a different survey in Tunisia.10

Table A.1 in appendix A provides innovation variables by two-digit industry level. There is
large heterogeneity in the amount of innovation investment across industries, and even
within manufacturing. Comparing innovators’ share in entire firms (innovator’s ratio) across
the two-digit industry level, I found that innovators’ ratios are not high in so-called “high-
tech” industries, such as pharmaceutical or automobile industries, which are typically
considered innovative. In fact, a large number of previous studies on innovation focused
largely on these sectors. Meanwhile, those industries that are generally considered less
technologically sophisticated, such as tobacco, furniture, apparel, and printing, have some of
the highest innovator ratios, together with refined petroleum, chemicals and their related
products (like rubber and plastic products), which are typically capital intensive and also
Tunisia’s main export items. This finding contradicts most of the previous studies, which
consider high-tech industries to be technological leaders and innovation-intensive, even in
developing countries.

The low level of innovators’ share in high-tech industries might be explained by the fact that
Tunisian firms might avoid investing in innovation activities in sectors where the technology
gap with the more technologically advanced countries is large. Another possible explanation
could be that those sectors are not necessarily tech-intensive in developing countries. In fact,
I visited firms that are in high-tech industries, such as automobile and aerospace, and found
that they produce only certain parts of automobiles or airplanes, such as seats and plastic



10
  . Around 55 percent of respondents responded affirmatively to innovation in Tunisian innovation survey
2005. Eurostat reveals that innovation existed in 51 percent of manufacturing firms and in 40 percent of
services firms in the period 1994–96 in Europe (Pianta 2005). In the CIS survey, about 62 percent of firms
claimed to innovate in 1993 in Belgium (Cassiman and Veugelers 2006).


                                                                                                       15
materials for interior use, which might require a relatively low level of technology in the
integrated global value chain. This suggests that two-digit industry level groups might be too
aggregated, and the position of these firms in the relevant supply chain is more important.
In other words, the more relevant factor is not industry level group but product or process
level group. Therefore, firms in developing countries like Tunisia that belong to high-tech
industries do not necessarily produce innovation-intensive products.11

Interestingly, there is no distinguishing feature between internal and external innovation
across the two-digit industry level. In the sectors where more firms invest in internal
innovation, more firms also invest in external innovation. However, the different
characteristics of firms that invest in different sources of innovation will be further analyzed
in the next subsection.

Other variables

To test whether key factors that determine firms’ innovation are different between internal
and external innovation, I identified major determinants of innovation investment from
previous literature. The explanatory variables in X include a vector of variables that could
influence a firm’s decision to invest in innovation.

Export: Previous literature shows that exporting can influence firms’ innovation investment
decisions. Exporting firms tend to invest more in innovation. Process and product innovation
would increase export market entry. Interaction between R&D and exports could further
influence productivity, and the decision to export is often accompanied by large R&D
investment (Porter 1990; Grossman and Helpman 2003; Krugman 1991; Griffith, Redding,
and Van Reenen 2004; Aw, Roberts, and Xu 2011; Bernard, Redding, and Schott 2011).

FDI: Similarly, FDI might be another factor that could influence firms’ investment in
innovation. Foreign investors’ knowledge and know-how are transferred to domestic
partners, competitors, suppliers, and customers, which might also influence their decision to

11
  . In Tunisia, FDI is mostly driven by short-term, cost-saving benefits. This is in contrast to some other
emerging markets, such as China and India, where FDI is driven by long-term benefits and strategic reasons.
Therefore, foreign firms in the latter cases invest in innovation by establishing local R&D centres and
collaborate with local universities, as an example

                                                                                                        16
invest in innovation. However, inward FDI may produce a negative effect on innovation of
local firms if the FDI firms substitute local innovation efforts with foreign ones. In fact, recent
studies provide mixed results of FDI’s effect on local firms’ innovation (Fu, Helmers, and
Zhang 2012; Fu 2011).

Firm age: Previous literature finds that younger firms are more likely to innovate (Huergo
and Jaumandreu 2004; Balasubramanian and Lee 2008).

Firm size (number of employees): Larger firms are more likely to invest in R&D. Specifically,
large firms invest more in process R&D, while small firms invest more in product R&D (Acs
and Audretsch 1991; Cohen and Klepper 1996).

Skill (Average wage): Ability of labor, measured by average wage, is positively correlated
with a firm’s innovation, and influences firm productivity (Van Reenen 1996; Abowd et al.
2005; Fox and Smeets 2011).

Technical staff ratio (Number of technicians): Having more technicians could positively
influence firms’ innovation investment decisions since technical staff might be more directly
involved in the process of how innovation is handled and of how innovation inputs are used
in the production of final outputs.

Competition: Market competition influences firms’ innovation investment. Previous studies
reveal that firm entry spurs innovation in sectors close to the technology frontier, but
discourages it in laggard sectors (Aghion et al. 2005; Aghion and Griffith 2008).

Details of the definition of the variables are presented in table 2.

The mean of the log investment amount of any sources of innovation, log investment amount
of internal innovation, and log investment amount of external innovation are 6.00, 2.93, and
5.48, respectively, which is equivalent to TD 192,396 12 (US$101,725 or 3.4 percent of
revenue), TD 45,883 (US$24,260 or 0.8 percent of revenue), and TD 146,513 (US$74,465 or
2.6 percent of revenue), respectively. For Tunisian manufacturing firms, the average sales


12
     Tunisian Dinar (TD).

                                                                                                17
revenue is TD 5,670,918 (US$2,998,365), the average wage is TD 4,225 per year (US$2,234)
and average number of workers is 111. All values are in real terms, depreciated by the price
index provided by the INS.

Table 2. Summary Statistics of the Variables
                Variable                     Definition                 Obs.     Mean    S.D.    Min.   Max.
                                  Firms invest only in internal
               Int only           innovation                            16,471    0.04    0.19     0       1
                                  Firms invest only in external
               Ext only           technology acquisition                16,471    0.30    0.46     0       1
 Dummy
               Innover            Firms invest in internal innovation   16,471    0.35    0.48     0       1
 variables
               Externer           Firms invest in external innovation   16,471    0.62    0.49     0       1
 {Z}
                                  Firms invest in both sources of
               Both               innovation at the same time           16,471    0.32    0.47     0       1
                                  Firms invest in any sources of
               All                innovation                            16,471    0.65    0.48     0       1
                                  Log investment amount of any
               ln_n_innov         sources of innovation                 16,471    6.00    4.65     0    16.37
 Innovation
                                  Log investment amount of internal
 investmen
               ln_n_inter         innovation                            16,471    2.93    4.21     0    16.25
 t {U}
                                  Log investment amount of external
               ln_n_exter         innovation                            16,471    5.48    4.55     0    16.21
                                  Log amount of sales revenue,
               ln_revenue_d       depreciated                           16,457   13.91    1.65   6.17   21.50
 Inputs for    ln_labor           Log number of employees               16,471    3.98    1.23     0     8.48
 production                       Log amount of capital assets
 function      ln_capital_d       beginning of the year, depreciated    16,015   13.42    1.83   4.61   20.57
                                  Log amount of intermediary inputs
               ln_interm_d        (materials), depreciated              16,167   12.73    2.23   1.60   20.19
               Tech       staff   Technical staff share among total
               raito              employees                             16,394    0.74    0.25     0       1
 Factors
               Skills             Log average wage                      15,369    8.39    0.68   2.28   12.47
 that
               Firm age           Years since firm’s creation           14,279   27.06   13.45     6     200
 influences
               Dominance          A firm’s market share                 16,457    0.01    0.06     0       1
 innovation
               Export_stat        Export status dummy                   16,471    0.51    0.50     0       1
               FDI_stat           FDI status dummy                      16,471    0.27    0.44     0       1


                                                                                                           18
   4. Empirical Strategy

In this section, I provide econometric strategies to answer the key questions posed in this
paper, discuss potential concerns related to them, and provide solutions.

The questions I would like to answer are summarized here: first, what are the determinants
of whether a firm will innovate at all, and further, whether they create, buy, or do both?
Second, conditional on the response to question one, what determines the intensity of
innovation? Third, how do the different types of innovation impact firm productivity?

These are difficult questions, as there are three fundamental issues to address. First, there
are deep endogeneity problems between innovation and productivity. Second, the
innovation data are censored. Lastly, there is a debate about whether to measure the impact
of technology on output or directly on (a derived measure of) total factor productivity (TFP).

Therefore, in this section, I provide both an empirical model to answer the questions posed
above and also suggest solutions to address these three cross-cutting econometric problems.

Determinants of create or buy

To understand whether the factors that influence firms’ innovation investment are different
between firms that create and firms that buy, I analyze the determinants of firms’ innovation
for both create and buy, using a Probit model as seen in equation (1).

Denote firms by i = 1,…., N, industries by j = 1, …, J, and years by t = 1, …, T. The dependent
variable is a dummy variable of whether there is investment in any innovation (all), internal
innovation (innover), and external innovation (externer), respectively. To test whether there
is any difference between those firms that invest in only one source of innovation and firms
that invest in both sources of innovation, I have also created dummies of different exclusive
categories — firms that have only internal innovation (int only), firms that have only external
technology acquisition (ext only), and firms that invest in both internal and external sources
of innovation (both).

Probit   ′   =γ   + ѵijt , (   ′   = 1, if   > 0. Otherwise,   ′   = 0)                 (1)


                                                                                              19
Z   = {int   only , internal , ext only , external , both , all }
X      = {firm size , tech staff ratio , skills , firm age , export status ,FDI status    , Dominance   }


      Firm size              : Log number of employees is used as a proxy of size of firm i in sector j and
       time t, in log form.
      Technical staff ratio : The number of technicians/number of total employees. Since
       technical staff is a relatively small number compared to total labor, there is no strong
       correlation between labor and the ratio variables, which allows the joint use of technical
       staff ratio and labor variables as the right-hand–side (RHS).
      Skill        ∶ Log average wage of a firm i in sector j and time t, which is used as proxy of
       workers’ skill.
      Firm age : The number of years since a firm i was created.
      Export status : Dummy variable that shows whether a firm exports or not.
      FDI status : Dummy variable that shows whether a firm has any foreign ownership.
      Dominance : A proxy for competition, and measured as a firm’s share in the market. The

       indicator of dominance is constructed as dominance                         =               , where
                                                                                      ∑

       revenue is the revenue of firm i at industry j and time t. N is the number of firms at
       industry j and time t.


ѵ      =        +     +


          : Time dummies (1997–2007)
          : Industry dummies (NACE 15–36)
              : Idiosyncratic error, which varies across individual firms


Rather than using dummies, I then use innovation intensity (investment amount) at my left-
hand side (LHS) for the abovementioned six categories of firms to capture information based
on intensity, using firm fixed effects (FE) methods. The RHS variable remains the same.

ln Z       =   β X    +   ′                                                                             (2)



                                                                                                            20
where ′      =    + α + ɛ′

    ɛ′ : Idiosyncratic error, which varies across individual firms

Meanwhile, if a firm that would have invested in innovation decides not to under a certain
threshold (z = 0), the observed innovation value               is censored around zero. To address this
issue, I consider using an econometric technique for the censored dependent variable, such
as Tobit. I will further discuss the potential censoring problem and solution in the next
subsection.

Does innovation affect final output?

To identify the effect of innovation on productivity, I adopt a production function approach
that describes the relationship between factor inputs and output. Specifically, I use the
standard Cobb-Douglas production function, where output is a function of the inputs the firm
employs, such as labor, capital, and material, as well as its productivity. One advantage of
using the production function is that it provides not only the coefficient for the variable of
interest but also the coefficients of other factor inputs, which allow comparison of the
relative size of the coefficient for variable of interest. Also, it reduces the problem of having
to correct for other sources of firm heterogeneity that influence both innovation and overall
performance, by including (controlling for) key factor inputs as repressors.

I consider innovation investment as a factor input and add the identified innovation
variables in the production function. In this functional form, innovation is treated as an input,
the same as labor, capital, and material. The residual is now unobservable, which takes out
the effect of innovation inputs.

All variables are quantity terms (number of workers) or proxies for quantity terms that are
measured by value terms divided by price index, as in previous literature.13 For the LHS, I
use gross output, measured by sales revenue deflated with the output deflators constructed
from the INS’s Producer Price Index (PPI). Since there are no separate deflators for material



 . Industry-level price indexes are usually applied to deflate firm-level sales and input expenditures in
13

production function estimates.

                                                                                                            21
and innovation, I use these output deflators for material and innovation inputs. For the
capital input, I have constructed the deflators from the Gross Fixed Capital Formation (GFCF)
of the National Account.

The empirical specification and description of variables can be written as follows:

ln Y = β ln K     + β ln L + β ln M + β ln I + β Ɵ + α + α + ɛ                            (3)

   Y : The real output of firm i operating in sector j at time t, which is calculated by the
    sales revenue deflated by subindustry-level deflators from the PPI obtained from INS.
   K    : The value of fixed assets at the beginning of the year, deflated by GFCF, from the
    National Account.
        : Number of workers.
        : The value of physical material inputs used directly for production, deflated by
    deflators based on input-output table.
       : Sum of the innovation investment (all), which is the cost of R&D, cost of consulting
    services, and cost of royalty payment for firm i in sector j at time t, deflated by PPI
    deflators. The subindustry of the PPI index was used as its output subindustry.
   Ɵ : A vector of control variables that are the dummies of export and FDI status.
       : Time dummies (1997–2007).
       : Industry dummies (NACE 15–36).


To answer the main research question, which source of innovation contributes more to
productivity, I divide the innovation variables into internal and external innovation as seen
in equation (4), and I simply compare coefficient of β and β in equation (4).

ln Y = β ln K      + β ln L + β ln M       + β ln Internal I   + β ln External I      +
   Ɵ +     +       + ɛ                                                                    (4)

To test whether the effect on productivity is different between those firms that invest in one
source of innovation and firms that invest in both sources, I add the interaction term
between internal and external innovation as seen in equation (5). This is because the β in
equation (4) actually includes not just those firms investing in internal innovation, but also

                                                                                            22
those that invest in both sources of innovation. By adding the interaction term, the distinct
effects of different categories of firms can be separated. In equation (5), β provides the
potential effect of investing only in internal innovation; the overall effect on internal
innovation is β + β . The same holds for β and β + β for the firms that invest only in
external innovation and the overall effect on external innovation.

In previous literature, the interaction term has been used to measure whether there is any
complementarity in using both sources of innovation at the same time (Cassiman and
Veugelers 2006). Therefore, the coefficient of β in equation (5) can also provide information
about whether there is any synergy of using both sources of innovation.

ln Y = β ln K + β ln L + β ln M + β ln Internal I + β ln External I +
β ln Internal I × ln External I + Ɵ + α + + ɛ                                             (5)

There are three major problems with the above econometric specifications: first, if the
innovation decision is endogenous, and thereby correlated with the error term; second, if
the innovation variables are censored, and third, if the effect on final output is an indirect
measure of the effect on the firm’s productivity.

Simultaneity between innovation investment and productivity

Simultaneity bias (or endogenous input selection): If a firm’s knowledge of its productivity
influences its decisions to invest in innovation and the amount to invest, the estimated
coefficient of innovation might be biased. Specifically, in the above specification, if more
productive firms invest in innovation, the estimated coefficient of innovation might be biased
upward since the innovation investment might be correlated with unobserved productivity
shocks. Therefore, the above functional form using ordinary least squares (OLS) fails to
convincingly isolate the causal effect of innovation on firm productivity.

To control for simultaneity between productivity and innovation, I applied the generalized
method of moments (GMM) in the above specification. GMM gets rid of the simultaneity issue
by using the previous year of observations of the dependent variable and the endogenous
variable (here, innovation investment) as its own instrument, removing them from the


                                                                                           23
regression equation (using the differenced equation with lagged levels as instruments) or
removing them from the instruments (using differences as the instrument in a levels
regression). The INS dataset has a relatively short time dimension (T = 11, max, from 1997
to 2007, but most have less than 11 years of observations) and a larger firm dimension (N =
16,471, unbalanced), which is an advantage of using GMM.

In addition to innovation variables, I consider material as an endogenous variable, as in
previous literature (Ackerberg et al. 2006). Firms can quickly adjust their material inputs
based on their knowledge of productivity and final output, while it takes more time to adjust
labor and capital inputs. Therefore, I use lagged values of the dependent variable, innovation
variables, and material as its own instrument, by removing them from the regression
equation (using the differenced equation with lagged levels as instruments) and from the
instruments (using differences as instruments in the levels regression).

Due to gaps in innovation variables for previous years in the weakly balanced INS data, using
a dynamic equation significantly reduces the number of innovative firms that can be tested.
A dynamic model that has lag dependent variable and/or lag factor inputs as additional
regressors requires further lags of those additional regressors when they are used.
Therefore, I use a static equation, which is a long-run description, since it might take some
time for inputs, such as innovation investment, to influence the output. To understand the
short-run effects, my estimation required an assumption that the current year’s innovation
investment of a firm reflects the previous years’ innovation investment. This might be a valid
assumption given that the overall number of innovative firms and the amount of innovation
investment has been stable over the data period.

In addition to using GMM, I also considered other econometric techniques widely used in
previous literature to deal with simultaneity issues in firm-level analysis; these include Olley
and Pakes (OP) (1996) and Levinsohn and Petrin’s (LP) (2003) semi-parametric estimator.
However, critical assumptions of OP methods on monotonicity of investment in productivity
might not hold when introducing an innovation status variable (Van Biesebroeck 2003; De
Loecker 2007, 2013). Also, the INS data are weakly balanced; thus, there is no information
about those firms that enter into and exit from the market, which is important in controlling

                                                                                             24
the selection bias in OP methods. Meanwhile, the current method of LP (such as the levpet
command in Stata) is developed for one proxy variable (material) and one endogenous
variable (capital) when using revenue as the dependent variable, and does not allow the
addition of innovation as another endogenous variable; (it is possible, however, to manually
code this method to have an additional endogenous variable). For these reasons, OP and the
current method of LP are not the most suitable methods for analyzing innovation effects for
INS data; thus, I used GMM instead of these two semi-parametric methods.

As mentioned above, the OLS estimate would be biased upward, and the fixed effects (FE)
estimate of coefficients would be biased downward.14 However, those estimation results are
still useful since they provide an upper and lower range of the estimated results. Also, the
current LP estimation is still closer to true estimation than OLS and FE, since it disregards
simultaneity issues of other factors inputs, such as capital, in estimating the production
function, even though it does not remove the simultaneity issue in my interest variable,
innovation. Therefore, I will report the results from OLS, FE, and the current LP methods to
ensure my estimated results using GMM are within the credible range.

In case the innovation variables are censored

If there are costs to seeking out innovation activities, and innovation activities require a
certain scope to be materialized, firms would invest in innovation activities only when their
investment amount is above a certain threshold. A number of firms that are not investing in
innovation would have invested in innovation without these threshold constraints. In the
INS data, about 40 percent of firms reported zero innovation investment, therefore, the
innovation variable might be censored at zero.

Therefore, I consider a firm’s decisions to innovate as two-fold: first, whether to invest in
innovation at all, and if so whether to invest in internal or external innovation (or both), and
second, how much to invest. I used the Type II Tobit model (selection in censored data) with
three-stage equations. The first equation of the model explains the propensity to invest in


 . The explanation on how FE provides an estimate with a downward bias is described well in Van Beeren
14

2012.

                                                                                                         25
overall innovation (all), invest in internal source of innovation (internal), and in external
innovation (external). Those firms that reported having positive innovation investment are
defined as innovator, creator, and buyer. The second equation explains the investment
amount in each source of innovation activity (if a firm invests). Therefore, the first two
equations estimate the predicted investment amount for those firms that could have
invested if the cost of searching were zero or if there is no minimum requirement to invest
in innovation (no threshold). Then, in the third stage, I used the predicted value of the
innovation investment amount, instead of the observed innovation amount, in the main
regressions. The empirical model is therefore as follows:

First stage: Decision equation (Probit model)

Z*ijt = γ Xijt + ѵijt, and z ijt = 1 if, z* ijt > 0, z ijt = 0 if z*ijt = < 0                        (6)

The first stage is shown in equation (6), which is the propensity of the decision to invest in
innovation, and then, which source (create or buy) of innovation. I used the Probit model to
understand the determinants of firms’ innovation decisions in each source. As mentioned
above, X is the vector of factors that could influence the probability of firms investing in
innovation, where Z is a vector of dummy variables for investing in each type of innovation:

X    = {firm size , tech staff ratio , skills , firm age , export status ,FDI status   , Dominance    }

Zijt = {invest in any source of innovation (all ), in internal innovation (internal ), in external
innovation (external ,)}.


Second stage: Predict innovation investment amount, considering censoring issue (Tobit
model)

U*ijt = γ′ Qijt + σλijt + μijt, and Uijt = U*ijt if z ijt = 1, Uijt = 0 if z ijt = 0                 (7)

ѵijt =     + + ɛ , μijt = ′ + + ′ + ɛ′ , t=1, …, T, j= 1, …J and I = 1, … N
and ɛ      =ρ ɛ  + τ , ɛ = ρ ɛ′       + τ′ , τ ~ (0, σ ), τ′ ~ (0, σ ’)

Equation (7) is for the second stage, which is to predict the innovation investment amount,
considering the potential censoring issue, using the Tobit model. Here, U is the vector of the


                                                                                                           26
log amount of innovation investment. Q is a vector of explanatory variables for innovation
investment decision and innovation amount equations, which is essentially the same vector
as X. Using the same vector of variables does not raise any identification issues in the Tobit
model (Crepon, Duguet, and Mairesse 1998).

Uijt = {log total innovation amount (all), log internal innovation amount (internal), log external
innovation (external)}

Q     = {firm size , tech staff ratio   ,   skill , firm age , export status , FDI status , Dominance }

σ is the standard deviation, and λ is the inverse Mills ratio. The components                         and ′ are
time dummies;                  ′ are industry dummies; and ɛ           is an idiosyncratic error, which
varies across individual firms. Hence the model allows unobserved heterogeneity, first order
state dependence, and serial correlation in the error components.

When a firm that would have invested in innovation decides not to innovate, under a certain
threshold (z = 0), the observed innovation value i is zero. The significance of the presence of
these potential censoring effects is indicated by the Rho statistics in the generalized Tobit
model, which reflects the correlation between the error terms of the two equations (μ and
υ).


I then use the predicted innovation investment amount (                   ijt   ), which is measured in the
second stage, and plug it into the main specifications, which are equations (3) to (5). Now,
equations (3) to (5) become equations (8) to (10).


In the third stage, I plug in the predicted innovation investment amount (                  ijt   ) into the main
equations:

ln      =    ln      +    ln     +      ln        +     ln     +   Ɵ    +         +   + ɛ                    (8)

ln Y = β ln K + β ln L + β ln M                       + β ln            + β ln                      +    Ɵ
             +  +     + ɛ                                                                                    (9)




                                                                                                               27
ln Y = β ln K     + β ln L + β ln M        + β ln             + β ln              +
β ln            × ln              +    Ɵ   + α + α + ɛ                                   (10)


Meanwhile, it should be noted that the use of the Tobit model for potentially censored
regressors produces different effects than the selection bias of a sample. If the analysis is
made only for firms with innovation inputs or outputs, this could lead to a sample selection
bias since the characteristics of innovative firms might be different from those firms that are
not. To deal with this selection bias, previous literature also used a selection model with a
two-stage estimation procedure, which is a similar econometric strategy to the above
specification, such as Probit and Tobit specifications for the interval data on outputs to
measure the probability of investment in innovation and input the estimated probability into
the production function (Loskin, 2008, Crepon, Duguet and Mairesse 1998). However, unlike
the innovation surveys or samples of only innovators, my data include representative
Tunisian firms, both innovators and non-innovators. Therefore, sample selection bias is not
an issue with the INS data.

Having Total Factor Productivity (TFP) as a dependent variable

There might be questions about why I analyze the effects of different sources of innovation
on final output, Y, instead of on productivity itself. In fact, some literature has used TFP as
the dependent variable to measure the effect of innovation-related activities on productivity.
That literature typically conducted these analyses with two steps: first, measuring TFP as
residual of the standard production function, and second, testing innovation’s effect on the
measured TFP (for example, Brynjolfsson and Hitt 2003). This is a direct way to measure
innovation’s effect on productivity.

However, the product function with Y as a dependent variable is essentially the same as with
TFP as a dependent variable. In a standard product function, the residual (        ) consists of
productivity,    , the Hicksian neutral efficiency level of firm (average TFP), and ϵ’, standard
i.i.d. error term, capturing unanticipated shocks to production and measurement error.

ln     =   ln    +     ln     +   ln       +   Ɵ    +    +     +                          (11)


                                                                                             28
     =A ,+ ′


In equation (6), adding innovation — typically considered a key driver of productivity — as
an input of the product function makes innovation a part of TFP (A ).


A    = ′(    )                                                                            (12)

Therefore, using specification (12) is essentially making equation (11) into equation (13),
which is my specification.


ln    =     ln    +    ln    +    ln     +     Ɵ   +     +      + ′(    ) + ′             (13)


In my view, measuring an innovation input’s effect on output might be a better approach
than measuring its effect on productivity for several reasons. First, measuring the innovation
effect on TFP requires the assumption that innovation investment, such as investment in
R&D or in IT equipment, does not affect the output directly but indirectly through
productivity, which is not necessarily true. Also, having innovation as an input in the
production function could automatically control other input intensity in production.
Moreover, the coefficient of innovation could also provide the relative importance of
innovation by allowing a comparison of the elasticity of innovation input to that of other key
input variables. Lastly, the production function approach has been widely used; therefore,
the limitations related to the econometric issues are well understood, and a number of
solutions based on the latest econometric techniques have been suggested. In fact, most
literature has used Y as the dependent variable and innovation as inputs in the production
function to analyze the effect of innovation on productivity.

Therefore, I will measure the effects of innovation inputs on final output, which is an indirect
measure of productivity, as a main specification. In addition, as a robustness check, I will
undertake the abovementioned two-stage approach, and measure TFP as a residual of the
product function, and then use TFP as LHS variable, and test my results for consistency.




                                                                                             29
I measure TFP as the residual of a Cobb-Douglas production function, which has an output
that is a function of the inputs the firm employs — the same equation of basic specifications
as equation (3), but without an innovation term in the RHS.

The empirical specification of estimation TFP can be written as follows:

ln     =       +   ln     +   ln    +    ln     +   +    +                                 (14)

          : The real output of firm i operating in sector j at time t, which is calculated by the
     sales revenue deflated by subindustry-level deflators from the Producer Price Index.
          : The value of fixed assets at the beginning of the year, deflated by GFCF, from the
     National Account.
          : Number of employees.
          : The value of material inputs adjusted for changes in material inventories, deflated
     by deflators based on input-output tables.
          : The Hicks neutral efficiency level of the firm (TFP of firm) measured as the residual
     of the model/stochastic error term.
      : Time dummies for 1997–2007.
     : Firm fixed effect.
          : Standard i.i.d. error term capturing unanticipated shocks to production and
     measurement error.


I use the generalized method of moments (GMM) in TFP estimation for consistency, by
controlling simultaneous input selection issues when input is correlated with the error term
(     ). The INS data set has a relatively short time dimension (T = 11 max, after omitting
information after 2008, but most firms have less than 11 years of observations) and a larger
firm dimension (more than 16,000 manufacturing firm observations, although many are
repeated several times), therefore, is suitable for GMM.

With INS data, for each of the NACE two-digit industries in manufacturing (NACE 15–36), I
obtained TFP estimation, with non-dynamic system GMM with 2 and 3 lags for instruments.
One drawback of using a weakly balanced INS data set is that the dynamic model will

                                                                                               30
significantly reduce the number of observations; therefore, I used the non-dynamic GMM
model. Specifically, I treated all factor inputs — labor, capital, and material — as endogenous;
so, factor inputs are instrumented by their own lag and differenced. Therefore, previous year
information has already been used as an instrument. Meanwhile, a dynamic model that has
lag-dependent variables and lag factor inputs as additional regressors requires one
additional lag in instruments, which significantly reduces the number of observations.
Likewise, further lags in instruments significantly reduce the number of observations; so, I
used 2 and 3 lags in instruments. After omitting those observations that were missing values
in key variables, such as revenue and employment, the number of observations fell
significantly: I obtained approximately 15,800 TFP measurements out of about 16,471 firm
observations.


As a robustness check, I use this estimated TFP as a dependent variable,          = ′(      ), as
described as below.

ln     =   ln       +   Ɵ     +      +   + ɛ                                                (15)

ln     = β ln               + β ln             +    Ɵ   +      +     + ɛ                    (16)

ln   = β ln                 + β ln             + β ln              × ln            +    Ɵ    +
 α + α + ɛ                                                                                  (17)




     5. Results

Determinants of innovation investment

Table 3 shows how each determinant is associated with each source of innovation decision,
while controlling for firm-specific, time-invariant unobserved bias (firm fixed effects [FE]). I
provide the results of the Probit estimation using pooled regression in table B.1, appendix B.

The estimation includes 9,447 firms that invested in any sources of innovation. Among them,
4,691 invested in both sources of innovation. Approximately 8,913 firms invested in external


                                                                                              31
innovation, and of those, 4,222 invested exclusively in external sources of innovation. A total
of 5,225, firms invested in internal innovation, but only 534 invested in only internal sources
of innovation.

Table 3. Determinants of Innovation Decision, Panel Firm Fixed Effects
   Dep. Var.             (1)             (2)            (3)             (4)             (5)             (6)
    {Z’ijt}            Internal     Internal All      External        External         Both             All
                        Only                           Only             All
 Firm size            -0.007         0.015           0.021           0.043**        0.022           0.036*
                      (0.269)        (0.328)         (0.146)         (0.005)        (0.138)         (0.015)

 Tech staff ratio     0.003          -0.003          0.049*          0.043          -0.006          0.046
                      (0.741)        (0.914)         (0.023)         (0.076)        (0.796)         (0.058)

 Skill                -0.009         0.006           0.026           0.041**        0.015           0.032*
                      (0.179)        (0.689)         (0.091)         (0.009)        (0.289)         (0.037)

 Export status        0.004          0.021           0.037*          0.055**        0.017           0.058***
                      (0.605)        (0.189)         (0.012)         (0.001)        (0.281)         (0.000)

 FDI status           0.001          0.005           -0.026          -0.022         0.004           -0.021
                      (0.898)        (0.781)         (0.167)         (0.284)        (0.818)         (0.299)

 Firm age             -0.000         0.001           -0.001          0.000          0.001           0.000
                      (0.665)        (0.275)         (0.290)         (0.874)        (0.233)         (0.963)

 Dominance            -0.002         0.289           -0.258          0.033          0.291           0.031
                      (0.943)        (0.408)         (0.385)         (0.915)        (0.401)         (0.920)

 # of obs.            13,257         13,257          13,257          13,257         13,257          13,257
 # of dep.=1          534            5,225           4,222           8,913          4,691           9,447
 # of group           3,332          3,332           3,332           3,332          3,332           3,332
 R2, within           0.002          0.005           0.006           0.010          0.006           0.011
 Rho                  0.458          0.647           0.610           0.601          0.659           0.598
Note: Firm fixed-effects (within) regression; t statistics in parentheses, standard error are clustered and robust;
year and industry dummies are included but not reported. Significance level: * = 5 percent, ** = 1 percent, ***
= 0.1 percent

Columns (2) and (4) show the factors that influence the probability of firms engaging in
internal and external sources of innovation respectively. Column (6) shows probability of
investment in any source of innovation (all). I added columns (1), (3), and (5) to see whether




                                                                                                                32
there are any differences between those firms investing in only one source of innovation and
those investing in both sources at the same time.

The determinants of a firm’s decision to invest in innovation are different between internal
and external innovation. Tests for the difference of coefficients are conducted, and the null
hypothesis that coefficients of the regressions from different columns are systematically the
same is rejected at the 1 percent significance level between columns (1) and (3), and
between columns (2) and (4).

All the coefficients of columns (1) and (2) are statistically insignificant, which implies that
there are no systemic factors that encourage firms’ investment in internal innovation. In
addition, those firms that invest in only one type of innovation shows less systemic patterns
that encourage firms’ investment decision, compared to those firms that invest in both
sources of innovation. Specifically, most coefficients in column (1), (3) and (5) are
insignificant, except for the positive and significant coefficients of technical ratio and export
for those firms that invest in only external sources of innovation as shown in column (3).

Meanwhile, the estimation results in columns (4), and (6) show that being large, paying
higher wages, and participating in exports are positive determinants of firms’ investment in
both external sources of innovation and any type of innovation.

Interestingly, FDI is associated with decreased likelihood of investment in innovation, and
has a negative coefficient; however, this coefficient is statistically insignificant. Also,
technical ratio, dominance, and firm age are not statistically significant determinants of all
innovation and external innovation decisions.

Table 4 provides the above specification with the firm fixed effects, but with dependent
variables of actual innovation investment amounts, as seen in equation (2).

The advantage of using the innovation amount as a dependent variable rather than using a
dummy variable for innovation is that the results reflect the information on innovation
intensity (investment amount to innovation) with firm FE. Table B.2 in appendix B provides
the estimation results of the same specification as table 4, but using random effects rather



                                                                                              33
than firm fixed effects. Hausman test results (table B.3 in appendix B) reveal that fixed effect
is more appropriate to use in the above model.

Table 4. Determinants of Innovation Intensity, Panel Firm Fixed Effects
    Dep. Var.            (1)              (2)               (3)               (4)          (5)       (6)
     {Zijt}           Internal          Internal         External         External All    Both       All
                       Only               All              Only
 Firm size            -0.041           0.210*            0.274*             0.564***     0.291*    0.523***
                      (0.391)          (0.048)           (0.011)            (0.000)      (0.016)   (0.000)

 Tech staff ratio     0.064            0.052             0.438*             0.308        -0.101    0.401*
                      (0.437)          (0.776)           (0.019)            (0.117)      (0.627)   (0.046)

 Skill                -0.069           0.182             0.320**            0.574***     0.240     0.491***
                      (0.174)          (0.106)           (0.005)            (0.000)      (0.060)   (0.000)

 Export status        0.047            0.196             0.354**            0.533***     0.198     0.599***
                      (0.408)          (0.122)           (0.006)            (0.000)      (0.169)   (0.000)

 FDI status           -0.014           0.018             -0.245             -0.137       0.096     -0.163
                      (0.852)          (0.912)           (0.148)            (0.441)      (0.611)   (0.368)

 Firm age             -0.001           0.009             -0.004             0.004        0.010     0.005
                      (0.660)          (0.225)           (0.624)            (0.576)      (0.243)   (0.566)

 Dominance            0.018            5.747**           -1.145             2.207        4.613*    3.486
                      (0.984)          (0.004)           (0.577)            (0.308)      (0.044)   (0.114)
 # of obs.            13,257           13,257            13,257             13,257       13,257    13,257
 # of group           3,332            3,332             3,332              3,332        3,332     3,332
 R2, within           0.002            0.004             0.006              0.011        0.062     0.011
 Rho                  0.429            0.583             0.585              0.569        0.632     0.560
 F test (u_i = 0)     1.95             3.39              2.83               3.49         3.37      3.48
 Prob > F            0.000           0.000             0.000           0.000         0.000        0.000
Note: Firm fixed-effects (within) regression. The dependent variable is the log investment amount of
different sources of innovation as noted in each column. t statistics in parentheses, standard error
are clustered and robust; year and industry dummies are included but not reported. Rho reports
fraction of variance due to u_i. Significance level: * = 5 percent, ** = 1 percent, *** = 0.1 percent.

Although the direction and statistical significance of coefficients of table 4 are similar to
those in table 3, the estimation results of table 4 are slightly different from those of table 3,
which explains that the decision related to innovation (whether to innovate or not) and
decisions related to innovation intensity (how much to innovate) are not exactly the same.

Similarly, to the results in table 3, for firms that invest only in internal sources of innovation,
widely recognized determinants of investing in innovation do not influence their decision on

                                                                                                             34
how much to invest. In column (1), all coefficients are statistically insignificant, implying that
none of the abovementioned factors would increase the innovation investment amount for
those firms that invest in internal innovation only.

Meanwhile, firms that are larger and have a bigger market share (dominance) will have a
larger amount of overall internal innovation, as seen in column (2). In fact, dominance has a
very large effect on internal innovation investment amount, since a 1 percent increase of
market share is associated with a 5.74 percent increase of the internal innovation investment
amount. The other determinants, including technical staff ratio, FDI status, and firm age, will
not augment firms’ internal innovation amount.

For firms that invest only in external sources of innovation, firm size, average wage and
export status have positive and significant effects on external innovation amount, as seen in
column (4). Meanwhile, the coefficient of technical staff ratio also becomes positive and
statistically insignificant for the firms that invest in external innovation only and that invest
in any sources of innovation, as shown in column (3) and (6).

The above results of tables 3 and 4 are largely consistent with the findings of previous studies,
although a few are in contrast to previous findings.

Firm size, measured by log number of labor, matters for the decision to invest in both source
of innovation and innovation intensity, except for firms that invest in only one source of
innovation. This finding is consistent with previous literature that finds firm size to be one
of the determinants of innovation (Souitaris 2002), and that the biggest firms have an
advantage when undertaking innovative activities (González and Jaumandreu 1998).

Workers’ skill, measured by log average wage, also has a positive coefficient for both sources
of innovation decisions, except for firms that invest in only one source of innovation. Also,
skill has positive effects on innovation intensity of external sources. The magnitude of the
coefficient for skill is as large as the coefficient for firm size in table 4. This might suggest
that not only the quantity of labor, but also the quality of labor is important for making the
decision to invest in innovation. While the coefficients of firm size and skill are similar in
both internal and external innovation in the Probit model, both coefficients are larger for


                                                                                               35
internal innovation than external innovation in the fixed effects model. Larger firms with
more skilled employees are more likely to invest in internal innovation.

Participating in exports also has a positive effect on both sources of innovation and
innovation intensity (except for internal innovation intensity). The coefficient for export is
larger for the external innovation decision than for the internal innovation decision. The
coefficient of export on external innovation intensity is significant while the coefficient on
internal innovation intensity is insignificant. Exporters might need more advanced
technology, which might not exist in-house, or they may have better exposure to external
markets or other firms, which might help them to buy external innovation.

Again, a test for the difference of coefficients is conducted, and the null hypothesis that
coefficients of the regressions from the mentioned columns are systematically the same is
rejected at the 1 percent significance level between columns (1) and (3), and between
columns (2) and (4), which confirms that the determinants of investing in innovation are
different between internal and external sources of innovation.

Table A.2 in appendix A provides more details on firms’ innovation investment by level of
their export status: full exporters, which export all of their production; partial exporters,
which export some of their production but sell the remaining production on the domestic
market; and non-exporters. Partial exporters invest the most in innovation, followed by full
exporters, and lastly, non-exporters. Full exporters and partial exporters invest much more
in external innovation than in internal innovation.

Table A.3 in appendix A shows the innovator’s ratio by FDI status. Interestingly, firms with
joint ownership between foreign owner and domestic owner (partial FDI) invest more in
innovation than fully domestic firms (no FDI), while those firms that are fully owned by
foreign owner (full FDI) invest in innovation much less.

The low level of innovation investment of full FDI firms might be explained by the specific
characteristics of foreign investment in Tunisia. FDI in Tunisia is mainly provided by a few
European countries, such as France and Italy, and is concentrated heavily in the export
processing zones (EPZs), known as the offshore regime, where foreign firms receive a tax


                                                                                           36
incentive to export products back to Europe. The main purpose of their investment in Tunisia
is cost saving, from both cheaper labor and tax incentives in natural resource–related
industries, or from outsourcing a relatively simple part of the process, like textiles, in the
production value chain. In fact, research on EPZs in developing countries found that foreign
firms operating in EPZs mostly engaged in process trade based on cheap unskilled or semi-
skilled labor available in the host country and did not generate linkages with the local
economy. This situation might explain the lesser likelihood of innovation investment for FDI
firms.

The negative effects of FDI on technological upgrading in domestic firms have been
documented in previous literature. Strong competition from foreign subsidiaries may reduce
local firms’ R&D efforts (OECD 2002). Foreign subsidiaries may remain enclaves in
developing countries, lacking effective linkages with the local economy. However, these
negative effects are more relevant for competitor firms or other firms in the domestic market,
rather than those firms that receive FDI. Therefore, there are many preconditions, such as a
firm’s absorptive capacity and business environment, necessary for an effective technology
transfer process to occur through FDI.

The findings above are consistent with previous literature investigating determinants of
innovation in Tunisia. Surveys on selected industries, such as ICT and pharmaceutical
industries, confirmed that innovation efforts are lacking in those so-called high technology
industries (Harbi, Amamou, and Anderson 2009, 2012; Yacoub 2013). Also, a study using the
innovation survey confirms that firm size has a positive effect on innovation (Ayadi et al.
2009). 15 Moreover, labor quality has a positive effect on innovation, whereas FDI has a
negative impact on innovation in Tunisia (Gabsi, Mhenni, and Koouba, 2008; Karray and
Kriaa 2008). Their findings are consistent with the abovementioned results.

Which source of innovation is the more efficient way to increase productivity?


15
   The innovation survey used a small sample of firms that were highly likely to innovate, and therefore, cannot
provide information for general firms in Tunisia. Also, the studies that use the innovation survey analyze the
determinants of innovation output, not innovation efforts. Therefore, I cannot directly compare my results with
those studies; however, they still provide valuable information to cross-check the characteristics of Tunisian
firm behavior related to innovation.

                                                                                                             37
Table 5 presents the main results of the paper and provides estimation results of equations
(3), (4), and (5), using GMM with lag 2 and 3.


Table 5. Innovate Internally or Externally? Using GMM
 Dep. Var.                     (1)                      (2)                     (3)
 ln revenue                    All                      Internal vs. external   Synergies
 ln_labor                      0.355***                      0.357***           0.362***
                               (0.000)                       (0.000)            (0.000)

 ln_capital                    0.005                         0.001              0.017
                               (0.899)                       (0.988)            (0.674)

 ln_mateiral                   0.640***                      0.639***           0.642***
                               (0.000)                       (0.000)            (0.000)

 ln_all                        0.027**
                               (0.003)

 ln_internal                                                 0.013              0.046
                                                             (0.189)            (0.274)

 ln_external                                                 0.021*             0.030*
                                                             (0.048)            (0.045)

 ln_int×ln_ext                                                                  -0.006
                                                                                (0.207)

 export_stat                   0.244***                      0.242***           0.241***
                               (0.000)                       (0.000)            (0.000)

 FDI_stat                      0.275***                0.275***                0.280***
                               (0.000)                 (0.000)                 (0.000)
 # of obs.                     15,735                  15,735                  15,735
 # of groups                   4,255                   4,255                   4,255
 sum of coefficient            1.105                   1.106                   1.02
 AR2 (p-value)                 0.001                   0.001                   0.002
 Hansen (p-value)              0.000                   0.000                   0.000
Note: Year and industry dummies were included but not reported. Standard errors are clustered and
robust (White’s correction for heteroskedasticity).; p-values in parentheses. Significance level: * = 5
percent, ** = 1 percent, *** = 0.1 percent

The instrument set for the differenced equation consists of the log of revenue, the log of
innovation investment (for all, internal and external innovation), the log of material input, in

                                                                                                    38
levels, in periods t-2 and t-3 (among which missing values are treated as 0, and the
instruments for each period are collapsed), the log of labor and capital inputs, export and
FDI status, and year and industry dummies, differenced. The instrument set for the levels
equation consists of the log of revenue, the log of innovation investment (for all, internal and
external innovation), the log of materials, labor, and capital inputs; export and FDI status as
a constant; and year and industry dummies.

The test results require a careful interpretation of GMM results. Test results for the AR2 are
close to zero, which leads me to reject the null hypothesis that the differenced residuals in
period t and t-2 are uncorrelated — therefore, autocorrelation in these levels might be a
concern in this system GMM measurement. The Sargan/Hansen test of overidentifying
restrictions for GMM estimators also rejects the null hypothesis that the instruments are
exogenous. This might have been caused by the fact that the instrument is exactly identified.
The difference-in-Sargan/Hansen test fails to reject similar results that these additional
instruments are valid.

The coefficient of materials (intermediary inputs) is quite large, around 0.64 in columns (1)
to (3), implying that Tunisian firms engage predominantly in relatively low value-added
activities. While the coefficient of labor is significant and around 0.36 in columns (1) to (3),
the coefficient of capital is close to zero and statistically insignificant. A very small coefficient
for capital is not unusual in previous research on firm-level TFP analysis in developing
countries (for instance, see Van Beveren, 2012). The coefficient of factor inputs reflects both
input and scale elasticities related to output. Control variables, participating in exporting
activity (export) and having foreign ownership (FDI) have positive and significant effects on
final output. Interestingly, the positive effect of FDI on output is in contrast to its effects on
innovation decisions and innovation intensity. FDI would not increase either a firm’s
decision to innovate or the intensity of its innovation investment, but would still increase its
final output.

I used the generalized method of moments (GMM) in TFP estimation to provide consistent
estimation by controlling simultaneous input selection issues when input is correlated with
error term (       ). For instance, when there is an exogenous price shock, if material is


                                                                                                  39
considered more easily adjustable than labor and capital, then material is more strongly
correlated with the error term. Therefore, material is biased upward and labor and capital
are biased downward. Instruments can be used to nullify this bias; however, in general it is
hard to find such instruments. Therefore, researchers use GMM with lagged variables of
output and inputs as instruments, as those are already included in the firm-level data. GMM
thus provides a consistent estimate by removing the simultaneity issue that is caused by the
endogenous input choice in TFP estimation.

Overall, results show that overall innovation (all) has a positive and statistically significant
effect on output productivity, controlling for simultaneity issues between innovation and
final output. In particular, external innovation has a positive and statistically significant
effect on output productivity. Meanwhile, the coefficient of internal innovation is statistically
insignificant at the 5 percent level, which is surprising and contrasts with previous literature
that finds a positive effect of internal innovation on productivity (Griffith et al. 2004). In
addition, a complementary effect between internal and external innovation is not found for
Tunisian manufacturing firms.

Specifically, column (1) shows that overall innovation (all) has a positive and statistically
significant effect on output productivity, controlling for simultaneity issues between
innovation and final output. The coefficient of innovation (all) variable is 0.027, implying
that a 1 percent increase of innovation investment would be associated with a 2.7 percent
increase in final output, controlling for other inputs and export/FDI status, and the
simultaneity issue that could be raised when firms with greater output invest more in
innovation.

Column (2) shows the effect of each individual source of innovation on output productivity.
External innovation has a positive and statistically significant effect on output productivity,
despite the pros and cons of innovation outsourcing and their complex characteristics. In
fact, the coefficient of external innovation is 0.021, so external innovation contributes the
most to the effect of overall innovation on output productivity seen in column (1). This
finding is particularly important, since to date there has been little empirical evidence that



                                                                                              40
quantifies the effect of innovation outsourcing on firms’ output productivity, particularly in
developing countries.

The insignificant coefficient of internal innovation might be explained by a number of factors.
First, if innovation investment requires a certain threshold amount to successfully enhance
firms’ productivity, it may be that current internal innovation has not yet reached the
threshold. Second, Tunisian firms’ outsourced innovation might be relatively simple, so it
does not require a high absorptive capacity, which can be measured by the internal
innovation investment. Otherwise, internal innovation efforts might not be good proxies of
absorptive capacity in Tunisia. As found in a previous study, if technology is difficult to
transfer, firms must have a certain prerequisite capacity to learn and adopt the external
source of innovation (absorptive capacity). Lastly, it may be that internal innovation is not
used efficiently within the firms. In fact, the previous study found that Tunisia’s relatively
large spending on R&D has not increased innovation outcomes at the national level, due to
the inefficient innovation environment (World Bank 201016). In any case, it has been more
efficient for Tunisian manufacturing firms to simply acquire technology created externally
to enhance their output productivity during the period of data coverage.

The results are consistent with the previous study on Tunisia. Using the innovation survey,
Ayadi et al. (2009) concluded that Tunisian firms must benefit from external knowledge
sources to exhibit significant innovation propensities for either product or process
innovation. Internal innovation, specifically investment in R&D, plays a limited role in having
a positive effect on product innovation but no effect on process innovation. Harbi, Amamou,
and Anderson (2009) conducted surveys on 60 Tunisian ICT firms and found that internal
innovation, specifically R&D, is negatively associated with firms’ success. Later, Harbi,
Amamou, and Anderson (2012) conducted surveys on 92 small Tunisian ICT companies and
found that although some innovation cultural values were positively related to performance,


16
  Tunisia spent an estimated 1.25 percent of its GDP on R&D in 2009. That and the number of researchers per
million people are typical proxies showing innovation inputs; in Tunisia, they are above regional average.
However, innovation outcomes are disappointing in Tunisia, which shows a low number of international patent
applications and low utilization of the results of research by firms, with both indicators below the regional
average (WB 2010).


                                                                                                          41
others appeared counterproductive. Specifically, successful companies favored managing
and controlling employees, and placed a strong emphasis on cost control, rather than on
creating a supportive and enabling environment.

Column (3) provides estimation results when the interaction terms of both sources of
innovation are added. The coefficient of external innovation becomes larger than in column
(2), showing that external innovation’s effect on output productivity is larger for those firms
that invest in only external sources of innovation than for firms that invest in both internal
and external sources of innovation. The coefficient of internal innovation remains
statistically insignificant.

Meanwhile, the coefficient of the interaction term is close to zero and statistically
insignificant, implying that there is no synergy in using both sources of innovation
simultaneously. This result further supports the argument that internal innovation does not
play a role in absorptive capacity in Tunisia, in contrast to earlier studies that argue it does
by adapting external innovation. Therefore, there is a complementary effect between
internal and external sources of innovation.

Results from table 5 might suggest that, in a developing country like Tunisia where firms face
resource constraints and have limited internal skills and capability to innovate, it is better to
increase investment exclusively in external innovation rather than dividing scarce resources
between the two sources of innovation.

These results contradict some previous studies that find complementary effects for using
both sources of innovation. For instance, Lokshin, et al. (2008) found complementarity in
Dutch manufacturing firms, and Cassiman and Veugelers (2006) found it in Belgian
manufacturing firms. My results contrast those studies, probably because of sample selection
bias. For instance, Lokshin, et al. (2008) conducted their studies only on 304 Dutch
manufacturing firms that answered that they were innovating.

More importantly, there might be differences in the way innovation works in developing and
in developed countries. Specifically, firms in developing countries, such as Tunisia, have a
lower level of innovation investment to start with. At the early stages of technology


                                                                                              42
development, much more investment is required; therefore, there is an increasing rate of
return. But after a certain threshold, firms would reach the level close to the technology
frontier, which might cause a diminishing rate of return and explain the complementarity of
using both sources of innovation. If Tunisian firms face resource constraints and their
available investment amount is below the threshold, it is better for them to invest in one
source of innovation, especially the one that contributes more to output productivity —
“buying”.

In fact, complementary effects are identified mostly in developed economies. In the case of
developing countries, the complementary effect was found only conditionally or only when
certain characteristics hold. For instance, Hou and Mohnen (2013) documented
complementary effect only for firms with 100 to 300 employees, however, for more general
firms, they found a significant degree of substitutability between both sources of innovation
in achieving a higher level of labor productivity in Chinese manufacturing firms.17

The findings of table 5 suggest that Tunisian firms with limited budgets for innovation would
gain more by buying innovation, rather than creating in-house, and that there are no
synergies of using both sources of innovation at the same time.

While research on the effect of innovation outsourcing on firm productivity on more general
industries with representative firms in developing countries is extremely rare, previous
literature provides explanations as to why no complementary or even a negative
(supplementary) effect has been observed.

Internal and external innovation substitute for each other, especially when resources are
limited (Basant and Fikkert 1996; Blonigen and Taylor 2000). Given a limited budget, an
increase in either of the two options tends to reduce the spending incurred on the other

17
  . For instance, Lokshin et al., (2008) used a similar specification of the above regression on manufacturing
firms and found that the coefficients of the interaction term of both sources of innovation were positive and
statistically significant. He concluded that it is more efficient to divide the resources into both sources of
innovation, and explained that a decreasing rate of return on innovation is one of the reasons for synergies
between two sources of innovation. He added quadratic terms of each source of innovation in its specification,
which allows decreasing or increasing returns to scale in internal and external innovation, and shows the
existence of a decreasing rate of return. He argued that the scope of economies is accompanied by decreasing
returns to scale at high levels of internal and external R&D. The analysis indicates that productivity grows by
increasing the share of external R&D in total R&D.

                                                                                                            43
option. If the effect on innovation investment on productivity is not linear or requires a
certain amount of investment (threshold) to make a positive effect on the final outcome,
splitting two types of innovation would actually have a lower effect than consolidating only
one type of innovation. While it is difficult to generalize, existing evidence from studies
shows that complementary effects tend to be more obvious in developed countries, whereas
substitution tends to be more common in the analysis of developing countries.

In addition, other studies argue that complementary or substitution effects could be changed
depending on the ratio of different sources of innovation used jointly, the firm’s initial
internal innovation condition, and its external environment. R&D outsourcing and
innovation performance have an inverse U-shaped relationship, which is positively
moderated by the extent to which firms engage in internal R&D and by the breadth of formal
R&D collaborations. Both serve as instruments to increase the effectiveness of R&D
outsourcing (Fu 2010). In an environment where learning is less demanding, a firm's in-
house R&D has little impact on absorptive capacity. In the extreme case in which external
knowledge can be assimilated without any specialized expertise, a firm's internal R&D would
have no effect on its absorptive capacity (Cohen and Levinthal 1990).

Table 6 provides estimation results from different econometric methods, such as ordinary
least squares (OLS), fixed effects (FE), and Levinsohn and Petrin (LP), to estimate equations
(3) to (5). The estimation results of table 6 confirm that table 5 GMM estimation results are
in the credible range.

As mentioned previously, estimation results using OLS and FE techniques can provide an
upper and lower range within which to compare the estimation results of GMM in table 6,
which aim to remove the simultaneity effects of innovation and final output.

The LP method, which uses the previous year’s intermediate input (material) as a proxy for
productivity shock and as an instrument to capital to remove the simultaneous effect of
factor inputs and productivity, is currently developed for one proxy variable (material) and
one endogenous variable (capital) when using revenue as the dependent variable, and does
not allow the addition of other endogenous variables, such as innovation investment.
Therefore, it still does not remove the simultaneous effect between innovation investment

                                                                                          44
and final output; however, the estimation results using the LP technique are still closer to a
true estimation than either OLS or FE, since it gets rid of simultaneity issues of other factor
inputs, such as capital, in estimating the production function.

Table 6. Innovation Impact on Output, OLS, FE, and LP
 Dep. Var.           OLS                            FE                                Levinsohn and Petrin (LP)
 ln revenue         (1)        (2)        (3)        (4)        (5)        (6)        (7)        (8)        (9)
                    All        Int.vs.    Synergy    All        Int.vs.    Synergy    All        Int.vs.    Synergy
                               ext.                             ext.                             ext.
 ln_labor           0.393***   0.392***   0.391***   0.206***   0.205***   0.206***   0.352***   0.352***   0.351***
                    (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)

 ln_capital_d       0.198***   0.197***   0.196***   0.196***   0.196***   0.196***   0.320      0.272      0.207
                    (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.058)    (0.061)    (0.174)

 ln_mateiral        0.397***   0.396***   0.396***   0.307***   0.307***   0.307***   0.359*     0.402***   0.491***
                    (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.018)    (0.001)    (0.000)

 ln_all             0.015***                         0.005***                         0.014***
                    (0.000)                          (0.000)                          (0.000)

 ln_internal                   0.007***   0.002                 0.005***   0.000                 0.007***   0.004
                               (0.000)    (0.558)               (0.000)    (0.953)               (0.000)    (0.193)

 ln_external                   0.012***   0.010***              0.003**    0.002                 0.011***   0.010***
                               (0.000)    (0.000)               (0.001)    (0.098)               (0.000)    (0.000)

 ln_int×ln_ext                            0.001**                          0.001*                           0.000
                                          (0.007)                          (0.011)                          (0.180)

 Eexport_stat       0.198***   0.198***   0.197***   0.055***   0.055***   0.055***   0.178***   0.177***   0.177***
                    (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)

 FDI_stat           0.253***   0.253***   0.252***   -0.032     -0.033     -0.033     0.207***   0.207***   0.206***
                    (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.089)    (0.083)    (0.079)    (0.000)    (0.000)    (0.000)
 N                  15,735     15,735     15,735     15,735     15,735     15,735     15,735     15,735     15,735
 Sum of coeffi      1.004      1.004      0.996      0.715      0.717      0.711      1.045      1.043      1.064
Note: Year and industry dummies were included but not reported. Standard errors are clustered and
robust (White’s correction for heteroskedasticity); p-values in parentheses: Significance level: * = 5
percent, ** = 1 percent, *** = 0.1 percent

As expected, the coefficients of labor get larger when using OLS and smaller when using FE,
compared to those in table 6. The coefficient of labor using LP is quite similar to the

                                                                                                                45
coefficients using GMM in table 6. The coefficients of capital are positive and statistically
significant when using OLS and FE, but become insignificant when using LP when the
simultaneous effect of factor inputs and final output are removed, which is consistent with
the above results using GMM. This might imply that capital investment in Tunisia is highly
correlated with the output; therefore, there could be an upward bias in the capital coefficient
in OLS and FE estimation. In contrast, the coefficients of intermediate inputs get larger when
using LP, which is also consistent with GMM estimation, although the coefficients of
intermediary inputs with GMM get even larger, which might result from different
assumptions of endogenous variables and different estimation methods in LP and GMM.
Overall, the factor inputs coefficients using OLS, FE, and LP confirm that estimation results
using GMM are in the credible range. The control variables, export and FDI, have significant
and positive effects on final output, except for the coefficient of FDI, which is insignificant
when using FE; these results are also consistent with table 5.

The coefficients of the overall innovation investment (ln_n_innovationi) are statistically
significant and are 0.015 using OLS, 0.005 using FE, and 0.014 using LP. These coefficients
are smaller than 0.027, the result in column (1) in table 5, implying that the innovations’
effect on final output (via productivity) is actually larger when the simultaneous effect
between innovation investment and final output (via productivity) is considered. As seen in
columns (2), (5), and (8), both internal and external innovation have positive and significant
effects on final output. The magnitude of the coefficient of external innovation is larger when
using OLS and LP, but smaller when using FE. The results are different from the results in
column (2) in table 5, where internal innovation does not significantly impact the final
outcome, while external innovation does. However, when adding the interaction terms
between the internal and external innovation investment amount, the coefficients of internal
innovation become insignificant when using OLS, FE, and LP, as seen in columns (3), (6), and
(9), which is consistent with the results of column (3) in table 5. Significantly, the coefficients
of the interaction term are in columns (3) and (5), but the magnitude is very small (close to
zero), and this coefficient becomes insignificant in column (9) when using LP, which is
consistent with the results of table 5.



                                                                                                46
The above results using OLS and FE support that the main results found using GMM are in
the credible range. Also, the results using typical LP are consistent with the GMM results,
which supports the fact that the difference of coefficients between OLS, FE and GMM result
from removing the simultaneous effects of inputs and output.

I also consider a translog production function, which is a flexible functional form of the
production functions, to avoid the rigid assumptions of the Cobb-Douglas production
function, such as a linear relationship between factor inputs and output, and perfect
substitution between production factors (in other words, perfect competition on the
production factors market). However, it is not included in the final results due to the high
collinearity among regressors.18

The collinearity among regressors in the translog specification is seen as “harmful” if the sign
of at least one estimated parameter is contrary to the sign of the coefficient of correlation
between the resultative variable and the analyzed explanatory variable (Pavelescu, 2010b).
Using equation (3) in the translog function,19 I find that, when other inputs are in the mean,
the marginal effect of labor is 0.309, the marginal effect of capital is 0.158, the marginal effect
of intermediate inputs is 0.694 and the marginal effect of innovation is -0.072. Likewise,
equations (4) is measured with a translog function. When other inputs are in the mean, the
marginal effect of labor is 0.296, the marginal effect of capital is 0.104, the marginal effect of
intermediate inputs is 0.690, the marginal effect of internal innovation is -0.036, and the
marginal effect of external innovation is -0.068. The negative coefficients for innovation
variables seem to be caused by collinearity among explanatory variables, which is a major
constraint to estimating the translog production function.




18
   The translog production function can be used for the second order approximation of a linear-homogenous
production function and allows to estimate not only the elasticity of input but also the elasticity of scale,
which is equal to the marginal product (Ferguson, 1979; Klacek, et al., 2007).
19
   For instance, equations (3) is measured as Y=f(K,L,I, T) = l k m t l2 lk lm lt k2 km kt m2 mt t2 lkm lkt lmt kmt
lkmt y1997-y2009. The marginal product of innovation is potentially non-linear and a function of other inputs:
dY/dN= _b[t]+_b[lt]*l+_b[kt]*k+2*_b[t2]*t+_b[mt]*m+_b[lkt]*lk+_b[lmt]*lm+_b[kmt]*km+_b[lkmt]*lkm.


                                                                                                                47
Meanwhile, if a firm that would have invested in innovation decides not to under a certain
threshold (z = 0), the observed innovation value            is censored around zero. To address this
issue, I use Tobit for the censored dependent variables.



Table 7 provides estimation results using Tobit model as described in equations (9) and (10).

Table 7. Determinants of Innovation Using Tobit Methods
 Dep. Var.                                           (1)             (2)             (3)
 { Uijt }                                            Internal        External        All
 Firm size                                           1.881***        0.957***        0.912***
                                                     (0.000)         (0.000)         (0.000)

 Tech staff ratio                                    -1.491***       0.060           0.045
                                                     (0.000)         (0.835)         (0.869)

 Skills                                              2.758***        1.547***        1.467***
                                                     (0.000)         (0.000)         (0.000)

 Export_stat                                         0.861***        0.830***        0.880***
                                                     (0.000)         (0.000)         (0.000)

 FDI_stat                                            -0.980***       -0.756***       -0.687***
                                                     (0.000)         (0.000)         (0.000)

 Firm age                                            -0.008          -0.018***       -0.017**
                                                     (0.282)         (0.001)         (0.001)

 Dominance                                       -4.911**          2.377             1.743
                                                 (0.007)           (0.054)           (0.156)
 Observations                                    13,257            13,257            13,257
 N_uncensored                                    4,995             8,384             8,875
 N_left censored                                 8,262             4,873             4,382
 Pseudo R2                                       0.028             0.014             0.013
 Log pseudo likelihood Sigma                     -23,400           -32,568           -33,724
 Sigma standard error                            8.919             6.530             6.343
                                                 0.069             0.053             0.053
Note: Year and industry dummies are included but not reported. Standard errors are clustered and
robust (White’s correction for heteroskedasticity); p-values in parentheses: Significance level: * = 5
percent, ** = 1 percent, *** = 0.1 percent

Tobit regression coefficients are estimated in a similar way to Probit regression coefficients
in pooled regression, except that the linear effect is on the uncensored latent variable, not
the observed outcome.



                                                                                                   48
As expected, the direction and statistical significance of coefficients in table 7 are similar to
the results in columns (2), (4), and (6) in table B.1 in Appendix B. Meanwhile, the magnitude
of coefficients is changed when considering the censoring issue in table 7. For instance, the
positive effects of firm size, average wage, and export become much larger in table 7 than in
table B.1. Also, the negative coefficient of technical staff ratio and dominance on internal
innovation investment, and negative coefficient of FDI on any type of innovation become
much larger in table 7, compared to table B.1.

Among the observations of 13,257 firms, the uncensored observations are 4,995, 8,384, and
8,875; observations left censored, which are for the firms that reported zero innovation
investment, are 8,262, 4,873, and 4,382, depending on sources of innovation, in columns (1)
to (3). The pseudo R-squared is between 0.013 and 0.028, which is less than the p-value of
R-squared in table 3 — that is, between 0.020 and 0.056. Sigma value, which is in the range
6.343 to 8.919 in columns (1) to (3), is comparable to the root mean squared error in an OLS
regression that estimates the average of the squares of the difference between the estimator
and what is estimated. The significance of the Tobit "sigma" parameter can tell us whether
the results of the Tobit model fit the data considerably better (González and Jaumandreu
1998).20 This finding supports the assumption that there is a minimum required innovation
investment. In fact, sizeable thresholds exist, and are systematically related to determinants
of innovation, that is, demand and technological factors.

Table 8 provides the estimation results of equations (11), (12), and (13) system GMM with
lag 2 and 3, while using the predicted value of innovation investment, obtained from the
Tobit regression above. Of primary interest in this table are the coefficients of the predicted
value of innovation investments.



20
  . González and Jaumandreu (1998) integrate analysis of the decision to undertake R&D activities with analysis
of the decision of the level of the R&D investment when this investment is carried out. The framework assumes
existence of a minimum required R&D expenditure. This assumption, combined with demand characteristics
and technological opportunities, determines the threshold level of R&D expenditure under which firms do not
find it profitable to invest. This framework leads naturally to a Tobit model aimed at estimating thresholds,
which the study authors applied to more than 2,000 Spanish manufacturing firms, many of which had no R&D
expenditure.


                                                                                                            49
Table 8. Innovation Impact on Output, GMM, and Predicted Value
 Dep. Var.             (1)                         (2)                     (3)
 ln revenue            All                         Internal vs. external   Synergies
 ln_labor              0.041                       -0.112                  -0.162
                       (0.473)                     (0.340)                 (0.167)

 ln_capita             -0.070                      0.009                   0.050
                       (0.137)                     (0.906)                 (0.495)

 ln_material           0.247***                    0.215***                0.189***
                       (0.000)                     (0.000)                 (0.001)

 Innov_hat             0.857***
                       (0.000)

 Inter_hat                                         -0.275                  -0.230
                                                   (0.180)                 (0.249)

 Exter_hat                                         1.374**                 1.477***
                                                   (0.001)                 (0.000)

 Int_ext_hat                                                               -0.026
                                                                           (0.062)

 Export_stat           -0.529***                   -0.768**                -0.870***
                       (0.000)                     (0.002)                 (0.000)

 FDI_stat             0.530***                 0.652***                   0.643***
                      (0.000)                  (0.000)                    (0.000)
 # of obs.            12,764                   12,764                     12,764
 # of group           3,210                    3,210                      3,210
 Sum of coefficient 1.075                      1.211                      1.298
 AR2 (p-value)        0.000                    0.001                      0.003
 Hansen (p-value)     0.000                    0.000                      0.001
Note: Year and industry dummies were included but not reported. Standard errors are clustered and
robust (White’s correction for heteroskedasticity); p-values in parentheses. Significance level: * = 5
percent, ** = 1 percent, *** = 0.1 percent

Like table 5, overall innovation (innov_hat) and external innovation have positive and
statistically significant effects on final output, while internal innovation and the synergy
between two sources of innovation are statistically insignificant. Surprisingly, the magnitude
of the coefficients became much larger when using the predicted value, so that the coefficient
of overall innovation is 0.857 in column (1), and external innovation is 1.374 in column (2)
and 1.477 in column (3), which makes the 1 percent increase in either external or overall
innovation investment have a larger effect on final output than the 1 percent increase of
other factors, such as intermediary inputs.
                                                                                                   50
Also, an increase in innovation investment has a larger effect on final output than a firm
receiving foreign investment or becoming an exporter. Therefore, the overall and external
innovation effects on final output become much larger when considering the minimum
requirement of innovation investment (threshold); however, internal innovation still has an
insignificant effect on final output, and there is no synergy in investing in both sources of
innovation. The results of table 8 further support the results of table 5.

When predicted values of innovation are used, the coefficients of labor become insignificant,
and the coefficients of capital remain insignificant. Meanwhile, the coefficients of
intermediary inputs are still positive and statistically significant. The coefficients of exports
now become negative while FDI status still remains positive and significant.

Table 9 provides the estimation results of using TFP as a dependent variable, instead of
output (revenue), which is a direct test of the innovation effect on productivity.

Table 9. Using TFP as a Dependent Variable, GMM
 Dep. Var                        (1)                       (2)                    (3)
 Ln TFP ijt                      Innov            Internal vs. external           Synergies
 ln_all                          0.063***
                                 (0.001)
 ln_internal                                           0.024                      0.034
                                                       (0.110)                    (0.307)

 ln_external                                           0.045*                     0.039*
                                                       (0.015)                    (0.047)

 ln_int×ln_ext                                                                    -0.001
                                                                                  (0.853)

 Eexport_stat                    0.635***              0.611***                   0.528***
                                 (0.000)               (0.000)                    (0.000)

 FDI_stat                        0.807***              0.782***                   0.704***
                                 (0.000)               (0.000)                    (0.000)
 # of obs.                       15,735                15,735                     15,735
 # of group                      4,255                 4,255                      4,255
 AR2 (p-value)                   0.607                 0.534                      0.509
 Sargan (p-value)                0.000                 0.000                      0.000
 Hansen (p-value)                0.001                 0.002                      0.000
Note: Year and industry dummies are included but not reported. Standard errors are clustered and
robust (White’s correction for heteroskedasticity); p-values in parentheses, Significance level: * = 5
percent, ** = 1 percent, *** = 0.1 percent


                                                                                                   51
The instrument set for the differenced equation consists of TFP, the log of innovation
investment (for all, internal, and external innovation), in levels, in periods t-2 and t-3 (for
which missing values are treated as zero, and instruments for each period are collapsed),
export and FDI status, and year and industry dummies, differenced. The instrument set for
the levels equation consists of TFP, the log of innovation investment (for all, internal and
external innovation), export and FDI status, a constant, and year and industry dummies.

Test results for the AR (equation 2) are quite large, between 0.509 and 0.607, and fail to
reject the null hypothesis that the differenced residuals in period t and t-2 are uncorrelated;
therefore, autocorrelation in levels might not be a serious concern in this system GMM
measurement. However, the p-value of the Sargan/Hansen test of over-identifying
restrictions for GMM estimators is close to zero, rejecting the null hypothesis that
instruments are exogenous. This might have been caused by the fact that the instrument is
exactly identified. The difference-in-Sargan/Hansen test fails to reject similar results that
these additional instruments are valid.
Overall innovation has a positive and significant effect on TFP, as seen in column (1) in table
9. The coefficient of internal innovation is statistically insignificant, while the coefficient of
external innovation is positive and statistically significant in column (2). Lastly, using both
sources of innovation at the same time (synergy) does not have a significant effect on TFP.
These results are also consistent with the results of table 5, which support innovation effects
on final output via TFP.

   6. Conclusion

In this paper, I first identified the determinants of innovation investment and analyzed
whether those determinants are different for internal and external sources of innovation for
a large number of representative samples of Tunisian manufacturing firms from 1997 to
2007.

As in previous literature on determinants of innovation, my estimation results showed that
in Tunisia, larger firms that pay higher wages and participate in exports are more likely to
invest in innovation. Meanwhile, having more technicians and a larger market share are


                                                                                               52
statistically insignificant determinants of all and external innovation decisions, and they
reduce the probability of firms engaging in internal innovation. Firm age has a negative and
significant coefficient, but its magnitude is small and close to zero.

Interestingly, FDI firms are less likely to invest in innovation, although FDI has a positive
effect on final output, which might be explained by the fact that most foreign investment in
Tunisia is driven by cost-saving purposes rather than longer-term strategic vision, which is
consistent with previous findings of the negative effects of FDI on technological upgrading
in domestic firms (OECD 2002). Determinants of innovation investment work in the opposite
way for firms that invest in only one source of innovation, implying that those firms that
invest in only one type of innovation are very different from those that invest in both sources
of innovation.

The major determinants of the innovation decision are consistent using either the Probit
model or firm fixed effects in panel data. Also, the estimation results with innovation
intensity (innovation investment amount) as a dependent variable reveal that the decision
related to innovation (whether to innovate or not) and the decision related to innovation
intensity (how much to innovate) behave similarly for external innovation but quite
differently for internal innovation investment in Tunisia.

I then tested which sources of innovation contribute more to final output (via productivity)
in Tunisian manufacturing firms. The results are summarized below.

First, innovation, overall, has a positive and statistically significant effect on final output via
productivity increase (output productivity). However, different types of innovation
investment have different effects on productivity. The coefficient of the innovation (all)
variable is 0.027, implying that a 1.0 percent increase in innovation investment would be
associated with a 2.7 percent increase in final output, controlling for other inputs and
export/FDI status as well as simultaneity issues between innovation and final output using
GMM methods.

Second, internal innovation has an insignificant effect on final output, while external
innovation has a positive and statistically significant effect on the same. Specifically, when


                                                                                                53
testing the effect of each individual source of innovation on final output, it is found that the
coefficient of external innovation is 0.021, which demonstrates that external innovation
contributes most to the overall effect on output productivity. These results are also
documented in previous studies on Tunisian firms using a different data set, such as the
innovation survey. Hence, it was more efficient for Tunisian manufacturing firms simply to
acquire foreign technology created externally to enhance their output productivity during
the period of data coverage.

Third, external innovation’s effect on final output is larger for those firms that invest in only
external sources of innovation than for firms that invest in both sources of innovation. When
the interaction terms for internal and external innovation investment are added, the
coefficient of external innovation becomes larger while the coefficient of internal innovation
remains insignificant.

Fourth, there is no synergy from using both sources of innovation simultaneously. The
coefficient of the interaction term is close to zero and statistically insignificant. This result
might suggest that internal innovation does not play a role in firm absorptive capacity in
Tunisia. The results further support my argument that for a developing country like Tunisia,
where firms face resource constraints and have limited internal skills and limited capability
to innovate, it is better to invest more in only external innovation, rather than dividing
resources between the two sources of innovation.

Fifth, the Tobit model estimation result supports the assumption that a minimum innovation
investment is required. When considering the censoring issue of innovation variables, using
Tobit methods to analyze determinants of innovation investment, the direction and
statistical significance of the coefficients are consistent with the main specification, but the
magnitude of the coefficients becomes larger. It appears that the Tobit model fits the data
considerably better given that a large number of observations have been left censored (zero
innovation investment) and the significant sigma values of Tobit regression. In fact, sizable
thresholds exist, which are systematically related to determinants of innovation, that is,
demand and technological factors.



                                                                                              54
Lastly, the overall and external innovation effects on output productivity become much
larger when considering this minimum requirement of innovation investment (threshold),
using the predicted value from the Tobit regression. Meanwhile, internal innovation and
synergy of using both sources of innovation still have an insignificant effect on final output
when using the predicted values.

The above results are also borne out through other econometric methods, such as OLS, FE,
and LP, confirming that the GMM results are in the credible range. Also, the results were
consistent when I used TFP as a dependent variable, which confirms the innovation effect on
productivity via TFP.

The paper provides insights for innovation policy design. In many countries, the
government’s innovation policy—such as tax benefits and subsidies to conduct R&D—
focuses too narrowly on promoting internal innovation, without considering the level of a
country’s technological advancement.

My findings suggest that innovation policy in Tunisia should emphasize technology adoption
over technology creation. In a developing country like Tunisia, where firms are constrained
by limited resources and skill level, it is important to understand which sources of innovation
are more efficient at improving final output. In particular, innovation policies should focus
on facilitating firm purchases of foreign technology and external innovation, since external
innovation contributes most to the overall effect on output productivity, and there is no
synergy in using both sources of innovation simultaneously. To encourage firms’ investment
in external innovation, the Tunisian government can promote exports and workers’ skills
(average wage can be a proxy of workers’ skills), but providing incentives, such as subsidies,
to firms to hire more technicians, and FDI promotion are not the best ways to encourage
firms’ investment in innovation.

Moreover, the fact that there is a minimum requirement (threshold) for innovation
investment suggests that policies that aim to reduce this threshold or to support firms
around this threshold could catalyze the innovation investment of certain firms. Such
policies could include government’s co-financing or risk-sharing of firms’ innovation
investment (that is, through governments’ matching grants or guarantee schemes) and tax

                                                                                            55
benefits for target firms around this threshold. Lastly, the finding that so-called “high-tech”
industries are not the most innovative industries in Tunisia suggests that they should not be
the main focus of innovation policy. The findings expressed in this paper are particularly
important, since there is little empirical evidence that quantifies the effect of innovation
outsourcing on firm output productivity, especially in developing countries.

The finding of this paper raises a number of questions regarding innovation policies, which
could serve as potential areas for further research.

For instance, given my findings that internal innovation has an insignificant effect on firms
in Tunisia, it would be interesting to investigate why Tunisian firms continue to invest in
internal innovation, and how they can make these investments more impactful on their
output productivity. Further, though I find that policies to reduce the innovation threshold
or support firms around it could catalyze innovation investment, methods for identifying this
threshold and the firms around it must still be developed. This finding could suggest practical
policy implications; for instance, many governments provide support to firms through
matching grants or subsidies for innovation, but do not use systematic mechanisms for
identifying target firms that could maximize the effects of their support. Lastly, if the effect
of innovation on productivity varies according to a firm’s position relative to the technology
frontier, what is the threshold level of technological advancement that determines whether
it will benefit more from “creating” or “buying” innovation? The same question applies at the
country level, in innovation policy design.




                                                                                             56
References

Abowd, J. M., J. Haltiwanger, R. Jarmin, J. Lane, P. Lengermann, K. McCue, and K. Sandusky.
      2005. “The Relation among Human Capital, Productivity, and Market Value: Building
      Up from Micro Evidence.” In Measuring Capital in the New Economy 153–204. Chicago:
      University of Chicago Press.

Acemoglu, D. 2009. “When Does Labor Scarcity Encourage Innovation?” National Bureau of
       Economic Research (NBER) Working Paper Series, Working Paper 14809,
       Cambridge, MA.

Acemoglu, D., P. Aghion, C. Lelarge, J. Van Reenen, and F. Zilibotti. 2007. “Technology,
       Information, and the Decentralization of the Firm.” Quarterly Journal of Economics
       122 (4): 1759–99.

Acemoglu, D., and J. Linn. 2004. “Market Size in Innovation: Theory and Evidence from the
       Pharmaceutical Industry.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 119 (3): 1049–90.

Ackerberg, D., K. Caves, and G. Frazer. 2006. “Structural Identification of Production
        Functions,” Mimeo, RandR Econometrica.

Acs, Z. J., and D. B. Audretsch. 1991. R&D, “Firm Size and Innovative Activity. Innovation and
           Technological Change: An International Comparison,” In Innovation and
           Technological Change: An International Comparison, ed. Z. J. Acs and D. B. Audretsch,
           39–59. Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press.

Aghion, P. 2004. “Growth and Development: A Schumpeterian Approach.” Annals of Economics
         and Finance 5: 1–25 (2004).

Aghion, P., U. Akcigit, and P. Howitt. 2013. “What Do We Learn from Schumpeterian Growth
        Theory?” National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER) Working Paper Series,
        Working Paper 18824, Cambridge, MA.

Aghion, P., Griffith, R. 2008. “Competition and growth: reconciling theory and evidence”.
        Zeuthen Lectures. MIT Press: Cambridge, US.

Antràs, P., and E. Helpman. 2004. "Global Sourcing." Journal of Political Economy 112 (3): 552–
         80.

Arnold, J., and B. Javorcik. 2005. “Gifted Kids or Pushy Parents? Foreign Direct Investment and
          Plant Productivity in Indonesia.” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper 3597

Aw, B., M. Roberts, and D. Xu. 2011. "R&D Investment, Exporting, and Productivity Dynamics."
         American Economic Review 101 (4): 1312–44.



                                                                                             57
Ayadi, M., M. Rahmouni, and M. Yildizoglu. 2009. “Determinants of the Innovation Propensity
           in Tunisia: The Central Role of External Knowledge Sources.” No. halshs-
           00368560.

Balasubramanian, N., and J. Lee. 2008. “Firm Age and Innovation.” Industrial and Corporate
         Change. 17 (5): 1019–47.

Basant, R., and B. Fikkert. 1996. “The Effects of R&D, Foreign Technology Purchase, and
           Domestic and International Spillovers on Productivity in Indian Firms.” Review of
           Economics and Statistics 78 (2): 187–99.

Bengtsson, L., and C. Berggren. 2008. The Integrator's New Advantage — Reassessing
         Outsourcing and Production Competence in a Global Telecom Firm. European
         Management Journal 26: 314–24.

Bengtsson, L., R. Von Haartman, and M. Dabhilkar. 2009. “Low-Cost versus Innovation:
         contrasting Outsourcing and Integration Strategies in Manufacturing.” Creativity
         and Innovation Management 18 (1): 35-47.

Bernard, A. B., and J. B. Jensen. 2004. “Why Some Firms Export.” Review of Economics and
          Statistics 86 (2): 561–69.

Bernard, A. B., J. B. Jensen, S. J. Redding, and P. K. Schott. 2011. “The Empirics of Firm
          Heterogeneity and International Trade.” National Bureau of Economic Research
          (NBER) Working Paper Series, Working Paper 17627, Cambridge, MA.

Blonigen, B., and C. Taylor. 2000. “R&D Intensity and Acquisitions in High-Technology
          Industries: Evidence from the U.S. Electronic and Electrical Equipment Industries.”
          Journal of Industrial Economics 48: 47–70.

Bloom, N., Eifer, B., Mahajan, A., McKenzie, D. and Roberts, J. (2012), Does Management
          Matter? Evidence from India”, The Quarterly Journal of Economics

Bloom, N., and J. Van Reenen. 2007. “Measuring and Explaining Management Practices across
           Firms and Countries.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 122 (4): 1351–408.

Bloom, N. and Van Reenen, J. 2010. “Why Do Management Practices Differ across Firms and
          Countries?” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 24(1)

Bloom, N., and Van Reenen, J. 2011. "Trade Induced Technical Change? The Impact of Chinese
           Imports on Innovation, IT and Productivity." NBER Working Paper No. 16717.

Blonigen, B. and Taylor, C. 2000. R&D intensity and acquisitions in high-technology
          industries: evidence from the U.S. electronic and electrical equipment industries,
          Journal of Industrial Economics, 48, pp. 47–70.


                                                                                          58
Blundell, R.W., and Bond, S.R., 1998. Initial conditions and moment restrictions in dynamic
             panel data models. Journal of Econometrics 87, 115– 143.

Blundell, Richard and Stephen R. Bond. 2000. “GMM Estimation with Persistent Panel Data:
             An Application to Production Functions.” Econometric Reviews, 19(3): 321-40.

Brynjolfsson, E., and L. Hitt. 2003. “Computing Productivity: Firm-Level Evidence.” Review of
             Economics and Statistics 85 (4): 793–808.

Cainelli, G., R. Evangelista, and M. Savona. 2004. « The Impact of Innovation on Economic
               Performance in Services.” The Service Industries Journal 24 (1): 116–30.

Cassiman, B., E. Golovko. 2010. "Innovation, Exports and Productivity." International Journal
             of Industrial Organization 28 (4): 372–76.

Cassiman, B., and R. Veugelers. 2002. “R&D Cooperation and Spillovers: Some Empirical
             Evidence from Belgium.” American Economic Review 1169–84.

Cassiman, B. and Veugelers, R. 2006. “In Search of Complementarity in Innovation Strategy:
             Internal R&D and External Knowledge Acquisition.” Management Science 52 (1):
             68–82.

Chesbrough, H. W., and D. J. Teece. 1996. “When Is Virtual Virtuous? — Organizing for
            Innovation.” Harvard Business Review (Jan.–Feb.): 65–73.

Cohen, W. M., and S. Klepper. 1996. “Firm Size and the Nature of Innovation within Industries:
             The Case of Process and Product R&D.” The Review of Economics and Statistics
             232–43.

Cohen, W. M., and D. A. Levinthal. 1990. “Absorptive Capacity: A New Perspective on Learning
             and Innovation.” Administrative Science Quarterly 35 (1).

Crépon, B., Duguet, E., and Mairessec, J. 1998. Research, Innovation And Productivi [Ty: An
             Econometric Analysis At The Firm Level. Economics of Innovation and New
             technology, 7(2), 115-158.

Dankbaar, B. 2007. “Global Sourcing and Innovation: The Consequences of Losing Both
            Organizational and Geographical Proximity.” European Planning Studies 15:
            271–88.

De Loecker, J. 2013. “Detecting Learning by Exporting.” American Economic Journal:
           Microeconomics 5 (3): 1–21.

Fifarek, B. J., F. M. Veloso, and C. I. Davidson. 2008. “Offshoring Technology Innovation: A Case
                Study of Rare-Earth Technology.” Journal of Operations Management 26: 222–38.


                                                                                              59
Foster, L., J. Haltiwanger, and C. Syverson. 2008. “Reallocation, Firm Turnover, and Efficiency:
               Selection on Productivity or Profitability?” American Economic Review 98 (1):
               394–425.

Fox, J. T., and V. Smeets. 2011. “Does Input Quality Drive Measured Differences in Firm
             Productivity? * International Economic Review 52 (4): 961–89.

Fikkert, B. 1993. “An open or closed technology policy? The effects of technology licensing,
             foreign direct investment and technology spillovers on R&D in Indian industrial
             sectors’ firms”, unpublished PhD dissertation, Yale University, New Haven, CT.

Fu, X. 2008. “Foreign Direct Investment, Absorptive Capacity and Regional Innovation
           Capabilities: Evidence from China.” Oxford Development Studies 36 (1): 89–110.

Fu, X. 2011. Processing Trade, FDI and the Exports of Indigenous Firms: Firm-Level Evidence
             from Technology-Intensive Industries in China. Oxford Bulletin of Economics and
             Statistics, 73(6), 792-817.

Fu, X. 2012, “How does openness affect the importance of incentives for innovation?”,
           Research Policy, 41, 512-523

Fu, X. and Gong, Y. 2010. “Indigenous and foreign innovation efforts and drivers of
           technological upgrading: evidence from China,” World Development, 39(7), pp.
           1213–1225.

Fu, X., C. Helmers, and J. Zhang. 2012. “The Two Faces of Foreign Management Capabilities:
              FDI and Productive Efficiency in the UK Retail Sector.” International Business
              Review 21 (1): 71–88.

Fu, X., and R. Hoyes. 2003. “The Role of Management Practices in Closing the Productivity Gap:
              A Literature Review.” University of Cambridge, Centre for Business Research,
              Memo.

Fu, X., C. Pietrobelli, and L. Soete. 2010. “The Role of Foreign Technology and Indigenous
              Innovation in Emerging Economies: Technological Change and Catching Up.”
              World Development 39 (7): 1203–12.

Gabsi, F., H. Mhenni, and K. Koouba. 2008. “Innovation Determinants in Emerging Countries:
              An Empirical Study at the Tunisian Firms Level.” MPRA Paper No. 17940

Girma, S. 2005. “Absorptive Capacity and Productivity Spill-Overs from FDI: A Threshold
            Regression Analysis.” Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics 67 (3): 281–306

González, X., and J. Jaumandreu. 1998. “Threshold Effects in Product R&D Decisions:
           Theoretical Framework and Empirical Analysis.” FEDEA Working Paper 78.


                                                                                             60
Griffith, R., S. Redding, and J. Van Reenen. 2004. “Mapping the Two Faces of R&D: Productivity
               Growth in a Panel of OECD Industries.” Review of Economics and Statistics 86 (4):
               883–95.

Grimpe, Christoph, and Ulrich Kaiser. 2010, “Balancing Internal and External Knowledge
           Acquisition: The Gains and Pains from R&D Outsourcing.” Journal of Management
           Studies 47 (8): 1483–509.

Grossman, G. M., and E. Helpman. 2003. “Outsourcing versus FDI in Industry Equilibrium.”
           Journal of the European Economic Association 1 (2–3): 317–27.

Grossman, G. M., and E. Helpman, E. 2005. “Outsourcing in a Global Economy.” The Review of
           Economic Studies 72 (1): 135–59

Hall, B. H. 2011, “Innovation and Productivity.” National Bureau of Economic Research
            (NBER) Working Paper Series, Working Paper 17178, Cambridge, MA.

Harbi, S., M. Amamou, and A. R. Anderson. 2009. “Establishing High-Tech Industry: The
            Tunisian ICT Experience.” Technovation 29 (6): 465–80.

Harbi, S., M. Amamou, and A. R. Anderson. 2012. “Innovation Culture and the Economic
            Performance of Tunisian ICT Firms.” International Journal of Entrepreneurship
            and Innovation Management 16 (3): 191–208.

Hou, J., and P. Mohnen. 2013, “Complementarity between In-House R&D and Technology
            Purchasing: Evidence from Chinese Manufacturing Firms.” Oxford Development
            Studies 41 (3): 343–71.

Huergo, E., and J. Jaumandreu. 2004. “Firms' Age, Process Innovation and Productivity
            Growth.” International Journal of Industrial Organization 22 (4): 541–59.

Inklaar, R., Timmer, M. P., and Van Ark, B. 2008. “Market services productivity across Europe
              and the US.” Economic Policy, 23(53), 140-194.

Javorcik, B. S. 2004. "Does Foreign Direct Investment Increase the Productivity of Domestic
             Firms? In Search of Spill overs through Backward Linkages." The American
             Economic Review 94 (3): 605–27.

Karray, Z., and M. Kriaa. 2008. “Innovation and R&D investment of Tunisian Firms: A Two
             Regimes Model with Selectivity Correction.” In ERF 15th Annual Conference-
             Equity and Economic Development. Cairo, Egypt.

Krugman, P. 1991. “Geography and Trade.” Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Lacity, M. and L. Willcocks. 2013. “Outsourcing Business Processes for Innovation.” MIT Sloan
             Management Review (Spring).

                                                                                             61
Lall S. 2000. Selective Industrial and Trade Policies in Developing Countries: Theoretical and
             Empirical Issues. Working Paper No. 48. Queen Elizabeth House, University of
             Oxford

Lai, E., R. Riezman, and P. Wang. 2009. « Outsourcing of Innovation.” Economic Theory 38 (3):
               485–515.

Lewin, A. Y., S. Massini, and C. Peeters. 2009. « Why Are Companies Offshoring Innovation:
             The Emerging Global Race for Talent.” Journal of International Business Studies
             40 (6): 901–25.

Levinsohn, J., and A. Petrin. 2003. “Estimating Production Functions Using Inputs to Control
            for Unobservable.” Review of Economic Studies 70 (2): 317–41.

Liu, X., and T. Buck. 2007. “Innovation Performance and Channels for International
            Technology Spillovers: Evidence from Chinese High-Tech Industries.” Research
            Policy 36 (3): 355–66.

Lokshin, B., R. Belderbos, and M. Carree. 2008. “The Productivity Effects of Internal and
             External R&D: Evidence from a Dynamic Panel Data Model.” Oxford Bulletin of
             Economics and Statistics 70 (3).

Lööf, Hans, and Almas Heshmati. 2001. “On the Relationship between Innovation and
            Performance: A Sensitivity Analysis.” SSE/EFI Working Paper Series in
            Economics and Finance 446, Stockholm School of Economics.

Mairesse, J., and P. Mohnen. 2002. "Accounting for Innovation and Measuring Innovativeness:
              An Illustrative Framework and an Application." American Economic Review 92
              (2): 226–30.

Mol, M. J. 2005. “Does Being R&D-Intensive Still Discourage Outsourcing? Evidence from
            Dutch Manufacturing.” Research Policy 34: 571–82
Mytelka, L. K. 1987. “Licensing and technology dependence in the Andean group”, World
            Development, 6(4), pp. 447–459.

Narula, R. 2004. “Understanding Absorptive Capacities in an ’Innovation Systems’ Context:
            Consequences for Economic and Employment Growth.” Danish Research For
            Industrial Dynamics, Working Paper No 04-02

Nelson, R. R., and S. G. Winter. 1977. “In Search of a Useful Theory of Innovation.” In
            Innovation, Economic Change and Technology Policies, 215-45. Birkhäuser Base.

OECD (Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development). 2002. Science and
          Technology Industry Outlook. Paris: OECD.


                                                                                           62
Olley, G. S., and A. Pakes, 1996. “The Dynamics of Productivity in the Telecommunications
              Equipment Industry.” Econometrica 64 (6): 1263–97.

Porter, M. 1990. The Competitive Advantage of Nations. London: Macmillan.

Pianta, M. 2005. "Innovation and Employment" In The Oxford Handbook of Innovation. ed. J.
            Fagerberg, D. Mowery and R. Nelson, 568–98. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Roodman, D. (2006) How to do xtabond2: an introduction to “difference” and “system” GMM
          in Stata, Working Paper Number 103, Centre for Global Development.

Schumpeter, J. A. 1934. “Theory of Economic Development: An Enquiry into Profits, Capital,
          Interest and the Business Cycle.” Innovation and Economic Performance in
          Services, 457. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.

Schumpeter, J. A. 1942. “Capitalism Socialism and Democracy.” New York: Harper Brother.

Sharma, M., M. Lacity, and L. Willcocks. 2012. “A Catalyst for Innovation.” Accenture Outlook.

Simar, L., and P. W. Wilson. 2011. “Two-Stage DEA: Caveat Emptor.” Journal of Productivity
             Analysis 36: 205–18.

Simonen, J., and P. McCann. 2008. “Firm Innovation: The Influence of R&D Cooperation and
             the Geography of Human Capital Inputs.” Journal of Urban Economics 64 (1): 146–
             54.

Souitaris, V. (2002). “Technological trajectories as moderators of firm-level determinants of
              innovation.” Research policy, 31(6), 877-898.

Spithoven, A., B. Clarysse, and M. Knockaert. 2011. “Building Absorptive Capacity to Organise
            Inbound Open Innovation in Traditional Industries.” Technovation 31 (1): 10–21.

Ulrich, K. T., and D. J. Ellison. 2005. “Beyond Make-Buy: Internalization and Integration of
              Design and Production.” Production and Operations Management 14: 315–30.

Van Beveren (2012), Total Factor Productivity Estimation: A Practical Review, Journal of
          Economic Surveys, Volume 26, Issue 1, pages 98–128.

Van Biesebroeck, J., 2003. “Exporting raises productivity in sub-Saharan African
          manufacturing firms.” NBER Working Paper 10020 (October).

Van Reenen, J. (1996). “The creation and capture of rents: wages and innovation in a panel of
           UK companies.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 195-226.




                                                                                            63
Westergren, U. H., and J. Holmström. 2012. “Exploring Preconditions for Open Innovation:
           Value Networks in Industrial Firms.” Information and Organization 22 (4): 209–
           26.

World Bank. 2010. “Tunisia Development Policy Review: Towards Innovation-Driven
          Growth”, Report N. 50847, The World Bank Group.

Yacoub, N. 2013. “Assessing Pharmaceutical Innovation in Tunisia: An Empirical Survey on
            Firms' Knowledge-Capital and an Analysis of the National Sectorial Innovation
            System.” African Journal of Science, Technology, Innovation and Development 5
            (2): 103–18.




                                                                                       64
Appendix A. Summary Statistics

Table A.1 Top 15 Industries with the Most Innovating Firms
                                                          Internal        External          Total
                                               # of     innovation       innovation      innovation
                 Industry
                                              firms    Mean     # of    Mean    # of    Mean     # of
                                                       (Ln)     firm    (Ln)   firms    (Ln)    firms
  Basic metals                                235       3.22       90    6.17     148    6.79      154
  Chemicals and chemical products             787       4.90      433    7.07     560    7.90      597
  Coke, refined petroleum products,
  and nuclear fuel                             44     6.32       25    7.56       29     8.56      30
  Electrical machinery and related
  items                                       598     3.54     242     5.50      331     6.32     354
  Fabricated metal products, except
  machinery and equipment                     871     3.22     365     5.81      587     6.50     621
  Food products and beverages               2030      2.75     656     5.29     1136     5.92    1192
  Furniture; manufacturing, etc               791     2.61     267     5.56      508     6.20     540
  Machinery and equipment, etc                382     3.48     159     6.27      251     6.88     263
  Medical, precision, and optical
  instruments, watches, and clocks            101     2.55       31    5.52       57     5.98      57
  Motor vehicles, trailers, and semi-
  trailers                                    253     3.61     102     6.07      164     6.83     170
  Office machinery and computers               11     6.02        7    8.40         9    8.82        9
  Other non-metallic mineral products       1256      2.75     424     5.40      714     6.17     782
  Other transport equipment                   131     3.11       47    5.75       81     6.58      87
  Pulp, paper, and paper products             254     3.33     106     6.15      154     6.66     164
  Radio, television, and communication
  equipment                                   167     3.96       73    6.49      112     7.68     123
  Rubber and plastic products                 637     4.18     329     6.82      469     7.48     491
  Textiles                                  1,246     2.74     418     5.54      742     6.20     789
  Tobacco products                             46     4.15       22    7.38       31     7.96      32
  Wearing apparel; dressing and dyeing
  of fur                                    4,947     2.33 1,428       5.66 3,043        6.29 3,205
  Wood and products of wood and cork,
  except furniture; articles of straw and
  plaiting                                    275     2.79     101     5.31      172     6.04     187
  Publishing,        printing,        and
  reproduction of recorded media              430     2.71     151     5.79      267     6.51     288
  Recycling                                    16     2.50        5    5.16       10     5.62      10
  Tanning and dressing of leather;
  luggage, handbags, saddlery, harness,
  and footwear                                965     2.73     359     5.39      578     6.08     621
Note: To identify industries with the most innovating firms, I have measured the innovator’s ratio
(the number of firms that invest in innovation within the two-digit industry /total number of firms
within the two-digit industry). This table presents the top 15 industries with the highest innovator’s
ratio within the manufacturing sector.


                                                                                                   65
Table A.2 provides more details on innovation investment by level of export status, among
full exporters, partial exporters, and nonexporters. Partial exporters invest the most in
innovation, followed by full exporters. Nonexporters invest the least. Table A.3 shows the
innovator’s ratio by FDI status. Firms that have joint ownership between foreign owner and
domestic owner (partial FDI) invest more in innovation than fully domestic firms (No FDI),
while those firms fully owned by foreign owners (full FDI) invest far less in innovation.


Table A.2 Innovator’s Ratio by Exporting Status
   Year         ln_n_internalino (%)              ln_n_externalino (%)   ln_n_innovationinv (%)
            Full/Partial Full/None     Full/Partial Full/None       Full/Partial    Full/None
    1998           58.7          79.4         91.3         117.0            89.2          108.4
    1999           86.2         123.0        101.7         128.1           102.0          124.8
    2000           62.4          92.3         83.6         108.6            85.4          109.3
    2001           68.6         107.7         87.2         109.4            88.1          109.6
    2002           80.2         113.0         95.3         119.7            97.2          119.6
    2003           73.7         123.5         89.5         124.6            90.7          122.9
    2004           74.5         113.2         85.0         108.3            87.4          107.8
    2005           74.1         105.6         89.6         108.4            92.9          108.7
    2006           66.6         130.2         89.1         117.0            87.0          113.0
    2007           62.5         129.9         80.9         118.2            83.6          115.3
Note: Higher than 100 percent indicates that exporters invest more on innovation inputs. Full
describes firms that export entire production; partial describes firms that export some of their
production and sell the rest at the domestic market; and none describes firms that sell only in
domestic markets.
Table A.3 Innovator’s Ratio by FDI status (Full/Partial/None)
   Year         ln_n_internalino (%)              ln_n_externalino (%)   ln_n_innovationinv (%)
           Full/Partial Full/None Full/Partial          Full/None      Full/Partial   Full/None
    1997          83.60        151.96          93.11         120.61           98.88        125.32
    1998          65.21        103.22          92.95         108.83           92.61        107.71
    1999          65.30        107.84          90.02         109.09           89.88        109.75
    2000          62.39         87.31          94.54         104.59           92.54        104.76
    2001          79.40         91.20         106.10         107.55         104.99         105.91
    2002         119.20        107.53         105.17         112.37         110.10         112.96
    2003          80.33        105.21          97.86         109.55         103.75         112.14
    2005          76.13         99.31         107.28         108.66         103.96         108.55
    2006          96.38        131.09         114.64         117.35         108.09         117.19
    2007          67.78         94.80          97.49         106.33           99.40        105.96
Note: Higher than 100 percent indicates that firms with FDI invest more. Full describes firms that
have 100 percent foreign ownership; partial describes joint ventures of foreign and domestic firms;
and none describes firms that are locally owned.

                                                                                                  66
Appendix B. Additional Results

Table B.1 is essentially the same as table 3 but presents estimation results of the determinants
of firms’ innovation for both create and buy, using pooled regression of the Probit model.


Table B.1 Determinants of Innovation Decision Using Probit Model
 Dep. Var.             (1)           (2)          (3)              (4)         (5)         (6)
 {Zijt'’}              Internal      Internal     External         External    Both        All
                       Only          All          Only             All
 Firm size             -0.089***     0.186***     -0.144***        0.075***    0.219***    0.055***
                       (-3.90)       (14.28)      (-10.69)         (5.87)      (16.70)     (4.26)

 Tech staff ratio      0.022         -0.162**     0.320***         0.086       -0.166**    0.093
                       (0.24)        (-3.11)      (5.73)           (1.69)      (-3.15)     (1.77)

 Ln (ave wage)         -0.104**      0.303***     -0.135***        0.185***    0.356***    0.165***
                       (-3.02)       (14.33)      (-6.46)          (9.19)      (15.73)     (7.78)

 Export status         0.025         0.091**      0.044            0.130***    0.090**     0.139***
                       (0.46)        (3.09)       (1.43)           (4.41)      (2.99)      (4.70)

 FDI_stat              -0.033        -0.169***    -0.043           -0.197***   -0.169***   -0.212***
                       (-0.57)       (-5.41)      (-1.35)          (-6.38)     (-5.23)     (-6.74)

 Firm age              0.000         -0.001       -0.003**         -0.003**    -0.001      -0.003**
                       (0.09)        (-1.08)      (-2.88)          (-3.20)     (-1.36)     (-3.21)

 Dominance             -2.526*       -0.746**     0.610*           0.083       -0.794**    -0.012
                       (-2.11)       (-3.02)      (2.03)           (0.31)      (-3.16)     (-0.05)

 # observations       13,257      13,257     13,257      13,257       13,257        13,257
 # dep > 0            534         5,225      4,222       8,913        4,691         9,447
 R2                   0.024       0.056      0.034       0.021        0.069         0.020
Note: t statistics in parentheses. Standard errors are clustered and robust; year and industry
dummies are included but not reported. Significance level: * = 5 percent, ** = 1 percent, *** = 0.1
percent

Like as table 3, columns (2) and (4) show the factors that influence the probability of firms
engaging in internal and external sources of innovation, respectively. Column (6) shows
probability of investment in any source of innovation (all). I added columns (1), (3), and (5)
to see whether there are any differences between those firms investing in only one source of
innovation and those investing in both sources at the same time.




                                                                                                       67
The determinants of firm’s decision to invest in innovation are different between internal
and external innovation. Tests for the difference of coefficients are conducted, and the null
hypothesis that coefficients of the regressions from different columns are systematically the
same is rejected by 1 percent significant level between columns (1) and (3), and between
columns (2) and (4).


The estimation results are quite different from the results of Probit estimation with firm
fixed effect in table 1. Particularly, many coefficients in column (1), (3) and (5) are
statistically significant, which implies that firm specific information matters a lot for the
decision of investing only one source of innovation or jointly invest in both type of innovation.
In addition, many coefficients in column (2) are also statistically significant, implying that
firm specific information matters for the decision of investing in internal innovation.

Meanwhile, the direction and statistical significance of coefficients for external innovation
and all innovation are similar to those in table 3, as shown in columns (4) and (6). Firms that
is larger, pay higher wages, and participate in exports are more likely to invest in external
innovation or any type of innovation. Interesting, the coefficient of FDI is associated with less
likelihood of investment in innovation. Firm age has a negative and statistically significant
coefficient in columns (4) and (6), but the magnitude is small and close to zero. Technical
ratio and dominance are not statistically significant determinants of all innovation and
external innovation decisions; however, they reduce the probability of firms engaging in
internal innovation.

Columns (1) and (3) show that the abovementioned factors, which enhance the likelihood of
firms’ investment in innovation, work the opposite way for firms that invest in only one
source of innovation. Column (5) shows the estimation results of those firms that invest in
both sources of innovation at the same time, and the direction of the coefficient in column
(5) is predominantly the opposite of columns (1) and (3). Firms that are large and pay high
wages are less likely to invest either only in internal innovation or only in external
innovation, as seen in columns (1) and (3), but more likely to invest in both sources of
innovation as seen in column (5). Participating in exports and having foreign ownership do
not have a significant effect on a firm’s decision to invest in one source of innovation, either

                                                                                              68
internal or external, as seen in columns (1) and (3); while exporting has a positive effect, and
FDI has a negative effect on a firm’s decision to invest in both sources of innovation, as seen
in column (5).


Having more technicians does not have a significant effect on a firm’s decision to invest in
only internal sources of innovation, but has positive and significant effect on a firm’s decision
to invest in only external sources of innovation, as seen in columns (1) and (3). The negative
coefficient of technical staff ratio in column (5) is largely driven by those firms that invest in
an internal innovation source as seen in column (2). This finding is somewhat unexpected
since one would expect that technicians would directly engage in decisions on innovation;
however, this result might be attributed to the fact that the main role of technical staff in
Tunisian firms is dealing with external sources of innovation, rather than engaging in their
own R&D. This finding might suggest that Tunisian firms face limited resource constraints;
therefore, having technicians could supplement their investment on internal innovation.


Interestingly, firms with a larger market share do not make substantial effort to innovate
internally but rely instead on only external sources of innovation. The larger market share
(dominance) has a negative and significant effect on a firm’s decision to invest in only
internal sources of innovation, as seen in column (1). Actually, the magnitude of the
coefficient is far too large, but this might be driven by the fact that only a small number of
firms invest in internal innovation (only 534 firms have value 1 and the rest, 0). In contrast,
the market share has positive and significant effect on a firm’s decision to invest in only
external sources of innovation, as seen in column (3). Firms with larger market share are
less likely to invest in both sources of innovation, as seen in column (5). Again, firm age does
not have a significant effect on internal, internal only, and both sources of innovation. It has
a negative and significant effect on external sources of innovation, but the magnitude is very
small and close to zero.


Table B.2 is essentially the same as table 5 but uses random effects rather than firm fixed
effect. Hausman test results reveal that fixed effect is more appropriate in the above model.


                                                                                               69
Table B.2 Determinants of Innovation: Random Effects
                             (1)             (2)           (3)           (4)         (5)        (6)
                             ln_Internal     ln_Intern     ln_Extern     ln_Extern   ln_Both    ln_All
                             Only            al All        al Only       al All
 Firm size                   -0.027          0.710***      -0.092*       0.688***    0.799***   0.697***
                             (-1.59)         (14.74)       (-2.19)       (12.80)     (16.45)    (12.71)

 Tech staff ratio            0.017           -0.379*       0.528***      0.106       -0.499**   0.142
                             (0.29)          (-2.43)       (3.83)        (0.63)      (-3.15)    (0.83)

 Ln (ave wage)               -0.044          0.780***      -0.039        0.865***    0.914***   0.848***
                             (-1.75)         (11.38)       (-0.65)       (11.46)     (13.16)    (11.03)

 Export status               0.030           0.315**       0.257**       0.549***    0.280**    0.612***
                             (0.83)          (3.21)        (2.98)        (5.13)      (2.82)     (5.61)

 FDI_stat                    -0.009          -0.090        -0.083        -0.266*     -0.110     -0.255*
                             (-0.22)         (-0.80)       (-0.84)       (-2.14)     (-0.96)    (-2.01)

 Firm age                    0.001           0.003         -0.008*       -0.007      0.002      -0.006
                             (0.40)          (0.86)        (-2.38)       (-1.57)     (0.43)     (-1.42)

 Dominance                  -0.376          2.425*        0.388         2.726*         2.593*   2.598*
                            (-0.98)         (2.18)        (0.40)        (2.17)         (2.32)   (2.03)
 # of obs.                   13,257           13257 13,257             13,257          13,257   13,257
Note: t statistics in parentheses. Significance level: * p < 0.05 ** p < 0.01 *** p < 0.001.


Table B.3 shows Hausman test results.

Table B.3 Hausman Tests Results
     Column                P-value: difference in                    Better estimation model
                         coefficients not systematic

 1                   1                                          RE

 2                   0.000                                      FE

 3                   0.000                                      FE

 4                   0.000                                      FE

 5                   0.000                                      FE

 6                   0.000                                      FE
Note: RE = random effects.

Overall, fixed effects should be chosen; based on the results of comparing the six models from
FE vs. RE; RE fails to outperform in five out of six cases.

                                                                                                           70
The Hausman test compares an estimator θ1 that is known to be consistent with an estimator
θ2 that is efficient under the assumption being tested. The null hypothesis is that estimator
θ2 is indeed an efficient (and consistent) estimator of the true parameters. If this is the case,
there should be no systematic difference between the two estimators. If there is a systematic
difference in the estimates, there are reasons to doubt the assumptions on which the efficient
estimator is based. The Hausman test can also differentiate between the fixed effects model
and the random effects model in panel data. In this case, random effects (RE) is preferred if
the null hypothesis cannot be rejected due to higher efficiency; otherwise, fixed effects (FE)
is at least consistent and thus preferred.




                                                                                              71
