                                                   WPS8059


Policy Research Working Paper                     8059




       Effects of Performance Incentives
 for Community Health Worker Cooperatives
                   in Rwanda
                                 Gil Shapira
                                 Ina Kalisa
                               Jeanine Condo
                               James Humuza
                                Cathy Mugeni
                               Denis Nkunda
                              Jeanette Walldorf




Development Research Group
Human Development and Public Services Team
May 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 8059


  Abstract
 This paper presents the results of a randomized controlled trial                   finds no impact of the performance payments on coverage
 set to evaluate the effects of a pay-for-performance scheme                        of the targeted services, attitudes and behaviors of commu-
 that rewarded community health worker cooperatives for                             nity health workers, or outcomes at the cooperative level.
 the utilization of five targeted maternal and child health ser-                    No synergies are found between the scheme and a demand-
 vices by their communities. The experiment took place in 19                        side, in-kind transfer intervention that was independently
 districts in Rwanda between 2010 and 2014. The analysis                            effective in increasing coverage rates of targeted services.




  This paper is a product of the Human Development and Public Services Team, Development Research Group. It is part
  of a larger effort by the World Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy
  discussions around the world. Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org.
  The authors may be contacted at gshapira@worldbank.org.




         The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
         issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
         names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
         of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
         its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                       Produced by the Research Support Team
    Effects of Performance Incentives for Community Health Worker Cooperatives in
                                        Rwanda

    Gil Shapira a, Ina Kalisa b, Jeanine Condo c, James Humuza b, Cathy Mugeni d, Denis Nkunda d, Jeanette
                                                     Walldorf a




JEL classification codes: I12, O15, H51



                                                   Acknowledgements

The Community PBF program was implemented by the Ministry of Health, under the leadership of Dr.
Agnes Binagwaho, Fidele Ngabo and Cathy Mugeni. The authors would like to acknowledge the
contribution to the program and its evaluation made by Netsanet Walelign Workie, Jennifer Sturdy,
Gayle Martin, Sebastian Martinez, Paul Gertler, Paulin Basinga, Patrick Mullen, Christel Vermeersch,
Elisa Rothenbuhler, Vedaste Ndahindwa and Randy Wilson. The team benefited from comments made
by participants of seminars at Erasmus University Rotterdam and Universitat Pompeu Fabra. The
financial contributions of the Health Results Innovation Trust Fund are gratefully acknowledged. The
findings, interpretations and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those of the author, and do
not necessarily represent the views of the World Bank, its Executive Directors, or the governments of
the countries they represent.
a Development Research Group, The World Bank
b School of Public Health, College of Medicine and Health Sciences, University of Rwanda
c Rwanda Biomedical Center
d Ministry of Health, Rwanda
* Corresponding author: Gil Shapira, gshapira@worldbank.org
Introduction

Pay-for-performance schemes have been increasingly introduced in the health care systems of Sub-
Saharan African countries and low- and middle-income countries more generally (Miller and Babiarz
2013; Witters et al. 2012). The schemes are introduced with the aim of improving health outcomes
through increasing both the coverage and quality of health services. In some African countries, such as
Rwanda, Burundi, Sierra Leone, Cameroon and Benin, such schemes targeting maternal and child health
services are implemented at scale and are part of the national health care delivery system. Many more
countries are either piloting such schemes or have them implemented at a regional level (World Bank
2015). In the African context, these schemes have mostly focused on incentivizing formal health
providers at the health facility level. However, some programs have also incentivized other agents, such
as users of the health services, local governments, community bodies and community health workers.

This study evaluates the impact of an intervention that rewarded cooperatives of volunteer community
health workers (CHWs) for utilization of five targeted maternal and child health services by the
communities they serve. The intervention was introduced in the context of the Community
Performance-Based Financing (CPBF) program at the end of 2010. When cooperatives received
payments through the CPBF program, a maximum of 30 percent could be immediately distributed to
cooperative members while the rest had to be invested in income-generating activities of the
cooperatives’ choosing. Revenues from these entrepreneurial activities, in turn, could be reinvested or
distributed as dividends to the members.

The evaluation relies on an experimental design in which cooperatives in randomly selected sectors
(sub-districts) received quarterly payments conditional on performance, defined by utilization rates in
the catchment areas served by the cooperatives. Cooperatives in comparison sectors received quarterly
payments that were not tied to performance. These payment amounts equaled the average amounts
received by the cooperatives under the scheme. Data used in the analysis are from a baseline survey of
households, CHWs and cooperatives conducted prior to the launch of the program, and from a follow-up
survey conducted about three years after the launch of the scheme.

The results indicate no impact of the CHW cooperative performance payments on the targeted
indicators of timely antenatal care, in-facility delivery and growth monitoring of children. Lack of impact
on use of modern family planning methods cannot be rejected. Furthermore, no evidence was found
that the intervention impacted the motivation, satisfaction or behaviors of CHWs, or the way


                                                     2
cooperatives were run. The outcomes of the performance payment scheme were found to be invariant
with respect to whether it was implemented together with a demand-side in-kind incentives scheme
that was found to be independently effective in increasing coverage of timely antenatal and postnatal
care.

This study contributes to a growing body of literature on pay-for-performance programs in the health
sector in developing countries. On the one hand, evidence suggests that these programs can be
effective in increasing service utilization, quality of care and health outcomes (e.g. Basinga, Gertler et al.
2012; Gertler and Vermeersch 2012; and Bonfrer et al. 2014). On the other hand, these are complex
interventions and some experiences have resulted in mixed or no improvements in targeted outcomes
(e.g. Van de Poel et al. 2015; Huillery and Seban 2015; Engineer et al. 2015). The paper contributes to
the growing literature analyzing the conditions under which these programs are effective and the design
features that improve their effectiveness. Questions such as which indicators to pay for and who should
be paid are of special interest. This paper relates more specifically to studies of programs that paid for
health-related outcomes to agents who are not formal health providers. Examples of such programs
include block grants to villages in Indonesia, incentives to school principals for reducing anemia among
students in China, and payments to childcare workers in India for reducing malnutrition (Olken et al.
2014; Miller et al. 2012 and Singh 2015).


Background and the Intervention

Since June 2006, Rwanda has implemented a pay-for-performance scheme in health centers and
hospitals.1 The program, named Performance-Based Financing (PBF), provided financial rewards to
health facilities to promote maternal, child and HIV/AIDS services. The rewards were conditional on the
number of services provided as well as measures of quality of care. The program was phased-in to allow
implementation of an impact evaluation that compared outcomes in treated districts to those in
comparison districts receiving additional input-based financing equaling the average PBF payments
made to facilities under the scheme. Studies have found that the PBF scheme increased utilization of
services such as institutional deliveries, preventative care visits by children, and voluntary counseling
and testing for HIV/AIDS by couples (Basinga, Gertler et al. 2012, de Walque, Gertler et al. 2015).




1
 Pilot PBF programs have been introduced as early as 2001 (Meesen et al. 2006; Soeters, Habineza and
Peerenboom 2006; Rusa et al. 2009).


                                                       3
Positive impacts were also found on outcomes such as quality of prenatal care and anthropometric
measures for children (Basinga, Gertler et al. 2102, Gertler and Vermeersch 2012).

Community health workers were integrated into the PBF scheme in 2009. Each village in Rwanda has
three community health workers: one female in charge of maternal and neonatal health, and a male and
a female that serve as multidisciplinary CHWs. The CHWs are volunteers elected by the village residents.
The criteria for selection are the ability to read and write, being 20 to 50 years old, and residing in the
village. CHWs within the catchment area of a health center are organized in a CHW cooperative. All
CHWs must be members of the cooperatives and membership is closed to any other individual. When
cooperatives receive transfers from the program, a minimum of 70 percent has to be invested in
income-generating activities of the cooperatives’ choosing. The other 30 percent, as well as revenues
from the income-generating activities, can be allocated among the cooperative members. It is up to the
cooperatives to decide how to allocate these funds among their members.

The objectives of the CHW incentives strategy were to improve the quality of data reported at the sector
level, increase utilization of key maternal and child health services and improve the motivation and
behavior of CHWs. Initially, payments to cooperatives depended on timely completion of quarterly
reports of data the CHWS collected on their communities. With the introduction of the CPBF program,
payments to cooperatives were also conditioned on utilization of targeted health services in their
corresponding catchment areas. The cooperatives received quarterly payments based on utilization of
five targeted maternal and child health services. The incentivized services, provided at the health
centers, were growth monitoring of children 6-59 months old, antenatal care provided to women in the
first four months of their pregnancy, in-facility deliveries, family planning consultations for new users,
and family planning consultations for regular users.

In several ways, the CHW cooperative performance payments scheme is similar to the Rwanda PBF
scheme at the health facility level and pay-for-performance schemes to health providers more generally.
The basic concept is to use financial rewards to induce higher effort exerted towards achieving pre-
specified targets. Unlike health providers, though, the CHWs do not actually provide the targeted
services but serve as a link between the health centers and the communities by providing information
on the services and encouraging utilization. Therefore, they do not have the ability to impact the
availability and quality of health services. However, as community members themselves, they could
employ local knowledge to encourage service utilization in ways that the formal health providers
cannot.


                                                       4
The rewards to health facilities and to the cooperatives are both provided based on the collective
performance of teams. Both facilities and cooperatives have some autonomy to decide how to distribute
the performance rewards among the group members. Unlike the cooperatives, though, health facilities
have hierarchical management structure and, at least at the health center level, a much smaller number
of staff members. The facility management can continually observe the work of its staff. For the PBF
program, for example, individual staff performance evaluations forms have been developed to track
performance of individual staff members (Fritsche et al. 2014). While the cooperatives have presidents
and accountants, their roles are primarily to coordinate with the health centers, and to manage the
cooperative finances and income-generating activities. The health work of the CHWs is done in their
respective villages and is unobservable to other members and the cooperative management team.
Theoretically, incentivizing teams might lead to improved performance through cooperation between
the members and creation of positive pressure to perform if effort exertion is observable to other
members. However, the large number of cooperative members and the fact that individual effort is
unobservable are more likely to induce free-riding in the community PBF model than in the health-
facility PBF model.

The amounts allocated to each CHW depend not only on the effort exerted by all other cooperative
members but also on the success of the cooperative enterprises. If the income-generating activities of
the cooperative are profitable, that amplifies the return to effort exerted toward encouraging the
communities to receive services at the health centers. However, uncertainty about profitability of the
cooperative’s enterprises can further weaken the link between individual effort and eventual financial
return.

Another potentially important aspect to consider is the fact that community health workers are
volunteers who only spend a portion of their time on providing health services in their communities. It
could be that they are intrinsically motivated to serve their communities and therefore are less likely to
respond to financial incentives. Previous studies have shown that pro-social preferences might lead
health providers to exert effort even in the absence of supervision and extrinsic rewards (for example,
Reinikka and Svensson 2010, Leonard and Masatu 2010). Nevertheless, a large body of literature,
including the studies on pay-for-performance schemes mentioned above, have shown that monetary
and non-monetary rewards, as well as career opportunities can improve provision of public services (for
example Ashraf et al. 2014, Ashraf et al. 2014).




                                                     5
In the context of the CPBF program, a demand-side in-kind incentives scheme was also piloted with the
objective of enhancing the demand for maternal health services in order to diagnose and treat
preventable threats to maternal and neonatal health. Health centers received funding to endow women
with gifts for receiving timely antenatal and postnatal care, as well as delivering in health facilities.
Health centers in selected sectors received funds to procure gifts between October 2010 and February
2013. Value ceilings were set for the gifts provided for each service and suggestions for the gifts were
provided. Although health centers experienced frequent stock-outs of the gifts, the scheme had a
positive impact on rates of early antenatal and postnatal care (Kalisa, Shapira et al. 2016). While it is not
the goal of this paper to evaluate the direct impact of the demand-side scheme, the overall design of the
CPBF program allows the estimation of potential synergies between the CHW cooperative performance
payments and the in-kind transfers to women. Timely antenatal care and in-facility deliveries were
targeted by both interventions.




Methods

The estimation of the impacts of the CHW cooperative performance payments relies on the
experimental design of the study, depicted in Figure 1. Sectors (sub-districts) in 19 districts were
randomly assigned to different study arms.2 The districts are in four of the five provinces of the country,
excluding the province of the capital city Kigali. Sectors without a public or non-for-profit faith-based
health center were excluded, as were 30 sectors where the demand-side in-kind transfers were piloted.3
The remaining 198 sectors were blocked by district and poverty ranking defined by the country’s Vision
Umurenge social protection program.

The sectors were randomly assigned into four study arms. In all study arms, CHW cooperatives received
funds conditional on submitting the routine reports on their communities. In the first study arm, the
quarterly amounts paid to cooperatives depended on performance on the selected indicators. In the
second study arm, payments to cooperatives were not linked to performance but health centers
received funds to implement the demand-side in-kind transfers for timely antenatal care, in-facility

2
  The 19 districts include the 18 districts of the impact evaluation of the PBF at the health facility level in 2006-
2008. An additional district was added to increase the statistical power of the study.
3
  A sector typically contains a single public or non-for-profit faith-based health center with the catchment area of
the health center corresponding to the boundary of the sector. However, there are some sectors that do not
contain a health center and others have more than one.


                                                           6
delivery and timely postnatal care. In the third study arm, both the CHW cooperative performance
payments and demand-side transfers were implemented. The fourth study arm served as a control
group, and pay-for-reporting was the only CPBF component implemented. In the two study arms in
which payments were not linked to performance (the first and second), cooperatives received the
average quarterly amounts given to cooperatives in the two study arms in which cooperatives were paid
for performance (the third and fourth arms). This reflected the fact that the goal was to evaluate the
impact of tying payments to performance and not the impact of different level of payments to the
cooperatives. The percentage of the funds that had to be invested in the cooperatives’ income-
generating activities, as well as the autonomy to decide how to allocate the money among the
members, were the same in all treatment arms.

A baseline survey was fielded from February to May 2010 to measure outcomes prior to the launch of
the program, and to establish internal validity of the study. For a household-level survey, 12 households
with a woman aged 15-49 with a recent pregnancy or birth were selected from the catchment area of
each of the 198 health centers. First, three cells (groups of villages) were randomly selected, and four
villages within each cell were randomly selected. In each village, a field supervisor consulted the village
leader and/or community health workers in order to identify the household with the most recent birth
in each village.4 This resulted in a sample of 2,376 households. In each village, the CHW in charge of
maternal and neonatal health was to be interviewed. Interviews were completed with 2,005 CHWs
(about 84 percent of the target). In addition, interviews were conducted with 197 cooperative
presidents.

Implementation of the cooperative performance payments and demand-side in-kind incentives started
in October 2010. Table 1 presents the unit fees paid to the cooperatives in the different implementation
years. Most unit fees were halved by the end of 2011 and reduced by an additional 25 percent the
following year. Four additional indicators related to tuberculosis and HIV testing were added during the
implementation of the program. These indicators were added nationally and are not discussed in this
paper. While the cooperative performance payments were implemented continuously until after the
follow-up survey, health centers received their last payments for the demand-side transfers on February
2013.



4
  During the fieldwork, the survey team learned that some villages, in five of the sectors, were served by health
facilities different than the ones affiliated with the CHW cooperative selected for the sample. In these cases,
additional households in the villages covered by the selected cooperatives were added to the sample.


                                                         7
A follow-up survey took place between November 2013 and June 2014. The survey teams returned to
the same villages sampled for the baseline survey and identified (i) the women interviewed at baseline
and (ii) women with the most recent birth or pregnancy in each village.5 Interviews were completed with
2,157 of the baseline women and 2,343 women with recent pregnancies. Tracking of baseline women
was attempted also outside the original districts in which they resided, which was the main driver of the
longer duration of fieldwork. 2,200 CHWs in charge of maternal and neonatal health in the same
villages were interviewed as well as 197 presidents of CHW cooperatives.

The outcome measures are constructed using data from the household, CHW and cooperative surveys.
The household surveys are used to construct measures of health service utilization, use of modern
family planning methods, fertility and interactions between women and CHWs. Data from the CHW
survey are used to construct measures of CHW behavior, motivation and satisfaction. Lastly, data
collected through the interviews with cooperative presidents are used to construct measures of
cooperative dynamics.




Descriptive Analysis

Tables 2-4 present summary statistics of the baseline characteristics of the samples of women with
recent pregnancies, CHWs in charge of maternal and neonatal health and CHW cooperatives. The tables
report means by exposure to the CHW cooperative performance incentives treatment.6 In addition, the
tables report p-values of t-tests assessing the similarity between treatment and control groups. Overall,
the randomization achieved balance between the two groups with respect to observable characteristics.

About 19 percent of the households are from the South Province, 28 percent from each of the East and
West Provinces, and 25 percent from the North province. Households consisted of an average of five
members and were located at an average distance of about 4.3 kilometers from the health center
serving their village. The average age of the sample of women with recent pregnancy was 28.2 and 91
percent were married. Eighteen percent of the women have never attended school, 70 percent
attended at least some primary school, and the rest have attended at least some secondary or higher



5
 The same procedure as in the baseline survey was implemented to identify the women with recent pregnancies.
6
 The two study arms in which CHW cooperatives were paid for performance are combined to define the treatment
group for the purpose of this paper.


                                                     8
level education. Ninety percent were covered by Mutuelle, Rwanda’s community-based health insurance
program.

The average number of births given by women in the sample is three, and the women had on average
2.7 living children. Forty percent of the women reported ever using any modern method of family
planning. Almost all women have received at least one antenatal consultation during their most recent
pregnancy, but only 63 percent initiated antenatal care within the first four months of the pregnancy
and 37 percent received four or more consultations (number of consultations recommended by WHO
guidelines). Seventy-nine percent have delivered in a health facility, attended by a skilled health
provider.

Table 3 presents the baseline characteristics of CHWs in charge of maternal and neonatal health. It is
important to keep in mind that the community health program was going through a reorganization
process at the time of the baseline survey. This is apparent in the CHW and cooperative surveys’ results.
For example, although all CHWs in charge of maternal and neonatal health were supposed to be female,
about 14 percent of those who declared being such community health workers were men. About 54
percent of CHWs reported being in that role for a year or less. The average reported years of experience
is 2.7. Average age was 39, and 87 percent were married. All CHWs had at least primary level education,
and 38 percent had a higher level of education. They reported having visited an average of 28
households in the month preceding the survey and spending an average of 17 hours per week on their
community health duties. Seventy-seven percent reported receiving any training in the 12 months
preceding the survey. About 52 percent were ever trained on antenatal and postnatal care, 53 percent
were trained on referral for delivery or for danger signs, 6 percent were trained on safe home delivery,
and 40 percent on newborn care.

As can be seen in Table 4, 84 percent of cooperatives were based in the grounds of the health centers.
The corresponding catchment area consisted of an average of 37 villages with a population of about
20,000. At the time of the baseline survey, most cooperatives had less than the target amount of
members (three per village) while many cooperatives had more than three CHWs per village.7 The
average number of members was 105.4. In the 12 months preceding the survey, the cooperatives had
recruited an average of 35 members, dismissed two members and had two members resign. The
cooperative leaders reported having had an average of 7.5 meetings during the preceding year. Average

7
 Prior to the reorganization of the community health program many villages had CHWs in charge of social affairs
or with HIV/AIDS specialization.


                                                        9
cooperative income for 2015 was about a million Rwandan Francs (RWF) with an average expenditure of
330,000 RWF.

The results of the follow-up survey show that during the implementation of the program, the
cooperatives were indeed reorganized according to the guidelines. Most of the cooperatives (about 80
percent) reported their number of members to be exactly three times the number of villages they serve.
In addition, the ratio of females to males was two to one, as expected.

Our data show overall increase in utilization of maternal and child health services between the baseline
and follow-up surveys. These trends are best portrayed by focusing on the sectors that were not
exposed to either of the two interventions. Although the rate of women attending at least one antenatal
consultation was already almost universal in the baseline (98 percent), the rate of women who initiated
antenatal care within the first four months of their pregnancies increased from 63 percent to 72
percent. The percentage of women who attended four or more consultations increased from 36 to 40.
The in-facility delivery rate increased from 79 to 94 percent. The rate of children 6-59 months who have
been measured for nutritional status in the six months preceding the survey has increased from 50 to 79
percent.

During the follow-up survey, the field teams managed to complete interviews with 99 percent of the
target number of women with recent births and 93 percent of the target number of CHWs in charge of
maternal and neonatal health. There are no statistically significant differences in these rates between
the treatment arms. However, the attrition rate of ‘baseline women’ - those who were recently
pregnant at baseline - is not balanced. As can be seen in Table A1 in the appendix, successful re-
interviews were conducted at the follow-up round with almost 93 percent of the baseline women in the
sectors that did not implement the CHW cooperative performance payments and with 89 percent of the
women in the sectors that implemented the intervention. Exposure to the performance payments
intervention is significantly correlated to higher attrition also when controlling for a range of baseline
characteristics of the women.


Impact of the CHW Cooperative Performance Payments

Given the experimental design and the balance between the study arms, the effects of the CHW
cooperative performance payments can be estimated simply by regressing outcomes from the follow-up
survey on an indicator of exposure to the intervention. Our main empirical specification is therefore



                                                     10
                                         =    +                  +    ,


where the unit of observation can represent a woman, a CHW or a cooperative.          is an outcome
measured at the follow-up survey.                   is a dummy for belonging to a sector assigned to the
CHW cooperative performance payments treatment. When the unit of observation is women or CHWs,
the error term is clustered at the sector level.


Impact on targeted maternal and child health services

The first two columns of Table 5 report the results on the impact of the intervention on utilization of the
targeted maternal health services: timely antenatal care and in-facility delivery. The sample used for the
analysis is that of women with recent pregnancies that resulted in live births. There is no impact of the
performance incentives on initiation of antenatal care within the first four months of pregnancy. There
is also no impact found on the rate of women who deliver in health facilities. It is important to keep in
mind, however, that by the time of the follow-up survey the rate of in-facility deliveries was 95 percent
in the control group.

Results of the impact of the intervention on child growth monitoring are presented in the third column
of Table 5. The indicator used is whether a child was measured in the 6 months preceding the survey to
determine his or her nutritional status. We perform the analysis among children 6-59 months old of the
sample of women with recent pregnancies. There is no statistically significant difference between the
treatment arms with respect to the rate of children who received growth monitoring services. We report
the results for children of women with recent pregnancies because, as discussed in the previous section,
attrition was unbalanced for the other sample. Among ‘baseline women,’ attrition was higher for
women residing in treatment sectors under the CHW cooperative performance payments scheme. We
did however perform the analysis also for the larger sample of children of all women and found no
evidence of impact of the program on rates of growth monitoring.

Impact on use of modern family planning methods

The sample used for estimating the impact of the CHW cooperative performance incentives on family
planning is that of ‘baseline women’. The two outcomes explored are an indicator for having had an
additional pregnancy since the baseline interview and whether the women reported using modern




                                                    11
contraceptive methods at the time of the follow-up survey. Because of the difference in attrition rates
between the treatment arms, we present results also of regressions including controls for characteristics
of the women, their households and the CHWs in their villages.

Overall, 56 percent of the women reported having an additional pregnancy after 2010. As can be seen in
Table 6, there is no statistically significant impact of the performance payments on the likelihood of
having an additional pregnancy since baseline. There is also no significant effect detected on the
likelihood of reporting the use of modern methods of contraception. Fifty percent of the women report
using some modern contraceptive method while 58 percent reported using any method. As in the
Rwanda DHS 2014-15, the most commonly used method is injectables, followed by contraceptive pills.
Women in the sectors implementing the cooperative performance payments are less likely to be using
modern contraceptive methods by 3 percentage points but the difference is not statistically significant.

Because the attrition rates were unbalanced between the treatment arms, rather than stating that there
was no impact of the CHW cooperative performance payments on the use of modern family planning,
we say we cannot reject that there is no impact. We can also reject big impacts of the performance
payments on use of modern family planning. For example, under the extreme assumption that all
missing women from the treatment sectors used modern family planning methods and those missing
from the other sectors have not, the utilization rate would be higher among the treatment group by less
than seven percentage points.

Another check we conducted to assess difference in fertility among the treatment arms is to compare
the characteristics of women who were recently pregnant at the follow-up round (the ‘recently
pregnant’ sample). If women respond to the intervention by increasing use of modern family planning
methods, we would expect to see differences in characteristics such as age and number of previous
births among pregnant women in the different treatment arms. As reported in Table A2 in the appendix,
the women in the sectors exposed to the performance payments and in the other sectors are similar.
Not only is the average age similar, but the 25, 50 and 75 age percentiles are identical. There is no
statistically significant difference in the number of household members, whether the women are
covered by health insurance, the number of lifetime births and the number of living children. The only
statistically significant difference, at the 10 percent level, is in the share of women with at least some
secondary education. These similarities also suggest there has been no impact of the CHW cooperative
performance payments on use of modern family planning.




                                                     12
Impact on CHW behavior, satisfaction and motivation

The results presented above do not point to an impact of the CHW cooperative performance payments
on the targeted outcome indicators. We performed further analysis to estimate whether having the
cooperative payments conditional on the collective performance affects individual behavior by the
community health workers. Theoretically, it could be that CHWs exerted greater efforts in response to
the performance payments even if these efforts did not lead to increased utilization of targeted health
services by the communities they served. We also test whether the different reward schemes impacted
measures of motivation and satisfaction by the CHWs.

Panel A of Table 7 reports the impact of the intervention on four self-reported measures of CHW
behavior. According to the CHWs, they spent an average of 10 hours providing health services in a
typical week and visited an average of 33 households in the month preceding the survey.8 There is no
statistically significant difference between the treatment arms with respect to these measures. The
CHWs were also asked whether they seek advice from other CHWs. Overall, about 75 percent of CHWs
declared frequently seeking advice from other members of their village community health team and 60
percent reported seeking advice from CHWs outside the village. There is a small and statistically
insignificant difference in these reports when CHWs belong to cooperatives paid for performance.

In Panel B of Table 7, results are presented on the impact of the interventions on reports of recently
pregnant women regarding interactions with CHWs during their most recent pregnancies. A high
percentage of women, 78, reported receiving information on antenatal care from a CHW. On the other
hand, only 26 percent of women reported receiving information on postnatal care. When comparing the
two arms that received the performance payments to the two that have not, there is no statistically
significant difference in these rates. There is also no statistically significant impact on whether CHWs
referred or accompanied the women for antenatal consultations. Surprisingly, the rate of women who
were referred or accompanied to deliveries is lower when the performance payments are provided,
although this is one of the paid indicators. Among the sectors that did not receive the performance
payments, 54 percent of women reported being referred or accompanied by CHWs to delivery. The rate
is lower by 4 percentage points among the sectors that did and significant at the 10 percent level. Given



8
 CHWs were asked differently in the baseline and follow-up surveys regarding the time they spent on health
activities. In the baseline, they were asked how many hours per day and how many days per week they work as a
CHW. In the follow-up survey, they were directly asked how many hours they spend providing health services in a
typical week.


                                                       13
that this is the only significant difference found between the treatment arms, it could be a spurious
effect.

Seventy-one percent of all women (those with recent pregnancies and ‘baseline women’) reported
meeting with a CHW in the preceding three months either in their communities or at home. Forty-five
percent reported having such meetings in their own home. As seen in Panel C of Table 7, there are small
and statistically insignificant differences in these rates between the different treatment arms.9

The follow-up survey included a module in which the CHWs reported their satisfaction regarding
different features of their role. Overall, high levels of satisfaction were reported as can be seen in Panel
A of Table 8. Above 98 reported being satisfied or very satisfied with their role overall, with their
relationship with the health center staff and with the respect they receive from their communities. High
but slightly lower rates of satisfaction were recorded with respect to their ability to meet the needs of
the communities and aspects related to the cooperative. About 80 percent were satisfied with the work
ethics and knowledge of the other cooperative members while about three-quarters of CHWs were
satisfied with the way decisions are being made by the cooperative and their ability to influence those
decisions. About half of the CHWs were satisfied with the support (financial or other) they receive from
the community. Only 21 percent reported being satisfied with their compensation. As seen in Table 8,
there is no apparent relationship between satisfaction overall and the CHW cooperative performance
payments. For only one of the 10 categories is there a statistically significant difference at the 10
percent level.

To assess the motivation of CHWs, the survey respondents were also asked to state whether they agree
with a list of statements related to their work as community health workers. The outcome measure used
in the regressions presented in Panel B of Table 8 is whether the respondents agreed or strongly agreed
with each of the statements. There is very little variation in responses, with almost all CHWs agreeing
with statements such that the role as CHW makes them feel good about themselves, that they are proud
to serve their communities and that they are feeling motivated to work as hard as they can. There are
negligible differences in responses of CHWs in the different treatment arms.




9
 Because of the unbalanced attrition of the baseline women, we also ran the regressions using only the sample of
recently pregnant women. Also for that group there are no statistically significant differences between the groups.


                                                        14
Impact on cooperative dynamics

There are different ways in which the CHW cooperative performance payments could impact the
interactions between cooperative members and the way the cooperatives are run. The performance
determining the payments is measured at the cooperative level but the effort is exerted at the individual
level in the different villages. On the one hand, this could lead to frictions if members are suspecting
others are free-riding. On the other hand, it could lead to greater cooperation or positive pressure to
perform if levels of effort exerted are observed by other members. Results of the analysis of the impacts
of the program on different cooperative-level outcomes are presented in Table 9.

Cooperative presidents reported an average of 4.5 member meetings in the 12 months preceding the
survey. Seventy-seven percent of cooperatives had between two and four annual meeting while 12
percent reported monthly meetings. There is no statistically significant difference between the
treatment arms. The presidents also reported that the performance of cooperative members was
internally evaluated on average eight times in the year preceding the survey.10 Half of the cooperatives
had monthly internal evaluations and 5 percent had zero. There is no evidence that the number of
internal evaluations is impacted by tying CPBF payments to cooperative performance.

We also find no impact of the interventions on indicators related to recruitment and retention of CHWs.
At the time of the interview, the presidents reported an average of 0.5 vacant positions in the
cooperatives with 75 percent of cooperatives having no vacant position. In the 12 months preceding the
survey, the cooperatives recruited on average about six members and about four have resigned. Thirty
percent of the cooperatives have dismissed at least one member during that period and the overall
average of members dismissed per cooperative is 1.1. As can be seen in Table 9, the CPBF interventions
did not impact movements of members in and out of the cooperatives.

Because it is up to the cooperatives to decide how to distribute payments among their members, one
way cooperatives can deal with potential free-riding is to distribute the payments according to personal
performance. Most cooperatives distributed equal amounts to their members and 46 percent
distributed amounts depending on performance. When comparing the two arms implementing the
performance payments to the two that do not, there is no statistically significant difference in tying
member payments to performance.


10
 Three cooperative presidents reported 40 or more annual internal evaluations of members. These observations
were dropped as they seem unrealistic.


                                                     15
Synergies between the CHW cooperative performance incentives and the demand-side in-kind transfers

Lastly, we test whether there is a multiplicative effect when implementing both the CHW cooperative
performance payments and the demand-side in-kind transfers. Timely antenatal care and in-facility
deliveries were targeted by both interventions. To that end, we also estimate the following model:


            =    +   1                    +   2             +   3                   ∙             + ,


where             is a dummy variable for belonging to a sector in which health centers received funding
to endow women with gifts when they meet the eligibility criteria.

The results presented in Table 10 do not point to synergies between the two interventions. The rate of
women who received timely antenatal care in the sectors implementing the demand-side intervention is
higher by nine percentage points. The effect is statistically significant at the 1 percent level. In the
sectors implementing both interventions, the rate is higher by eight percentage points relative to the
control sectors implementing none of the programs. Neither of the interventions significantly impacted
the rate of in-facility deliveries. For both targeted services, there is no significant difference in the
impact of the demand-side intervention whether it is implemented in conjunction with the CHW
cooperative performance payments or not.

Although the two interventions had only two common targeted indicators, the conditional in-kind
transfers could theoretically increase overall engagement of women with the health care system in
general and with the CHWs in particular. We ran the regressions on all outcomes presented in Tables 5-9
using the specification separating the four study arms and we did not find evidence of systematic
synergies between the interventions.

Discussion

The CHW cooperative performance payment scheme is not found to have affected targeted outcomes.
No impact was detected on the coverage rates of timely antenatal care, in-facility delivery or growth
monitoring of children under 5. We cannot reject lack of impact on use of modern family planning
methods. Furthermore, we find no evidence that the CHW incentives scheme affected the behavior,
motivation and satisfaction of CHWS as well as outcomes at the cooperative level. We find no synergies
between the CHW cooperative performance payments and the demand-side in-kind transfers. The




                                                       16
demand-side intervention, which was found to positively impact rates of timely antenatal and postnatal
care, does not result in different outcomes when implemented in conjunction with the CHW incentives.

It could be that the financial rewards per service were not high enough. For the CHWs to increase effort
towards a targeted service, the reward has to be perceived as at least equal to the cost incurred by
exerting the additional effort. The cost, for example, can be in terms of the time the CHW will have to
spend away from household tasks or income-generating activities. As shown Table 1, the per-service
incentive amounts have been continuously reduced. In the follow-up survey, CHWs were asked to report
the amount received in their last CPBF quarterly payment, excluding dividends from the cooperatives’
income-generating activities. The average reported amount was only about 7.3 USD. For reference, the
GNI per capita was estimated to be 690 USD in 2014. This means that for an average Rwandan the CPBF
payments would represent a very small change in income. The PBF scheme at health facilities, for
comparison, increased staff salaries by 38 percent (Basinga, Gertler, et al. 2011).

Another factor that could have further diminished the expected return to effort exertion is the
transmission of the financial incentives through the cooperative structure. When CPBF payments were
transferred to the cooperative, at least 70% of the payments had to be invested in the cooperatives’
income-generating activities. It was up to the cooperatives to decide how to allocate the CPBF payments
and dividends from the income-generating activities among an average of more than 100 members.
Therefore, the reward for an individual CHW does not depend only on her effort but also on the efforts
of the other cooperative members, the success of their income-generating activities and the
cooperative’s revenue allocation decisions. Moreover, focus group discussions conducted early during
the implementation of the program revealed that CHWs were confused about the payment mechanisms
of the CPBF program (Condo et al. 2014).

The study was not set up to evaluate the organization of community health workers in cooperatives and
cannot identify their impact as the same organization was used in all study arms. There are ways in
which the organization of CHWs in cooperatives is theorized to positively impact the performance of the
CHWs. For example, the income received from the cooperatives might permit the CHWs to spend more
time on health activities rather than on individual income-generating activities. The cooperatives might
also enable sharing of health knowledge and collaboration. However, transferring the financial
incentives through the cooperatives might not serve as an optimal platform for inducing individual effort
by the CHWs in their perspective villages as it can weaken the link between efforts exerted and
perceived rewards.


                                                    17
It is also important to keep in mind that the study compared outcomes between sectors in which
cooperatives were paid for reporting health indicators and outcomes in sectors in which cooperatives
were paid for performance on indicators (conditional on completed reports). The regular reporting by
CHWs already orients CHWs towards the prioritized indicators. It could be that as volunteers they have
pro-social preferences and they are more motivated by improving the community health indicators than
by financial rewards. It could also be that given their health knowledge and available resources and time
there is little scope for additional improvements in performance on these indicators.

Consistent with other data sources, such as the Rwanda DHS, the data collected for the CPBF impact
evaluation show overall increase in utilization of maternal and child health services. Ongoing policies
and newly introduced interventions were targeting the same outcomes. For example, in the duration of
the study, the ministry of health introduced and scaled up a program of community-based provision of
family planning methods directly by community health workers (Chin-Quee et al. 2016).11 Given the
other interventions, it might have been hard to achieve additional marginal improvements in utilization
through the performance payments to cooperatives.




11
  The program was scaled up at the district level and therefore did not pose a threat to the internal validity of the
experiment in which treatment was randomized at the sub-district level.


                                                         18
References

Ashraf, N., Bandiera, O., & Jack, B. K. (2014). No margin, no mission? A field experiment on incentives
for public service delivery. Journal of Public Economics, 120, 1-17.

Ashraf, N., Bandiera, O., & Lee, S. S. (2014). Do-gooders and go-getters: career incentives, selection,
and performance in public service delivery. STICERD-Economic Organisation and Public Policy
Discussion Papers Series, 54.

Basinga, P., Gertler, P. J., Binagwaho, A., Soucat, A. L., Sturdy, J., & Vermeersch, C. M. (2011). Effect
on maternal and child health services in Rwanda of payment to primary health-care providers for
performance: an impact evaluation. The Lancet, 377(9775), 1421-1428.


Bonfrer, I., Van de Poel, E., & Van Doorslaer, E. (2014). The effects of performance incentives on the
utilization and quality of maternal and child care in Burundi. Social Science & Medicine, 123, 96-104.

Chin-Quee, D., Mugeni, C., Nkunda, D., Uwizeye, M. R., Stockton, L. L., & Wesson, J. (2016). Balancing
workload, motivation and job satisfaction in Rwanda: assessing the effect of adding family planning
service provision to community health worker duties. Reproductive health, 13(1), 1.

Condo, J., Mugeni, C., Naughton, B., Hall, K., Tuazon, M.A., Omwega, A., Nwaigwe, F., Drobac, P.,
Hyder, Z., Ngabo, F. and Binagwaho, A., 2014. Rwanda’s evolving community health worker system: a
qualitative assessment of client and provider perspectives. Human resources for health, 12(1), p.1.

De Walque, D., Gertler, P. J., Bautista-Arredondo, S., Kwan, A., Vermeersch, C., de Dieu Bizimana, J., ...
& Condo, J. (2015). Using provider performance incentives to increase HIV testing and counseling
services in Rwanda. Journal of health economics, 40, 1-9.

Engineer, C. Y., Dale, E., Agarwal, A., Agarwal, A., Alonge, O., Edward, A., ... & Peters, D. H. (2016).
Effectiveness of a pay-for-performance intervention to improve maternal and child health services in
Afghanistan: a cluster-randomized trial. International journal of epidemiology, dyv362.

Fritsche, G. B., Soeters, R., & Meessen, B. (2014). Performance-based financing toolkit. World Bank
Publications.

Gertler, P. J., & Vermeersch, C. (2012). Using performance incentives to improve health outcomes. World
Bank Policy Research Working Paper, (6100)

Huillery, E., & Seban, J. (2015). Financial incentives are counterproductive in non-profit sectors: evidence
from a health experiment.

Kalisa, S. , Shapira, G, Condo, J., Humuza, J. & Walldorf J. (2016) In-Kind Demand-Side Conditional
Transfers for Improving Uptake of Maternal Health Services in Rwanda.

Leonard, K. L., & Masatu, M. C. (2010). Professionalism and the know‐do gap: Exploring intrinsic
motivation among health workers in Tanzania. Health economics, 19(12), 1461-1477.

Meessen, B., Musango, L., Kashala, J. P. I., & Lemlin, J. (2006). Reviewing institutions of rural health
centres: the Performance Initiative in Butare, Rwanda. Tropical Medicine & International Health, 11(8),
1303-1317.

Miller, G., & Babiarz, K. S. (2013). Pay-for-performance incentives in low-and middle-income country
health programs (No. w18932). National Bureau of Economic Research.



                                                     19
Miller, G., Luo, R., Zhang, L., Sylvia, S., Shi, Y., Foo, P., ... & Rozelle, S. (2012). Effectiveness of Provider
Incentives for Anaemia Reduction in Rural China: A Cluster Randomised Trial. BMJ, 345, e4809.

Olken, B. A., Onishi, J., & Wong, S. (2014). Should Aid Reward Performance? Evidence from a field
experiment on health and education in Indonesia. American Economic Journal: Applied Economics, 6(4),
1-34.

Reinikka, R., & Svensson, J. (2010). Working for god? Evidence from a change in financing of nonprofit
health care providers in Uganda. Journal of the European Economic Association, 8(6), 1159-1178.

Rusa, L., Schneidman, M., Fritsche, G., & Musango, L. (2009). Rwanda: Performance-based financing in
the public sector. Performance incentives for global health: potential and pitfalls

Singh, P. (2015). Performance pay and information: Reducing child undernutrition in India. Journal of
Economic Behavior & Organization, 112, 141-163.

Soeters, R., Habineza, C., & Peerenboom, P. B. (2006). Performance-based financing and changing the
district health system: experience from Rwanda.Bulletin of the World Health Organization, 84(11), 884-
889.

Van de Poel, E., Flores, G., Ir, P., & O'Donnell, O. (2015). Impact of performance‐based financing in a
low‐resource setting: a decade of experience in Cambodia. Health economics.

Witter, S., Fretheim, A., Kessy, F. L., & Lindahl, A. K. (2012). Paying for performance to improve the
delivery of health interventions in low-and middle-income countries. Cochrane Database Systematic
Reviews, 2(2), CD007899.

World Bank (2015). Achieving Results for Women’s and Children’s Health: Progress Report




                                                       20
Figure 1: Experimental design



                                                                            198 Sectors in 19 Districts


                                        50 sectors assigned
                                                                 50 sectors assigned              50 sectors are
                                        to CHW cooperative                                                           48 Sectors Assigned
 Random Assignment                          performance
                                                                 to the semand-side              assigned to both
                                                                                                                          to Control
                                                                   in-kind transfers              interventions
                                             incentives


                                                                 February-May 2010:                                  February-May 2010:
                                        February-May 2010:                                    February-May 2010:
                                                                 Baseline Survey (600                                Baseline Survey (576
                                        Baseline Survey (600                                  Baseline Survey (600
                                                                   households; 600
                                          households; 600                                       households; 600        households; 576
 Baseline Survey (February-May 2010)    planned CHWS, 516
                                                                  CHW planned, 498
                                                                                               CHW planned, 524
                                                                  actual; 50 planned                                  CHW planned, 467
                                             actual; 50                                            actual; 50             actual; 48
                                                                   cooperatives, 49
                                           cooperatives)                                         cooperatives)          cooperatives)
                                                                        actual)


                                                                  CHW cooperatives              CHW cooperatives
                                         CHW cooperatives            are paid for                  are paid for       CHW cooperatives
                                            are paid for           reporting only.                performance.           are paid for
                                           performance.             Health Centers                                     reporting only.
 CPBF Implementation                                                                             Health Centers
                                          No funding for         Receive Funding for          Receive Funding for      No funding for
                                        Demand-Side In-Kind      Deman-Side In-Kind           Deman-Side In-Kind     Demand-Side In-Kind
                                            transfers             Transfers (October           Transfers (October        transfers
                                                                 2010-February 2013)          2010-February 2013)



                                                                                                                      Follow-up Surveys
                                         Follow-up Surveys (;     Follow-up Surveys            Follow-up Surveys         (576 planned
                                             600 planned             (600 planned                 (600 planned         households, 565
 Follow-up Survey (November 2013-      households, 591 actual;     households, 594              households, 593        actual; 48 health
                                        50 health centers; 600     actual; 50 health            actual; 50 health    centers; 576 planned
 June 2014)                              planned CHWs, 559       centers; 600 planned         centers; 600 planned    CHWs, 536 actual;
                                              actual; 50          CHWs, 569 actual;            CHWs, 556 actual;          48 planned
                                            cooperatives)          50 cooperatives)             50 cooperatives)       cooperatives, 47
                                                                                                                            actual)




                                                                  21
Table 1: Unit fees (in USD) of targeted indicators by year

                       Incentivized indicators                   2010   2011   2012   2013   2014

      Growth Monitoring: Children 6-59 months monitored
                                                                 3.24   0.57   0.43   0.43   0.43
      for nutritional status

      Timely Antenatal Care: women receiving first antenatal
                                                                 2.24   1.12   0.81   0.81   0.81
      consultation within first 4 months of pregnancy

      In-facility Delivery: assisted deliveries in health
                                                                 2.73   1.37   0.99   0.99   0.99
      facilities

      New Family Planning User: new users receiving
                                                                 2.90   1.45   1.05   1.05   1.05
      consultation in health center

      Regular Family Planning User: regular users of modern
                                                                 2.11   1.06   0.77   0.77   0.77
      long-term methods of contraception




                                                            22
Table 2: Baseline Characteristics of the sample of Women with Recent Pregnancies by Treatment

                                                    Sectors without            Performance
                                                     Performance                Payments
                                                       Payments                  Sectors a
                                                    Mean        SD             Mean        SD         p-value b      Observations
 Province
                                        South       0.184          0.387        0.190       0.392        0.909            2,376
                                         East       0.276          0.447        0.290       0.454        0.822            2,376
                                         West       0.276          0.447        0.290       0.454        0.822            2,376
 Distance to facility c                             4.356          5.354        4.116       4.197        0.355            2,360
 Household members                                  5.020          1.893        5.000       1.898        0.825            2,376
 Age                                                28.39          6.000        28.02       5.953        0.190            2,376
 Married                                            0.910          0.286        0.910       0.286        0.989            2,329
 Education Level
                                  No School         0.175          0.380        0.178       0.383        0.881            2,318
                                    Primary         0.697          0.460        0.692       0.462        0.839            2,318
                                  Secondary         0.128          0.335        0.130       0.336        0.929            2,318
 Covered by Mutuelle                                0.904          0.294        0.897       0.304        0.650            2,368
 Ever used modern family planning                   0.402          0.491        0.391       0.488        0.657            2,376
 method
 Number of lifetime births                          3.105          2.148        2.964       2.158        0.147            2,362
 Number of living children                          2.779          1.823        2.650       1.790        0.135            2,368
 Care during most recent pregnancy
                  At least one ANC visit            0.976          0.154        0.986       0.119        0.173            2,227
         First ANC in first 4 months of             0.619          0.486        0.635       0.482        0.617            2,203
                              pregnancy
               Four or more ANC visits              0.358          0.479        0.374       0.484        0.583            2,216
     In-facility skill attended delivery            0.776          0.417        0.801       0.399        0.255            2,219
 Growth monitoring of children 6-
                                                    0.528          0.500        0.483       0.500        0.210            1,549
 59m in past 6 months
a Women    residing in the sectors in which financial rewards to cooperatives of CHWs were conditional on performance.
b t-testfor the difference between the treatment arms done by regressions with standard errors clustered at the sector level.
c Reported by the community health workers.

*significant at 10% level, ** significant at 5% level, *** significant at the 1% level.




                                                              23
  Table 3: Baseline Characteristics of the sample of CHWs in charge of Maternal and Neonatal Health by
  Treatment
                                              Sectors without      Performance
                                               Performance          Payments
                                                 Payments            Sectors a
                                              Mean        SD      Mean        SD    p-valueb   Obs.
   Female                                     0.856      0.351    0.863     0.344    0.714     2,000
   Age                                        38.45      8.598    39.62     9.384 0.028**      1,990
   Married                                    0.873      0.330    0.867     0.339    0.595     2,002
   Education above primary level              0.392      0.488    0.367     0.482    0.345     1,970
   Years of experience as CHW                 2.683      3.651    2.717     3.753    0.875     1,993
   Households in charge of                    110.6      67.63    117.7     72.20    0.212     1,849
   Households visited in the past             26.99      41.17    28.39     51.55    0.664     1,990
   month
   Hours per week spent on health
                                              17.64      26.44    16.93     24.77    0.565     1,977
   activities
   Training in the preceding 12 months        0.773      0.419    0.770     0.421    0.903     1,962
   Topics of training
            Antenatal and postnatal care      0.512      0.500    0.521     0.500    0.787     1,978
    Referral for delivery or danger signs     0.523      0.500    0.536     0.500    0.660     1,978
                      Safe home delivery      0.054      0.226    0.070     0.255    0.183     1,977
                           Newborn care       0.409      0.492    0.392     0.488    0.543     1,977
  a CHWs   residing in the sectors in which financial rewards to cooperatives of CHWs were conditional on performance
  b t-testfor the difference between the treatment arms done by regressions with standard errors clustered at the sector level.
  *significant at 10% level, ** significant at 5% level, *** significant at the 1% level.

  Table 4: Baseline Characteristics of the CHW Cooperatives by Treatment

                                                     Sectors without            Performance
                                                      Performance                Payments
                                                        Payments                  Sectors a
                                                     Mean        SD             Mean        SD          p-valueb        Obs.
Cooperative located at the health
                                                     0.845           0.363       0.838       0.370        0.894          196
center
Number of villages in catchment area                 33.45           17.02      39.89        47.57       0.220           189
Population in catchment are                          19,505          8647       20,458       11723       0.635           109
Active cooperative members                           94.78           61.58      115.42       71.12      0.037**          183
Recruited members in past 12 months                  32.97           36.74      37.64        41.07       0.439           167
Dismissed members in past 12 months                  1.750           4.086      2.539        4.470       0.251           156
Resigned members in past 12 months                   1.707           2.996      2.026        6.532       0.690           158
Cooperative meetings in past 12
                                                     7.750           4.370       7.290       4.461        0.467          196
months
Total income for 2009 (in 1000 RWF)                   956            1,547       1,044       2,167        0.752          184
Total expenditure for 2009 (in 1000
                                                      308            416          353         593         0.558          182
RWF)
  a Cooperatives  in the sectors in which financial rewards to cooperatives of CHWs were conditional on performance
  b t-testfor the difference between the treatment arms done by regressions with standard errors clustered at the sector level.
  * Significant at the 10% level; ** significant at the 5% level; *** significant at the 1% level.



                                                                24
Table 5: Impact of the performance incentives on utilization of targeted maternal and Child health
indicators

                                           Timely ANC a        In-Facility Delivery b       Growth Monitoring c

               CHW cooperative                 0.000                   -0.001                       -0.024
               incentives                     (0.023)                  (0.011)                     (0.031)
               Constant                      0.770***                 0.947***                    0.767***
                                              (0.017)                  (0.008)                     (0.022)
                    Number of
                                               2,334                    2,334                        1,195
                   observations

       Outcomes measured at the follow-up survey in 2013/4. Standard errors are clustered at the sector level and are reported in
       parentheses.
       a
         Initiated antenatal care within first four months of pregnancy; sample of women with recent pregnancies that resulted in live
       births.
       b
         Delivered in a health facility; sample of women with recent pregnancies that resulted in live births.
       c
         Child was measured to assess his/her nutritional status in the preceding 6 months; sample of children 6-59 months of women with
       recent pregnancies.
       * Significant at the 10% level; ** significant at the 5% level; *** significant at the 1% level.




                                                                 25
Table 6: Impact of the performance incentives on use of modern family planning methods and fertility
                                      among baseline women

                                                   Pregnancy since                Currently using
                                                      baseline                   modern FP method
                                                   (1)              (2)            (3)             (4)
                   CHW cooperative                0.032            0.025         -0.029          -0.021
                   incentives
                                                 (0.024)        (0.022)         (0.025)          (0.025)

                   Age of woman                               -0.009***                        -0.012***

                                                                (0.003)                          (0.003)

                   Married                                     0.140***                        0.117***

                                                                (0.043)                          (0.043)

                   No school                                       0.008                          0.032

                                                                (0.043)                          (0.044)

                   Primary                                         0.030                          0.012

                                                                (0.036)                          (0.039)

                   Number of births                             -0.020*                         0.025**

                                                                (0.010)                          (0.011)

                   Household                                  -0.026***                           0.010
                   members
                                                                (0.010)                          (0.010)

                   Health center more                            -0.014                           0.019
                   than 4km away
                                                                (0.021)                          (0.024)

                   Age of CHW                                      0.000                         0.003*

                                                                (0.001)                          (0.001)

                   CHW experience                               -0.010*                          -0.001

                                                                (0.005)                          (0.005)

                   Constant                    0.540***        0.819***        0.515***        0.450***

                                                 (0.017)        (0.129)         (0.017)          (0.133)

                   District Dummies                No              Yes             No              Yes
                   Number of
                                                  2,157            1,899         2,154            1,896
                   observations
                Outcomes measured at the follow-up survey in 2013/4. Women background characteristics are
                from the baseline survey in 2010. Standard errors are clustered at the sector level and are
                reported in parentheses.
                * Significant at the 10% level; ** significant at the 5% level; *** significant at the 1% level.



                                                              26
Table 7: Impact of the performance incentives on CHW behavior and interaction with women
                                         CHW cooperative
                                                             Constant                                               N
                                         incentives
  Panel A: Reports by CHWs in charge of maternal and child health
  Hours spent providing health services
                                            0.704    (0.706) 9.717***                                  (0.473)      2,201
  in a typical week
  Households visited in the past month      -0.53    (2.487) 33.40***                                   -1.659      2,198
  Frequently seek advice from other
                                           -0.036    (0.038) 0.753***                                  (0.025)      2,200
  CHWs in village
  Frequently seek advice from other
                                           -0.012    (0.043) 0.597***                                   (0.03)      2,201
  CHWs outside the village
  Panel B: Reports by women with recent pregnancies
  Received information on antenatal
                                           -0.028    (0.021) 0.780***                                  (0.015)      2,325
  care from CHW
  Made the CHW aware of the
                                            0.008    (0.025) 0.408***                                  (0.019)      2,325
  pregnancy
  CHW refer or accompany to ANC            -0.007    (0.027) 0.581***                                  (0.019)      2,318
  CHW refer or accompany to delivery      -0.042*    (0.025) 0.544***                                  (0.018)      2,202
  Received information on postnatal care
                                            0.000    (0.022) 0.261***                                  (0.016)      2,317
  from CHW
  Panel C: reports by all women
  Met with a CHW in the past 3 months    -0.016     (0.022)  0.717***                                  (0.016)      3,459
  Met with a CHW at home in the past 3
                                         -0.018     (0.022)  0.459***                                  (0.016)      3,459
  months
Outcomes measured at the follow-up survey in 2013/4. Standard errors are clustered at the sector level and are reported in parentheses.
a
  The question was only asked to women who received information on ANC from a CHW.
* Significant at the 10% level; ** significant at the 5% level; *** significant at the 1% level.




                                                             27
                                             Table 8: Impact on satisfaction and motivation of CHWs
                                                                                                  CHW cooperative
                                                                                                                    Constant       N
                                                                                                    incentives
  Panel A: satisfaction
                    working relationship with health center staff                     0.004     (0.015) 0.936*** (0.011) 2,197
                    community support – financial and other a                        -0.061     (0.060) 0.571*** (0.042)          811
                    respect received from the community                              -0.006     (0.014) 0.952*** (0.010) 2,196
                    ability to meet community needs                                  -0.053     (0.033) 0.743*** (0.022) 2,199
    Satisfied or
                    way decisions are being made in the cooperative                 -0.064*     (0.039) 0.742*** (0.028) 2,185
   very satisfied
                    ability to influence cooperative decisions                       -0.019     (0.038) 0.760*** (0.027) 2,188
       with…
                    work ethics of other cooperative members                         -0.010     (0.033) 0.819*** (0.024) 2,188
                    health knowledge of other cooperative members                     0.006     (0.032) 0.799*** (0.024) 2,195
                    compensation                                                      0.001     (0.029) 0.210*** (0.020) 2,178
                    with role overall                                                 0.006     (0.017) 0.951*** (0.013) 2,201
  Panel B: Motivation
                    role as CHW makes you feel good about yourself                   0.001      (0.003) 0.996*** (0.002) 2,202
                    you are proud to be working for this community                    0.000     (0.004) 0.995*** (0.003) 2,201
      Agree or      you always complete your tasks efficiently and
                                                                                     -0.004     (0.007) 0.988*** (0.004) 2,201
   strongly agree effectively
       that…        you are a hard worker                                             0.003     (0.006) 0.987*** (0.004) 2,201
                    you are punctual about you CHW activities                         0.001     (0.006) 0.991*** (0.004) 2,201
                    you feel motivated to work as hard as you can                    -0.002     (0.008) 0.989*** (0.005) 2,201
a
  63% of the CHWs replied that community support is not applicable and therefore their responses are excluded.
Outcomes measured at the follow-up survey in 2013/4. Standard errors are clustered at the sector level and are reported in parentheses.
*Significant at the 10% level; ** significant at the 5% level; *** significant at the 1% level.




                                                                                28
                                      Table 9: Impact on cooperative dynamics
                                                                 CHW cooperative
                                                                                                Constant             N
                                                                    incentives
Number of cooperative meetings in the past 12 months              0.163     (0.479)        4.454***      (0.340)    196
Times performance was internally assessed in past 12
                                                                   1.821      (1.930)      8.299***      (1.375)    197
months
Vacant positions                                                  -0.148      (0.177)      0.598***      (0.126)    197
Members recruited in past 12 months                                0.663      (0.729)      5.458***      (0.520)    195
Members dismissed in past 12 months                               -0.699      (0.505)      1.479***      (0.360)    196
Any member dismissed in past 12 months                            -0.091      (0.066)      0.351***      (0.047)    197
Members resigned in past 12 months                                0.424       (0.678)      3.958***      (0.473)    140a
Cooperative distributes payments to members according
                                                                  -0.040      (0.072)      0.485***      (0.051)    196
to performance

Outcomes measured at the follow-up surevy in 2013/4. Standard errors are clustered at the sector level and are reported in parentheses.
a
  The outcome variable is missing for some health centers because of skip pattern error in the questionnaire.
* Significant at the 10% level; ** significant at the 5% level; *** significant at the 1% level.




                                                           29
Table 10: Impact of the performance incentives and in-kind transfers on utilization of targeted
maternal and Child health indicators

                                                                       Timely       In-Facility
                                                                       ANC a        Delivery b
                                         CHW cooperative
                                                                       0.015           0.020
                                           incentives
                                                                       (0.036)        (0.016)
                                           Demand-side
                                                                    0.091***           0.012
                                            incentives
                                                                       (0.033)        (0.016)
                                        CHW and demand-                -0.027         -0.042*
                                          side incentives
                                                                     (0.045)          (0.022)
                                              Constant              0.723***         0.941***
                                                                       (0.026)        (0.013)

                                       Impact of combined            0.079**          -0.010
                                          intervention                 (0.032)        (0.018)
                                            Number of
                                                                       2,334           2,334
                                           observations
       Outcomes measured at the follow-up survey in 2013/4. Standard errors are clustered at the sector level and are reported in
       parentheses.
       a
         Initiated antenatal care within first four months of pregnancy; sample of women with recent pregnancies that resulted in live
       births.
       b
         Delivered in a health facility; sample of women with recent pregnancies that resulted in live births.
       * Significant at the 10% level; ** significant at the 5% level; *** significant at the 1% level.




                                                                  30
Appendix
Table A1: Attrition of baseline women

                                                                  Re-interview of Baseline Women a

                                               (1)                    (2)                    (3)        (4)
 CHW cooperative incentives
                                           -0.034***              -0.042**               -0.046***   -0.037***

                                             (0.013)               (0.017)                 (0.016)    (0.012)
 Demand-side incentives                                            -0.021                  -0.016
                                                                   (0.015)                 (0.014)
 CHW and demand-side                                                0.016                   0.017
 incentives
                                                                   (0.026)                 (0.024)
 Age of woman                                                                              0.003*      0.003*
                                                                                           (0.002)    (0.002)
 Married                                                                                   0.056*      0.056*
                                                                                           (0.029)    (0.029)
 Household members                                                                         -0.005      -0.005
                                                                                           (0.006)    (0.006)
 No school                                                                                  0.007      0.007
                                                                                           (0.023)    (0.023)
 Primary                                                                                    0.004      0.004
                                                                                           (0.018)    (0.018)
 Number of births                                                                           0.004      0.004
                                                                                           (0.006)    (0.005)
 Mutuelle (community based                                                                -0.046**    -0.045*
 health Insurance)                                                                         (0.023)    (0.023)
 Constant                                   0.925***              0.936***                0.913***   0.901***
                                             (0.008)               (0.010)                 (0.063)    (0.062)
 District Dummies                              No                     No                     Yes       Yes
  Number of observations                       2,376                 2,376                   2,259    2,259
Standard errors are clustered at the sector level and are reported in parentheses.
a
  Women that gave birth shortly before the baseline survey.
* Significant at the 10% level; ** significant at the 5% level; *** significant at the 1% level.




                                                           31
Table A2: Follow-up Characteristics of the Women with Recent Pregnancies by exposure to the CHW
cooperative performance payments intervention

                                                            Control             Performance
                                                                              Payment Sectors a
                                                      Mean             SD      Mean       SD         p-value b
    Household members                                 5.148           1.846    5.157    1.900          0.925
    Age                                               28.97           6.409    28.90    6.462          0.810
    Married                                           0.896           0.306    0.889    0.315          0.634
    Education Level
                                      No School       0.133           0.340     0.132      0.339          0.952
                                        Primary       0.741           0.438     0.715      0.452         0.179
                                      Secondary       0.125           0.331     0.153      0.360         0.067*
    Covered by health insurance                       0.957           0.203     0.947      0.225         0.307
    Number of lifetime births                         3.081           2.042     3.079      2.116         0.986
    Number of living children                         2.828           1.787     2.837      1.835         0.919
    Number                                            1,159                     1,184
a
  Women residing in the sectors in which financial rewards to cooperatives of CHWs were conditional on
performance.
b
  Regressions are clustered at the sector level.
*significant at 10% level, ** significant at 5% level, *** significant at the 1% level.




                                                       32
