                                               WPS8067


Policy Research Working Paper                8067




              Elections and Embezzlement
           Experimental Evidence from Burkina Faso

                             Malte Lierl




Development Research Group
Impact Evaluation Team
May 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 8067


  Abstract
  Can democratic elections reduce rent extraction by public                          Faso suggests that electoral selection favors benevolent can-
  decision makers? Existing research suggests that reelection                        didates. Furthermore, elections increase citizens’ willingness
  incentives can reduce the embezzlement of public funds. This                       to punish corrupt decision makers, even if their ability to
  paper examines three additional mechanisms through which                           do so remains unchanged. However, these beneficial effects
  democratic elections could have an impact on embezzlement,                         of elections are offset by an unexpected adverse effect: elec-
  even in the absence of reelection incentives: (1) electoral                        tions cause citizens to trust decision makers more than they
  selection effects, (2) social norms and norm enforcement,                          should be trusted. These findings have important impli-
  and (3) citizens’ trust in decision makers. Evidence from                          cations for the role of information in electoral democracy.
  an experiment with 472 groups of citizens in rural Burkina




  This paper is a product of the Impact Evaluation Team, Development Research Group. It is part of a larger effort by the
  World Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions around
  the world. Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The author may be
  contacted at malte.lierl@yale.edu.




          The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
          issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
          names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
          of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
          its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                        Produced by the Research Support Team
                           Elections and Embezzlement:
                     Experimental Evidence from Burkina Faso

                                                   Malte Lierl∗




                                    JEL codes: D72, D73, C92, C93, H11

                                                                                              e’s
On October 31, 2014, a popular uprising in Burkina Faso put an end to president Blaise Compaor´

attempt to manipulate the constitution to allow himself and the dominant ruling party to stay in

power. Frustrated with decades of political corruption, citizens and civil society organizations took

                                                                                              e
the future of their country into their own hands and demanded free and fair elections. Compaor´

was forced to resign and left the country. After a year of political transition and a failed coup by

the former regime’s security apparatus, peaceful national elections were held in November 2015,

followed by municipal elections in May 2016. The transition to competitive, multi-party democracy

brought greater political freedom and more active political competition to Burkina Faso. But is it

reasonable to hope that competitive elections will also bring a reduction in corruption?

The connection between electoral democracy and corruption is important for various reasons, one

of them being that elections are merely one of several methods of delegating democratic authority.

Instead of being elected, public decision makers could alternatively be appointed by higher-level

authorities (e.g. regional governors by the national government), identiﬁed by deliberation and
   ∗
     Contact: malte.lierl@yale.edu. This study was funded by a grant from the World Bank’s Research Support
Budget (RSB). Earlier versions of this paper have been presented at the 2015 APSA Annual Meeting, the 2016
CESS Experimental Political Science Conference, the 2016 SIOE conference and the EPSA 2016 conference. The
author thanks conference discussants Chris Dawes, Robert Erikson, and Aina Gallego for their feedback, as well as an
anonymous reviewer for the World Bank Policy Research Working Paper Series for helpful suggestions. All errors are
the responsibility of the author. Excellent research assistance by Keith Mangam, Nicolas Orgeira and Sidiki Soubeiga
is gratefully acknowledged, as is the careful implementation of the experiment by Innovations for Poverty Action
(IPA), and support by the Programme d’appui aux colletivit´   es territoriales (PACT), which provided the resources to
reach out to the citizens sampled for this study. The study was exempted by the Yale University Human Subjects
Committee as part of IRB protocol #1405013896.
consensus (e.g. heads of international organizations), or even selected at random (e.g. important

executive, legislative and judicial positions in Athenian democracy were ﬁlled by lot). Yet, despite

potential alternatives, nearly all contemporary democracies rely on elections to ﬁll the most impor-

tant positions of power. In fact, it is the demand for free and fair elections for which citizens risked

their lives in pro-democracy protests, such as in Tunisia in 2011 and in Burkina Faso in 2014 and

2015. What makes elections so special, relative to other democratic methods of delegating public

authority? Can elections actually lead to better governance outcomes, and if so, through what

mechanisms?

One of the most prominent arguments in favor of elections is political accountability. Elections

are a mechanism through which citizens can potentially reward or punish public decision makers.

For example, Ferraz and Finan (2011) show that reelection incentives reduced corruption by local

politicians in politically contested Brazilian municipalities. However, in other contexts, electoral

accountability is often inherently limited. Such limitations can be due to institutional features, for

example if term limits eliminate reelection incentives. However, even if reelection is possible, local

party hegemony can render elections uncompetitive. Moreover, the discrete timing of elections

forces voters to consider valence issues, such as corruption, simultaneously with programmatic

issues, which may cause voters to prefer certain candidates for programmatic or ideological reasons,

even if they are known to be corrupt. Finally, even if voters do have the ability to punish corrupt

incumbents electorally, they may not have a preference for doing so, as studies in Brazil (Winters

and Weitz-Shapiro, 2013) and India (Banerjee et al., 2014) have suggested. As a consequence, the

importance of electoral accountability for public corruption can easily be overstated.

It is also possible that electoral accountability merely substitutes for other channels of political ac-

countability. Rather than articulating their discontent at the polls, citizens could make complaints

to higher-level authorities, participate in public protests, or exert accountability pressures through

informal social sanctions (Tsai, 2007). If alternative forms of accountability exist, the impact of

reelection incentives on corruption outcomes could again be marginal. To understand how elections

can aﬀect governance outcomes, such as corruption and embezzlement, it is therefore important to

look beyond electoral accountability and explore potential additional mechanisms.

                                                   2
This paper will examine three alternative channels of inﬂuence, other than electoral accountability,

through which democratic elections could have an impact on corruption outcomes. First, electoral

selection eﬀects. Do elections enable citizens to select benevolent decision makers who are intrinsi-

cally motivated to refrain from corruption? Second, social norms. Do elections inﬂuence how much

corruption or embezzlement citizens are willing to tolerate? Third, citizens’ trust in politicians.

How do elections aﬀect expectations about corruption, and what does this imply for governance

outcomes?

To shed light on these mechanisms, a ﬁeld-based behavioral experiment was carried out with 472

groups of voting-age citizens in 118 rural municipalities in Burkina Faso. The experiment was

designed to identify the impact of elections on the embezzlement of public resources, focusing on

a situation in which citizens’ ability to sanction public decision-makers is held constant by design.

There were no re-election incentives in the experiment. Instead, citizens were able to sanction

decision makers by other means, independently of whether the decision makers were elected or

not. The experiment examined a very straightforward social dilemma situation: Groups of citizens

received a budget of unknown magnitude that could be embezzled by a decision maker in their

midst. It was varied whether decision makers were elected or randomly selected. After a decision

maker was selected, it was additionally varied whether the decision maker would have private

information about the group budget, i.e. the ability to conceal embezzlement, or whether the

budget would be transparent to the group. Using this experimental setup, the paper makes three

important contributions to our understanding of the causal mechanisms through which elections

can aﬀect the embezzlement of public funds.

A ﬁrst contribution is to shed light on electoral selection eﬀects. Electoral selection eﬀects have

long been suspected to play a powerful role in preventing corrupt candidates from gaining access to

public oﬃce (Besley, 2005). Yet, empirical evidence on corruption and electoral selection is almost

completely lacking. Lierl (2014) shows that village elections can be eﬀective at identfying benev-

olent leaders who are intrinsically more motivated to refrain from embezzlement than externally

appointed village leaders or ordinary village residents. However, villages are high-information envi-

ronments, where voters frequently interact with candidates in everyday life. This paper examines

                                                 3
electoral selection eﬀects in a low-information environment, in which voters have only limited op-

portunities to learn about candidates’ true character and intentions. It is shown that competitive

elections can favor benevolent candidates even if voters and candidates are mutual strangers and

are given only ten minutes of face-to-face communication in a group setting.

A second contribution is to test whether elections reduce citizens’ tolerance for embezzlement. This

speaks to the larger question of whether a formal institution like elections can inﬂuence informal

social norms and voluntary norm enforcement behavior. Prior research has examined the impact

of elections on voluntary compliance with authorities (Baldassarri and Grossman, 2011; Grossman

and Baldassarri, 2012) and collective action (Baldwin and Mvukiyehe, 2015). This paper proposes

that elections might additionally change the social norms by which decision makers are evaluated,

as well as citizens’ willingness to enforce such norms. Consistent with either mechanism, the

experiment reveals that elected decision makers are punished more severely for embezzlement than

non-elected decision makers, even after correcting for endogenous electoral selection eﬀects and

adaptive behavior on the part of decision makers.

A third contribution is to examine the impact of elections on citizens’ trust in public decision makers.

It is shown that elections caused citizens to underestimate the embezzlement of public funds.

By contrast, if decision makers were randomly selected, citizens’ expectations are unbiased. The

practical implications of this ﬁnding are troubling. As Gottlieb (2016) shows in a ﬁeld experiment

in rural Mali, citizens are, in fact, biased towards being too trusting towards local decision makers.

This paper complements Gottlieb (2016), by suggesting that biased perceptions of governance

quality can actually be caused or aggravated by the fact that decision makers are elected.

Taken together, the ﬁndings of this study have important theoretical implications: They suggest

that democratic elections have the potential to reduce the embezzlement of public resources, even

if they do not increase citizens’ ability to sanction public decision makers. However, the ﬁndings

also highlight that access to information plays an important enabling role. Information neutralizes

citizens’ tendency to be overly trusting towards elected decision makers. If citizens lack access to

information, their trust can be exploited by self-interested decision makers, which diminishes the



                                                   4
otherwise beneﬁcial eﬀects of elections.

On a methodological level, the study is innovative in several respects. It is one of the largest

behavioral experiments in political economy that has been carried out directly in the population

of interest. From the population of 118 rural municipalities in Burkina Faso, stratiﬁed by village,

2,360 study participants were sampled at random. The research objectives, as well as the analytical

approach, were pre-speciﬁed in a detailed analysis plan. The experiment used innovative techniques

to minimize interviewer eﬀects and to preserve procedural rigor and conﬁdentiality while making a

complex group decision exercise accessible to illiterate populations. This included intuitive touch

screen interfaces to record decisions and synchronized video instructions in nine vernacular lan-

guages, integrated into a tablet application that controlled and monitored the actions of human

facilitators. As a result, the experiment achieved a level of data quality and replicability that

is on par with laboratory studies, while studying a decision situation that involved face-to-face

interaction between study participants in a challenging ﬁeld setting.

The paper proceeds as follows. Section two contrasts elections with other methods of delegating

democratic authority. Section three explains the case selection and context of this research. Section

four describes the experimental design and procedures. Section ﬁve presents the aggregate eﬀects

of elections and transparency on the embezzlement of group resources, followed by a discussion

of the underlying causal mechanisms. Section six discusses the construct validity, theoretical gen-

eralizability and external validity of the experiment. Section seven discusses the implications for

the role of information in electoral democracy. Section eight concludes by summarizing the central

ﬁndings.



Elections and Alternatives

There are several diﬀerent ways in which democratic authority can be delegated to individual deci-

sion makers: through competitive elections, through bureaucratic appointments, by consensus, or

by randomly selecting a decision maker (also known as sortition). The need to choose between al-



                                                 5
ternative methods of identifying public decision makers arises in many domains of society, including

government. For instance, decentralization reforms frequently create new democratic institutions

at the local level, such as municipal councils, mayors, management committees, etc. Whenever

new institutions are created, it is a ﬁrst-order concern to ensure that they serve the collective

interests of their constituents, rather than becoming vehicles for rent extraction (Myerson, 2015).

Similar institutional design questions arise outside of government, for example in community de-

velopment programs (where a major concern is the capture of projects by local elites (Mansuri

and Rao, 2013)), in membership-based organizations (e.g. associations, cooperatives (Grossman,

2014), or user groups), and in corporate governance. In each of these cases, the need to minimize

opportunities for embezzlement or rent extraction is a universal concern.

A small but growing number of rigorous experimental and observational studies have begun to

systematically compare democratic elections to other types of political institutions, including tra-

ditional authorities (Baldwin and Mvukiyehe, 2015; Beath et al., 2014), single-party rule (Martinez-

Bravo et al., 2014), direct democracy (Olken, 2010), and bureaucratic appointments (Alatas et al.,

2013; Lierl, 2014). Of these, Alatas et al. (2013); Beath et al. (2014) and Lierl (2014) directly focus

on the embezzlement of public resources. Alatas et al. (2013) ﬁnd no diﬀerence in embezzlement

outcomes between elected and appointed village leaders in Indonesia. Lierl (2014) ﬁnds that elected

village leaders in Tanzania are more benevolent than appointed village leaders with regard to their

social preferences, but that embezzlement outcomes become indistinguishable once social and repu-

tational incentives are taken into consideration. Beath et al. (2014) ﬁnd that the existence of elected

village councils alongside traditional authorities in Afghanistan increased embezzlement overall, but

reduced embezzlement if the councils were given exclusive decision authority. These ambiguous re-

sults suggest that the impact of democratic elections on embezzlement is context-dependent, which

shifts the focus towards understanding the underlying causal mechanisms.

In this paper, elected decision makers will be compared to randomly selected decision makers,

which is a particularly useful comparison case to illuminate the causal mechanisms by which elec-

tions can aﬀect embezzlement outcomes. First, random selection is a benchmark against which

electoral selection eﬀects can be quantiﬁed. In suﬃciently large numbers, randomly selected de-

                                                  6
cision makers statistically represent the constituent population. In other words, the behavior of

randomly selected decision makers reveals how ordinary citizens would act if they were put in a

position of responsibility. Randomly selected decision makers or policies have therefore become a

standard reference point in the nascent literature on the behavioral eﬀects of elections (Baldassarri

                                                                                         o et al.,
and Grossman, 2011; Grossman and Baldassarri, 2012; Corazzini et al., 2014) and voting (B´

2010).

Second, random selection of decision makers is a practical alternative to elections, if a political

system is at risk of being captured by powerful individuals for their personal advantage. In fact,

societies that selected their leaders at random largely did so with the explicit objective of leveling

the political playing ﬁeld (Carson and Martin, 1999; Frey and Steiner, 2014). In medieval Italian

city states, the random selection of political leaders ensured the frequent rotation of power be-

tween rivaling families. When several Swiss towns began to select their mayors at random in the

17th century, they did so to ensure that nobody would gain disproportionately from holding oﬃce

(Carson and Martin, 1999, 22). Even in recent years, policy makers have experimented with the

random selection of decision makers, for example to prevent local development grants from being

captured by village chiefs in Sierra Leone (Voors et al., 2017).

Third, a comparison between elections and random selection is appealing, because both institutions

are similarly egalitarian, which distinguishes them from any other method of delegating democratic

authority (Table 1). Random selection gives every eligible constituent an equal chance at obtaining

a position of responsibility, whereas elections give every eligible voter an equal say in the selection

process. Bureaucratic appointments, by contrast, involve exclusionary selection criteria. Selection

by consensus, while being inclusive of the constituent population, privileges inﬂuential constituents

or coalitions via their disproportionate bargaining power. To the extent that procedural egali-

tarianism matters for the perceived fairness of a political institutions, both elections and random

selection might rank highly on procedural fairness, since both are founded on egalitarian premises.

This assumption will be veriﬁed directly.




                                                  7
                                            Competitive       Participatory   Egalitarian

              Election

              Selection by consensus

              Bureaucratic appointment

              Random selection

Table 1. Ideal-typical methods of delegating democratic authority. Elections diﬀer from random

selection in that they allow for competition between candidates and collective participation in the

delegation of authority. Both aspects are also relevant in comparing elections to other democratic

and non-democratic methods of assigning authority.

While elections and random selection are similar on procedural egalitarianism, they diﬀer in two

important respects: Elections are participatory and competitive, whereas random selection leaves

citizens passive and does not give them a choice. As far as embezzlement outcomes are concerned,

this means that any impact of elections, relative to random selection, is most likely a consequence of

political competition or of political participation, rather than of concerns about procedural equality.

There are several ways in which embezzlement outcomes could be inﬂuenced through the electoral

competition mechanism. First, through reelection incentives, which can create accountability pres-

sures on public decision makers (Ferraz and Finan, 2011). Second, competition causes candidates

to make campaign promises, which might continue to inﬂuence their behavior through a moral

commitment or lying aversion mechanism (Corazzini et al., 2014). Third, competition leads to

electoral selection eﬀects, as a result of which the social preferences of elected decision makers dif-

fer from those of the general population (Lierl, 2014). In this study, the previously studied eﬀects

of reelection incentives and campaign promises are eliminated by design, which makes it possible

to directly study the impact of electoral selection eﬀects.

The participatory nature of elections could also have important consequences for embezzlement

outcomes. Elections require citizens to collectively express their consent to the delegation of au-

thority. Electoral participation thus establishes an implicit social contract between citizens and

elected decision makers. Such a social contract could make norms of trusteeship salient. Since


                                                  8
the embezzlement of public funds is a particularly blatant violation of the principle of trusteeship,

elected decision makers who embezzle public funds might encounter diﬀerent reactions from citizens

than randomly selected or bureaucratically appointed decision makers.

Finally, both the anticipation of electoral selection eﬀects and the social norms that are attached to

electoral delegation could interact to shape citizens’ trust in public decision makers. Citizens may

expect diﬀerent levels of embezzlement from elected decision makers than from randomly appointed

decision makers. As long as citizens’ expectations are empirically correct, they should have no

bearing on the behavior of decision makers. However, if elections cause citizens to systematically

underestimate the willingness of decision makers to embezzle public funds, self-seeking decision

makers could exploit their trust. Transparency may be necessary to correct such perceptive biases.

By examining each of these potential channels of inﬂuence in detail, this paper aims to provide

scholars, policy makers and citizens with a better understanding of the mechanisms through which

elections can actually contribute to reducing rent extraction by public decision makers.



Case, Context, and Study Population

In recent years, Burkina Faso has undergone several changes in local-level political institutions.

In the context of decentralization reform, nationwide local elections were introduced in 2006 and

subsequent elections were held in 2012. Following the popular uprising in 2014, all elected local

governments were dismissed and replaced by centrally appointed special delegations. A majority of

citizens in the rural areas welcomed their dismissal, given that the previous municipal governments

were elected during a period of single-party dominance and were widely perceived as corrupt and

prone to embezzlement. In principle, however, most citizens continued to prefer elections over

central appointments and other forms of selecting local decision makers. In May 2016, local elections

were held to replace the centrally appointed special delegations. The current national government

is again considering a revision of the local government code.

In debates on political decentralization in Burkina Faso, it is not uncommon for policy makers


                                                  9
to question citizens’ ability to make eﬃcient electoral choices at the local level, especially in the

rural areas. Voters in rural Burkina Faso overwhelmingly live in poverty. The vast majority have

been excluded from educational opportunities. Literacy rates are low, with only 16.3 percent of the

study population having ever attended school. Without widespread literacy and formal education,

and often even without electricity and cell phone coverage, word-of-mouth and radio are by far

the most important sources of political information at the local level. However, the presence of

municipal-level politics in public discussion falls far behind national-level politics.

In such a low-information and educationally disadvantaged environment, are democratic elections

an eﬃcient way of selecting public decision makers? Are voters able to identify benevolent candi-

dates? How do elections inﬂuence citizens’ expectations towards and evaluation of public decision

makers? How willing are citizens to sanction embezzlement by local decision makers, and does this

depend on whether they are elected or not? To improve the evidence base on these questions, this

study was carried out with voting-age citizens in rural Burkina Faso between June and July 2015,

prior to the transitional municipal elections of 2016.

The study participants are a stratiﬁed random sample of the population of all 118 rural municipal-

ities that are located within six of Burkina Faso’s 13 regions: Cascades, Centre-Est, Centre-Nord,

Centre-Sud, Plateau Central, and Sahel (Figure 1). Within each municipality, ten villages were

sampled at random. In municipalities with fewer than ten villages, all villages were included. Per

village, two voting-age adults were invited to take part in the study. The invited study partici-

pants were sampled at random (with equal inclusion probabilities) from a census of the voting-age

population in each village (census lists of residents between 18 and 70 years of age in 2014).

The 2,360 study participants provide a typical picture of the voting-age population in the rural areas

of Burkina Faso. Only 16.3 percent of study participants report ever attending school (weighted

population estimate for the six study regions: 17.8 percent).1 Among those who attended school,

the mean level of schooling is 5.4 years. Median age among study participants is 36 years (population

estimate: 36 years) and 53.5 percent of study participants are female (population estimate: 52.1
  1
      Another 11.2 percent report to have attended coranic school (population: 11.6 percent).




                                                         10
percent). 11.0 percent report to have ever held a position of responsibility in their community

(population estimate: 9.2 percent) and 62.7 percent report to have voted in the 2012 municipal

elections (population estimate: 60.1).




                                                                         STUDY COVERAGE
                                                                             Not included
                                                                             Sampling area



                                                                             Study site




Figure 1. Study sites and sampling areas.



Experimental design

In the experiment, groups of ﬁve citizens, each from diﬀerent villages in a municipality, were

confronted with a simple decision situation with real stakes: An unknown amount of money was

allocated to the group and a decision maker within the group could potentially embezzle these group

funds for personal gain. It was varied experimentally whether the groups elected their decision

maker, or whether the decision maker was appointed at random. Independently, and only after the

decision maker selection had been selected, it was also randomized whether the decision maker had

private information about the amount of money that was to be distributed (no transparency) or

whether this amount was public knowlegde within the group (transparency). Ex-ante, the chance

of the decision maker having private information was 50 percent. The election and transparency

treatments were assigned at the group level, in a 2 × 2 factorial design. Treatment assignment was


                                                11
blocked by municipality, with four groups in each of 118 municipalities, resulting in a total of 472

groups in the experiment. Of the 472 groups, the experiment was successfully implemented in 471

groups.



Decision Situation

The experimental protocol consisted of the following steps:

  1. Baseline decisions: Prior to the experiment, all study participants submitted a proposal on

        how to split 5,000 CFA Francs2 between themselves and the group. The fraction allocated

        to the group would be shared equally among all group members, including the proposer, so

        that the most equitable choice was to allocate the entire amount to the group. One proposal

        per group would be selected at random and implemented. Through this baseline decision,

        study participants were familiarized with the decision situation and their individual allocation

        preferences were recorded. The results of the baseline decisions were not announced until the

        end of the meeting, to ensure that the actual experiment was not aﬀected by income eﬀects

        or information spillovers from the baseline stage.

  2. Cheap talk/communication: The groups were informed that in the next stage, a substantially

        larger amount of money would be provided to the group. This time, only one group member

        would be able to decide over the group money, but the other group members would have

        the ability to reward or punish the decision maker at a cost to themselves. The groups were

        given ten minutes to freely discuss (without intervention by the facilitator) who would be the

        best person to make the allocation decision and how the money should be split between the

        group and its decision maker. This cheap talk phase gave study participants the opportunity

        to make inferences about other candidates’ preferences through verbal and nonverbal cues.

        The communication took place prior to revealing the procedure by which the decision maker

        would actually be selected, so that the content of the communication itself was unaﬀected by

        the elections treatment.
  2
      Approximately 10 USD at the time of the study.



                                                       12
3. Announcing the selection method: It was announced to the group how the decision maker

  was going to be selected (elected by the group or appointed at random). Furthermore, it was

  announced that there would be an equal chance that the available amount of group money

  would either be private information of the decision maker, or revealed to all group members.

4. Selection of the decision maker: Depending on the treatment condition, the decision maker

  was elected or randomly selected. In the election condition, all group members used a touch

  screen secret ballot (Figure A-1) to cast votes for two diﬀerent candidates out of the ﬁve

  group members. By asking group members to vote for two candidates in the ﬁrst round, it

  was avoided that all group members just voted for themselves. Runoﬀ elections were held

  with the candidates ranked ﬁrst and second. If candidates tied in the ﬁrst round, there

  could be more than two runoﬀ candidates and subsequent runoﬀ elections were held until one

  candidate won an absolute majority. In the runoﬀ elections, group members cast one vote.

  The candidate who won an absolute majority became the decision maker. In the random

  selection condition, the decision maker was selected with equal probabilities among the ﬁve

  group members.

5. Announcing the transparency/no-transparency condition: All group members were informed

  whether the decision maker would have private information about the size of the pie (the

  amount of money to be shared within the group), or if this would be public information

  within the group. The actual amount of group money was not revealed yet, it was merely

  announced whether the amount would be revealed after the allocation decision had been

  made. If the amount of group money remained private information of the decision maker

  (the no-transparency condition), the other group members could not ﬁnd out how much the

  decision maker had embezzled. If the total amount of group money was to be revealed to the

  other group members (the transparency condition), they would be able to ﬁnd out how much

  the decision maker had embezzled.

6. Allocation decision: On a touchscreen and in privacy, the decision maker allocated banknotes

  worth 10,000 Francs (approx. 20 USD) between two stacks (Figure 2). One stack was to be



                                            13
  split equally among all ﬁve members of the group, including the decision maker. The other

  stack was to be captured by the decision maker and not shared with anyone else. Again, the

  most equitable choice was to allocate the entire budget to the group stack, in which case the

  decision maker received an equal share in the group fund. By allocating any part of the group

  ﬁnd to the personal stack, the decision maker could enrich her-/himself at the expense of the

  other group members.

7. Announcing the allocation outcome: At the time of the allocation decision, the total group

  budget was known only to the decision maker. Once the allocation was made, it was an-

  nounced to the other group members how much money the decision maker had allocated to

  the group. In the public information condition, it was additionally announced how much

  money the decision maker had kept for her-/himself.

8. Costly sanctioning opportunity: After learning how much money was allocated to them by the

  decision maker (and, in the public information condition, how much money the decision maker

  had embezzled), the other four group members were given the opportunity to reward or punish

  the decision maker at a cost to themselves. For this purpose, every group member received a

  budget of 1,000 Francs. This sanctioning budget did not have to be fully expended, and the

  group members were the residual claimants. To reward the decision maker, group members

  could anonymously send money to her/him. To punish the decision maker, group members

  could anonymously pay to have money deducted from the decision maker’s payoﬀ. For every

  300 Francs that were to be deducted from the decision maker’s payoﬀ, group members had

  to pay 100 Francs.




                                            14
Figure 2.   Touch screen interface to record the embezzlement decision. All goup members were

identiﬁed by lanyard badges in diﬀerent colors. Decision makers divided the group fund between

the group (represented by the badge symbols of all ﬁve group members including their own) and

themselves (represented by only their own badge symbol). Decision makers could freely move the

1,000 FCFA and 500 FCFA notes between the two ﬁelds on the touch screen. Once all banknotes

were allocated, decision makers conﬁrmed their choice by touching a ﬁngerprint symbol.


Field Procedures

The sampled study participants were randomly assigned into groups and invited to a central meeting

point. To replace no-shows, additional backup participants were sampled from each of the villages

                                               15
and also invited to the study site. If necessary, the backup participants would substitute for

missing study participants from their village, following a precisely speciﬁed replacement protocol.

The groups for the experiment were formed by randomly dividing the 20 study participants in a

municipality into four groups of ﬁve individuals, subject to the constraint that the ﬁve members of

a group had to be from diﬀerent villages in the municipality. The groups were strictly separated

to prevent information spillovers.

Prior to the decision exercise, all study participants completed a baseline survey. The baseline

survey gathered information about local governance quality in the municipality and citizens’ ex-

periences with municipal authorities, as well as data on individual-level characteristics, such as

age, education, occupation, household size, leadership experience, electoral participation in the last

elections, and their trust in the municipal administration.

Following the baseline survey, the baseline decision exercise and the actual experiment were carried

out under the supervision of two facilitators. Study participants were not allowed to communicate

during the exercise, except when they were asked to. To minimize facilitator eﬀects, the instruc-

tions for the decision exercise were video recorded, dubbed in nine vernacular languages, and played

back to the study participants in their respective language. The sequencing of instructions, compre-

hension checks and decisions was programmed into a tablet computer application that forced the

facilitators to abide by the exact same procedures in every group. The tablet app simultaneously

collected background data through which the facilitators’ performance could be monitored.

The video instructions were divided into multiple logical blocks. Each video block was followed by

a set of comprehension checks. If a study participant in the group did not pass a comprehension

check, the video block was re-played to the entire group until all participants had understood

the instructions. Voting and allocation decisions were made on speciﬁcally designed touch screen

interfaces. The video instructions included demonstrations of the tablet interface. Additionally, a

practice tablet was passed around so that study participants could familiarize themselves with the

interface. Pilot tests conﬁrmed that the touch screen ballots and allocation interfaces were easily

understood, especially by illiterate study participants.



                                                 16
The automated sequencing of instruction blocks also ensured that facilitators themselves did not

know the treatment condition a group was assigned to, until the moment when they actually

had to announce the selection method and the transparency/no-transparency to the group. This

guarantees that the baseline decisions and the cheap talk/communication stage were unaﬀected by

the facilitators’ knowledge of the treatment condition.

Outcome data were collected at various stages of the decision exercise. They included (1) study

participants’ expectations about the amount embezzled by the decision maker, (2) the decision

maker’s allocation decision, (3) the amounts spent on rewarding or punishing the decision maker,

and (4) an endline question about the perceived fairness of the procedure by which the decision

maker was selected.



Data Analysis and Research Transparency

The experimental design, along with a detailed explanation of the research design choices and the

trade-oﬀs involved were documented in a pre-analysis plan.3 The pre-analysis plan organized the

research questions hierarchically into primary outcomes and analyses related to the underlying

causal mechanisms. The analysis plan also included the program code for a ﬁrst pass of data

analysis. This paper closely follows the pre-analysis plan, summarizing and interpreting the insights

gained from these pre-speciﬁed analyses and scrutinizing the results through additional tests.

In this paper, both unweighted and population-weighted analyses of the experimental data are

presented. Due to the sampling procedure, individuals from regions with fewer municipalities,

municipalities with fewer villages, and villages with fewer voting-age residents were relatively more

likely to be included. Therefore, analyses at the level of individual group members were weighted

by the inverse of each study participants’ probability of being included into the sample.

Population inferences at the level of decision makers are more diﬃcult to accomplish, given that the

election outcomes may depend on the group composition, which in turn depended on individual
  3
    The pre-analysis plan was ﬁnalized prior to accessing any data from the experiment and posted to the EGAP
design registry. An anonymized version is available at http://bit.ly/2mRxl3F.




                                                     17
group members’ inclusion probabilities. To address this challenge, observations from individual

decision makers were weighted by the simulated likelihood that they would have been elected if the

experiment had been carried out with self-weighted sample of the population of each municipality.

To simulate voting outcomes in a self-weighted population sample, weighted bootstrap samples

were drawn from each group (using the group members’ sampling weights) and the entire election

process was simulated for each bootstrap iteration via their recorded vote choices in the ﬁrst round

and runoﬀ elections. For comparability, the weights for randomly selected decision makers were

obtained analogously, simulating random selection instead of elections. Thus, an individual decision

maker’s weight can be interpreted as the estimated proportion of decision makers represented by this

individual, if the experiment had been carried out inﬁnitely many times on self-weighted samples

of the respective municipality’s voting-age population.



Results

The experiment illuminates three causal pathways through which democratic elections can reduce

the embezzlement of group funds, even if there are no re-election incentives, i.e. even if elections

do not increase group members’ ability to sanction the decision maker. First, electoral selection

eﬀects. Second, changes in the group members’ willingness to punish the embezzlement of group

funds. Third, changes in group members’ trust towards the decision maker.4 Before presenting

mechanism-speciﬁc results, the aggregate eﬀects of the elections and transparency treatments will

be analyzed.

Overall, elections reduced the embezzlement of group resources in the symmetric information (trans-

parency) condition of the experiment, but their eﬀect remained ambiguous under asymmetric in-

formation. In the absence of transparency, elections reduced average embezzlement by 0.1 standard
   4
    There are several additional potential mechanisms through which the overall eﬀects of elections and transparency
on embezzlement could have been mediated: For example, the experience of having been elected could have made
decision makers intrinsically less selﬁsh, caused them to reciprocate the support of their constituents, or increased
their sensitivity to social observability, independently of actual diﬀerences in their constituents’ sanctioning behavior.
While these additional mechanisms remain speculative, they should be considered in interpreting the overall impact
of the experimental treatments. However, they have no bearing on the mechanism-speciﬁc results in this paper.




                                                           18
deviations (s.e. 0.13, unweighted) and by 0.23 standard deviations (s.e. 0.13, unweighted) if em-

bezzlement was transparent. The null hypothesis of no reduction in embezzlement was rejected

only in the transparency condition (p = 0.032 unweighted, p = 0.005 weighted). Figure 3 visualizes

the distribution of embezzlement outcomes by treatment condition. Table A-1 presents average

treatment eﬀect estimates with and without adjustment for group-level covariates.

The interaction eﬀect of the election and transparency treatments is negative, but statistically

indistinguishable from zero. Thus, elections and transparency appear more likely to be complements

in reducing embezzlement, rather than substitutes. However, it cannot deﬁnitively be ruled out that

elections have similar eﬀects under symmetric and asymmetric information. A more disaggregated

analysis of the underlying causal mechanisms can help us understand in what ways elections and

transparency actually interact.




                                                19
Panel A. Unweighted Results




Panel B. Extrapolation to Self-Weighted Population Sample




Figure 3.     Distribution of embezzlement decisions by experimental condition (kernel density

estimates, n=471). Top row: unweighted results. Bottom row: extrapolation to self-weighted

population samples, based on the simulated likelihood of being selected as decision maker.
                                               20
Electoral Selection Eﬀects

To estimate the extent of electoral selection eﬀects, the baseline embezzlement preferences of elected

decision makers are compared to those of individuals in the random selection condition. The baseline

decisions can unambiguously be attributed to individuals’ preferences to refrain from embezzlement,

rather than to incentives resulting from the other group members’ anticipated reactions, because

the baseline decision situation was fully anonymous and did not include a sanctioning stage.

Compared to individuals in the random selection condition, election winners were more benevolent

at baseline (p = 0.026, Mann-Whitney U test; see also Fig. A-1 for a comparison of winning

and losing candidates). Moreover, candidates who are more benevolent commanded greater vote

shares (Table 2). This relationship is even more pronounced if ballot order eﬀects are controlled

for. Thus, the results suggest that benevolent candidates have an electoral advantage, even in a

low-information environment. The social preferences of elected decision makers diﬀer from those

of randomly selected decision makers and therefore from those of the general population.

Voters’ ability to elect benevolent candidates could be a consequence of their social intelligence,

or of statistical discrimination. Subtle verbal or nonverbal cues in the candidates’ communication

might enable voters to draw inferences about a the candidates’ social preferences. Alternatively,

voters might intentionally or unintentionally prefer certain observable candidate characteristics

that correlate with benevolent social preferences, such as gender or age. Identifying the heuristics

that enable voters to select benevolent candidates in low-information settings remains an open

question for future research. In this study, it remains observationally equivalent whether voters

discriminated on their beliefs about candidates’ benevolence, or based on other characteristics that

are correlated with benevolence.5 The data do reveal, however, a substantial correlation between

citizens’ expectations and decision makers’ actual embezzlement behavior (r = 0.51). This suggests

that citizens are able to predict benevolence at least to some extent (see Table A-5).
   5
    A third possibility is that altruistic voters may have deliberately favored individuals whom they consider most
deserving of a greater payoﬀ – for example a visibly poor group member – and may have been willing to tolerate
embezzlement by that person out of directed altruism. If this happens in the experiment, but no in natural settings,
the study would be underestimating voters’ ability to elect public-spirited decision makers.




                                                        21
                                                                        DV: Vote Share (First Round)

                                                                  population-weighted                       unweighted
                                                                    (1)       (2)                         (3)       (4)
 OLS coeﬃcients

 Fraction embezzled (baseline)                                     -0.046         -0.051∗               -0.041     -0.047∗
                                                                  (0.028)         (0.028)              (0.025)     (0.025)

 Distance from optimal ballot position6                                          -0.031∗∗∗                        -0.041∗∗∗
                                                                                  (0.011)                         (0.0093)

 Constant                                                         0.42∗∗∗         0.47∗∗∗              0.42∗∗∗     0.48∗∗∗
                                                                  (0.012)         (0.020)              (0.011)     (0.018)
 Groups                                                             236             236                  236         236
 Observations                                                      1180            1180                 1180        1180
   Standard errors in parentheses, adjusted for clustering by group. ∗ p < 0.1   ∗∗
                                                                                      p < 0.05   ∗∗∗
                                                                                                       p < 0.01 (two-sided)


Table 2. A greater willingness to embezzle group resources is associated with a lower vote share.

Columns (1) and (2): Vote shares are population-weighted. Columns (3) and (4): Unweighted data,

overrepresenting voters from low-population areas.



Citizens’ Willingness to Sanction Embezzlement

In all four experimental conditions, study participants were willing to sanction the embezzlement

of group funds at a cost to themselves, even though they had no instrumental reason for doing so.

This behavior is consistent with evidence from ultimatum games and other allocative dilemmas,

where individuals willingly forgo own payoﬀs in order to prevent others from receiving a greater,

                                                                                      opez-P´
unequal payoﬀ (e.g. Henrich et al., 2004; Fehr and Fischbacher, 2004; Leibbrandt and L´     erez,

2012). Of the study participants, 63.3 percent in the transparency condition and 63.7 percent

of study participants in the private information condition spent money to reward or punish the

decision maker. Study participants who rewarded or punished the decision maker spent on average

20.3 percent of their sanctioning budget. High levels of embezzlement by the decision maker
   6
     Due to a recording error, information on ballot order is missing for 20 groups containing 100 individuals. Since
ballot order was randomized at the group level, distance from the optimal ballot position has been imputed at mean
for those groups.



                                                         22
typically attracted punishments, while very low levels of embezzlement and complete abstinence

from embezzlement tended to be rewarded.

To understand the causal impact of elections on citizens’ willingness to sanction embezzlement, the

main object of interest is the functional relationship between embezzlement decisions and expected

sanctioning outcomes, denoted by g (X, E ), where X is the fraction of group resources embezzled

and E is an indicator of the elections treatment. Since embezzlement decisions X are post-treatment

outcomes, the observed relationship between embezzlement decisions and sanctioning outcomes will

be confounded by adaptive behavior on the part of the decision maker. If the decision maker strate-

gically anticipates the sanctioning behavior of the other group members, embezzlement choices will

be endogenous. To address this endogeneity concern, the post-treatment embezzlement decisions

X are instrumented by the decision maker’s baseline embezzlement preferences B , using a nonpara-

metric instrumental regression model that is additively separable in the inﬂuence of unobservables

(Horowitz, 2011).


                                 S = g (X, E ) + U

                                 E[U |B = b, E = e] = 0 for all b, e


This model choice has the advantage that it does not impose functional form assumptions on

the sanctioning function g (X, E ), since sanctioning behavior could be non-linear in the extent of

embezzlement. Estimates of the ﬁrst-stage relationships conﬁrm that the decision maker’s baseline

embezzlement preferences are a strong instrument for both actual and suspected embezzlement

(Table A-4).

Figure 4 presents nonparametric estimates of g (X, E ) in the transparency and private information

conditions. If embezzlement is transparent, elected decision makers face more severe punishments

than randomly appointed decision makers for the most common levels of embezzlement (greater

than zero and up to about two-thirds of the endowment). At very high levels of embezzlement, it

appears that the sanctioning function for elected decision makers is non-monotonic and punishments

decrease again. However, these values of the sanctioning function are of little substantive relevance,


                                                 23
since 86 percent of elected decision makers preferred to embezzle less than two-thirds of the group

fund at baseline. Most likely, the non-monotonicity of the sanctioning function at high levels of

embezzlement is driven by outliers. There are very few data points at high levels of embezzlement.

Additionally, no such pattern exists in the private information condition, where high embezzlement

rates are almost as obvious as in the transparency condition, because the group members receive

only a minimal payoﬀ or no payoﬀ at all.

In the private information condition, sanctioning behavior is estimated both as a function of sus-

pected embezzlement and as a function of actual embezzlement. Relative to the average suspected

embezzlement in the group, elected decision makers are punished more severely for moderate to

high embezzlement than non-elected decision makers. Among decision makers who are believed

not to have embezzled anything, elected decision makers are rewarded more generously than non-

elected decision makers (Column 3 of Figure 4). As a function of actual embezzlement, sanctioning

behavior no longer diﬀers signiﬁcantly between elected and randomly appointed decision makers,

except at very high levels of embezzlement. The reason may be that high levels of embezzlement

are increasingly obvious to the other group members, because the group fund was known to be

greater than 5,000 Francs. If the decision maker left less than 5,000 Francs to the group, it was

obvious that she or he must have embezzled at least some the group money. Thus, while citizens

are more willing to punish elected decision makers if they suspect that they engaged in substantial

embezzlement, this may not translate into greater sanctions as a function of actual embezzlement,

because citizens’ expectation formation may be inﬂuenced by elections as well.

If elections cause citizens to underestimate how much embezzlement has taken place, their greater

willingness to sanction elected decision makers might not translate in greater actual punishments

for a given level of embezzlement. Citizens’ expectations of how much the decision maker actually

embezzled are illustrated in the bottom row of Figure 4, suggesting that this could be true. To

test more directly whether elections bias citizens’ expectations, the next step is to estimate how

elections and transparency shape citizens’ expectations about embezzlement.




                                                24
                                            TRANSPARENCY                                                       PRIVATE INFORMATION                                               PRIVATE INFORMATION
                                        (ACTUAL EMBEZZLEMENT)                                                (ACTUAL EMBEZZLEMENT)                                            (SUSPECTED EMBEZZLEMENT)


                          2500                                                                 2500                                                                 2500




                             0                                                                    0                                                                      0




      Sanctions g(X,E)
                                                                           Sanctions g(X,E)
                                                                                                                                                Sanctions g(X,E)
                         −2500                                                                −2500                                                                −2500




                         −5000                                                                −5000                                                                −5000
                                 0.00      0.25     0.50     0.75   1.00                              0.00      0.25     0.50     0.75   1.00                                0.00        0.25    0.50     0.75        1.00
                                           Fraction Embezzled (X)                                               Fraction Embezzled (X)                                              Avg. Suspected Embezzlement (X)




                           1.5




25
                                                                                                1.5
                                                                                                                                                                     2

                           1.0                                                                  1.0




      Density
                                                                           Density
                                                                                                                                                Density




                                                                                                                                                                     1
                           0.5                                                                  0.5


                           0.0                                                                  0.0                                                                  0
                                 0.00      0.25     0.50     0.75   1.00                              0.00      0.25     0.50     0.75   1.00                            0.00           0.25     0.50     0.75        1.00
                                           Fraction embezzled (X)                                               Fraction embezzled (X)                                          Avg. Suspected Embezzlement (X)


     Figure 4.                           Combined rewards and punishments as a function of actual or suspected embezzlement. Top row: Nonparametric

     instrumental variable estimates of the sanctioning function, estimated via cubic B-splines, using Landweber-Fridman regularization

     (Racine and Nie, 2014). Embezzlement choices are instrumented by baseline embezzlement preferences. Bottom row: Distribution

     of embezzlement outcomes (kernel density estimates). The green solid lines represent elected decision makers, the red dashed lines

     represent randomly appointed decision makers.
Trust in the Decision Maker

In line with the previous argument, elections increased group members’ trust in their decision

maker, which is measured by their stated expectations of how much embezzlement has taken place.

As evident in Figure 5, citizens’ expectations in the absence of elections and transparency are

unbiased. Both elections and transparency increased citizens’ trust in the decision maker, but

more so than they actually decreased embezzlement.

In the private information condition, average suspected embezzlement was 0.37 SD lower (s.e. 0.11)

for elected decision makers than for randomly selection decision makers (Figure 5 and Table A-2).

Transparency, by contrast, reduced suspected embezzlement only in the random selection condition

(by an estimated 0.25 SD, s.e. 0.11), but not in the election condition (zero eﬀect, s.e. 0.15 SD).

In other words, the fact that a decision maker has been elected has a greater eﬀect on trust than

actual accountability. It is possible that citizens assume elected decision makers to be intrinsically

motivated to refrain from embezzlement, whereas their trust in randomly selected decision makers

can still be increased by transparency.

The actual behavior of elected decision makers does not justify the trust citizens place in them.

Table 3 uses the diﬀerence between expected and actual embezzlement as a metric of bias in study

participants’ expectations about embezzlement. Comparing this diﬀerence across experimental

conditions, it is evident that elections caused citizens to trust decision makers more than they

should be trusted.




                                                 26
                                                          Actual embezzlement   Suspected embezzlement


                                   0.4
       Fraction Embezzled (Mean)



                                   0.3



                                   0.2



                                   0.1



                                   0.0
                                            RANDOM/             RANDOM/          ELECTIONS/       ELECTIONS/
                                           PRIVATE INFO      TRANSPARENCY       PRIVATE INFO    TRANSPARENCY



Figure 5. Citizens underestimate embezzlement by elected decision makers. The bars represent,

by treatment condition, unweighted means (with 95% CI) of actual and suspected embezzlement.

                                         DV: Diﬀerence between the expected and the actual fraction embezzled

                                                             Population-weighted               Unweighted
                                                                     (1)                          (2)

                Intercept                                           0.0023                       0.0041
                                                                    (0.015)                      (0.019)
                Elections                                          -0.055∗∗                     -0.063∗∗
                                                                    (0.023)                      (0.026)
                Transparency                                       -0.037∗∗                     -0.051∗∗
                                                                    (0.021)                      (0.025)
                Elections×Transparency                              0.059∗                      0.089∗∗
                                                                    (0.031)                      (0.035)
                Obs.                                                 1884                         1884
                Standard errors in parentheses (adjusted for clustering by group). ∗ p < 0.1,     ∗∗
                                                                                                       p < 0.05,   ∗∗∗
                                                                                                                         p < 0.01.

Table 3. Elections and transparency bias citizens’ expectations. The table shows OLS coeﬃcents,

the dependent variable being the diﬀerence between suspected and actual embezzlement.




                                                                          27
Construct Validity, Generalizability, and External Validity

To what extent can we draw conclusions from the experiment about embezzlement of public funds in

natural settings? To answer this question as thoroughly as possible, it is helpful to ﬁrst examine the

construct validity of the experimental setting itself, i.e. the question whether embezzlement in the

experimental setting is a plausible model of the embezzlement of public funds in natural settings.

After establishing that the experimental decision situation suﬃciently resembles the management

of public funds in natural settings, the discussion will be extended to the theoretical generalizability

of the experimental results, as well as to the representativeness of the study population.



Construct Validity

The experiment confronted decision makers with a decision problem that diﬀered in several ways

from more natural opportunities for rent extraction by public decision makers. The embezzlement

choices in the experiment were highly stylized, in the sense that any contextual elements that did not

directly pertain to the problem of choosing between an equitable allocation of group funds and self-

interested appropriation were eliminated by design. For example, the instruction videos cautiously

avoided any type of normative framing, including any references to the normatively loaded concept

of embezzlement. Moreover, even though the experimental decision concerned a non-trivial amount

of real money, there was no speciﬁc purpose attached to the group fund, other than its equitable

distribution within the group. In reality, public funds are often raised or earmarked for a speciﬁc

purpose, and their misappropriation creates an eﬃciency loss, because a particular public good or

service is underprovided. In the experiment, embezzlement did not cause any eﬃciency loss. Its

consequences were purely distributional, while the overall size of the pie remained the same.

Yet, despite these obvious diﬀerences between the experimental setting and real-world problems

of managing public funds, study participants overwhelmingly thought of the decision situation

in those terms. At the end of the decision exercise, study participants were asked what real-life

situation the decision exercise reminded them of (Figure 6). This was an open-ended question; no



                                                  28
response options were read to the study participants. For almost two-thirds of study participants,

the experimental decision situation resembled problems of governance or public management. Of

the study participants, 39.6 percent named very pertinent situations in which public resources are

managed on behalf of a group: Management of an association, a savings group or a self-help group,

municipal or village governance, management of public services, national politics, and even decisions

over household ﬁnances. Another 16.8 percent felt reminded of national, local, or other elections,

and 5.1 percent described the situation as an instance of corruption, trusteeship, or violations of

trust more generally (e.g. “how our leaders steal from us”), without giving a speciﬁc example. Only

approximately 4 percent of the study participants thought of the decision situations in completely

diﬀerent terms.7 The remaining answers lacked speciﬁc examples, but were not inconsistent with

the purpose of the experiment.8 These minor exceptions notwithstanding, the virtual absence of

incorrect interpretations suggests that any additional framing of the decision situation would have

been unnecessary and potentially detrimental, as it could have introduced social desirability bias

or distracted from the basic logic of the decision situation.

As far as the elections treatment is concerned, construct validity is not an issue, because the

elections of decision makers in the experiment were real and not in any way stylized or simulated.

Study participants had no diﬃculties understanding the procedures and their meaning. A voting

booth and a touch screen ballot ensured that vote choices were anonymous and not observable

to the facilitators. Votes were counted automatically and vote counts were reported back to the

group, to determine the candidates for the runoﬀ stage. Thus, the elections in the experiment did

not substantively deviate from familiar procedures in natural settings, be it to elect the leader of a

community organization or the president of a country.
   7
      3.2 percent thought of it as an education or learning activity, 0.6 percent compared it to a lottery, and only three
individuals primarily described it as a research or measurement exercise.
    8
      These answers either mentioned abstract moral values (honesty, altruism, solidarity, and mutual understanding)
without describing speciﬁc real-life situations (7.3 percent) or described the decision situation in general terms (e.g.
“managing money” or “sharing money”, 2.8 percent). 4.8 percent did not feel reminded of any speciﬁc real-life
situation and 15.9 percent chose to skip the question.




                                                           29
                                                      RANDOM SELECTION                    ELECTION
             Management of an association
                       Municipal governance
                         Village governance
                  Savings−/Self−help group
            Management of public services
                              National politics
         Development/Aid/Social protection
              Managing household finances
                     Transparency in politics
            Other governance/management
                            National elections
                               Local elections
                              Other elections
                                   Corruption
         Trust/Trusteeship/Breaches of trust
               Making money/Becoming rich
    Sharing/allocation decisions (unspecific)
               Managing money (unspecific)
           Question of conscience/Honesty
                                    Solidarity
                        Altruism/compassion
                       Mutual understanding
                  Teaching/Learning Activity
                                   The future
                                       Lottery
                     Research/Measurement
                                        Other
                         Nothing/Don't know
                                 No response
                                                  0      5          10   15      0       5       10       15
                                                                           Percent

                                                        Governance/Management        Moral Values
                                                        Elections                    Incorrect Interpretations
                                                        Trusteeship/Corruption       Other/No Response
                                                        Sharing/Managing Money



Figure 6. Study participants’ interpretations of the experimental decision situation. Classiﬁcation

of responses to the open-ended question: “What situation in real life did the decision exercise remind

you of ? ” (n = 2350).



Generalizability

The parsimonious and stylized nature of the experimental setting has distinct advantages when it

comes to causal attribution and generalizability. By minimizing contextual inﬂuences, the experi-

mental setting strengthens causal attribution to the mechanisms of interest. Additionally, for each

of the three main ﬁndings, there are certain features of the experimental setting that strengthen


                                                         30
their generalizability to natural settings.



The electoral advantage of benevolent candidates


The evidence on positive electoral selection eﬀects is strengthened by the fact that it was obtained

in a low-information setting with minimal prior communication between candidates and voters. To

create a low-information environment, group members were sampled from diﬀerent villages within

a municipality and their real names were not revealed, so that voters’ choices in the experiment

were unlikely to be inﬂuenced by pre-existing social ties or knowledge of candidates’ social reputa-

tions. Communication between group members was limited to ten minutes of group conversation

immediately prior to the selection of the decision maker. This made it potentially more diﬃcult for

voters to identify benevolent candidates. Additionally, the study was carried out on an education-

ally disadvantaged population with only limited prior exposure to truly competitive democracy. If

mostly illiterate voters, socialized in a dominant-party regime, are able to elect benevolent decision

makers with minimal information, we might expect that the results generalize to settings where

voters have more information and more experience with electoral competition. Indeed, the result is

consistent with prior evidence of positive electoral selection eﬀects in village elections (Lierl, 2014),

a high-information setting where voters interact with candidates in everyday life and know their

social reputations.

In future research, it will be important to investigate whether the electoral advantage of benevolent

candidates extends to situations that involve professional politicians. While higher-level elections,

such as municipal or national elections, are typically low-information environments (given that there

is only limited and superﬁcial interaction between voters and candidates), professional politicians

might be particularly skilled at manipulating and deceiving voters. Corrupt politicians might be

able to overcome their electoral disadvantage either by subtle manipulation, or by engaging in

clientelism, vote-buying or identity-based appeals. Therefore, it should be a priority for future

research to extend the measurement of social preferences to professional politicians, to understand

the heuristics that enable voters to identify benevolent candidates, and to investigate the strategies



                                                   31
by which self-seeking candidates might be able to overcome their electoral disadvantage. But even

if it turns out that professional politicians are able to eﬀectively deceive voters, the experimental

results might still be informative for elections in non-professionalized governance bodies, such as

citizen committees, school boards, or associations.



Elected decision makers are sanctioned more severely


A second insight from this study is that citizens are less willing to tolerate embezzlement by elected

decision makers than by non-elected decision makers. Several features of the experimental setting

ensure that this eﬀect can be causally attributed to citizens’ preferences to sanction embezzlement,

rather than to changes in their ability to do so, to some form of instrumental rationality, or to

conformity eﬀects. First, citizens’ opportunity costs of sanctioning the decision maker were held

constant across the election and random appointment conditions. In this respect, the experimental

setting intentionally deviated from some natural settings, where reelection opportunities or other

features of electoral democracy might alter the opportunity costs of sanctioning corrupt decision

makers. The advantage is the experimental results cannot have been caused by endogenous changes

in the opportunity costs of sanctioning the decision maker. Second, by eliminating repeated in-

teraction and communication during the sanctioning stage, the experimental setting removed any

instrumental rationality for engaging in costly sanctioning behavior, as well as any possibility for

group members to coordinate around sanctioning the decision maker, or to observe each others’

sanctioning behavior. Consequently, the treatment eﬀect cannot have been caused by changes in

group-level collective action capacity, incentives to conform to socially desirable behavior, reputa-

tional concerns, or any other form of instrumental rationality.

The neutral framing of the experimental setting ensured that the eﬀect of elections on citizens’

willingness to sanction embezzlement was not due to any cues in the instruction script that could

have primed them to hold elected decision makers to higher moral standards than non-elected

decision makers. Moreover, by conditioning on actual embezzlement outcomes, it was ruled out

that diﬀerences in sanctioning behavior between the election and random selection conditions were



                                                 32
merely driven by positive or negative reciprocity towards the decision maker.

It also appears unlikely that the eﬀect of elections on sanctioning behavior was driven by spite or

envy towards the decision maker. This might have been the case if group members believed that

the elected decision makers obtained their position in an unfair manner. However, an overwhelm-

ing majority (94 percent) of study participants in the election condition considered the selection

procedure to be fair (Table A-3). This is an even greater proportion than in the random selection

condition (91 percent) and the diﬀerence is signiﬁcant at p = 0.03 (two-sided test of proportions).

Thus, the most plausible explanation for the eﬀect of elections on study participants’ willingness

to sanction embezzlement has to do with social norms: Citizens either apply diﬀerent social norms

to elected and non-elected decision makers, or they are more willing to enforce such norms towards

elected decision makers. This is consistent with the idea that elections make norms of trusteeship

salient, because citizens actively participate in the delegation of authority.



Citizens are too trusting towards decision makers


A third insight from the experiment is that elections bias citizens’ expectations, causing them to

trust elected decision makers more than they should. This ﬁnding is strengthened by external

evidence that citizens are actually too trusting towards elected local decision makers. Gottlieb

(2016) shows that voters in rural Mali tend to overestimate the performance of elected local decision

makers, unless they are presented with credible benchmarks that correct their misperception. Given

that rural populations in Mali and Burkina Faso are culturally, economically and geographically

proximate, it would not be surprising if similar evidence were to be found in other West African

societies and beyond. The contribution of this study goes beyond Gottlieb’s 2016 ﬁndings, by

showing that elections can cause such misperceptions.




                                                  33
External Validity

In addition to the design features that strengthen causal attribution and theoretical generalizability

of the main ﬁndings, the study also beneﬁts from the representativeness of its subject pool. In most

laboratory and ﬁeld-based behavioral studies, external validity is severely limited by the fact that

they are conducted on convenience samples, often from a single location. Carried out on randomly

sampled rural, voting-age citizens in six regions of Burkina Faso, this study produced population-

weighted estimates that are statistically representative for the population of interest.



Implications for the Role of Information in Electoral Democracy

The ﬁndings of this study suggest a novel perspective on the role of information in electoral democ-

racy. Conventional wisdom holds that citizens’ access to information is vitally important for elec-

toral democracy, because a lack of information constrains citizens’ ability to select competent and

benevolent decision makers and to hold incumbents accountable (Fearon, 1999; Ferraz and Finan,

2008, 2011). Without challenging the importance of information for retrospective electoral account-

ability, this study has two additional implications for the role of information in electoral democracy.

First, information might be less important for electoral selection than previously assumed. Sec-

ond, access to information matters for accountability, because citizens are otherwise biased towards

trusting elected decision makers more than they should.

With regard to electoral selection, the experiment has demonstrated that elections can favor benev-

olent candidates even in a low-information environment, corroborating evidence of positive electoral

selection eﬀects in a high-information setting (Lierl, 2014). In this study, voters and candidates

were mutual strangers. Communication between them was limited to ten minutes of unstructured

deliberation in a group setting. Even after this minimal opportunity for cheap talk, elections were

superior to random selection at selecting benevolent decision makers. Thus, detailed informa-

tion about candidates might be less important for electoral selection outcomes than conventionally

assumed. Voters’ social intelligence or statistical discrimination might enable them to identify


                                                  34
benevolent candidates even in the absence of veriﬁable factual information.

Voters’ ability to identify benevolent candidates also has implications for electoral accountability.

As Fearon (1999) points out, it is only rational for voters to replace a corrupt or non-performing

incumbent, if they can expect to actually elect a better candidate. This means that electoral

accountability directly depends on voters’ ability to identify benevolent candidates with limited

information: The more electoral selection favors benevolent candidates, the more diﬃcult it becomes

for corrupt incumbents to be reelected.

The experiment produced two additional insights that have important implications for the rela-

tionship between information access and electoral or non-electoral accountability. First, elections

appear to increase citizens’ willingness to sanction embezzlement. Second, elections bias citizens’

perceptions of decision makers’ willingness to embezzle public resources, causing them to be too

trusting towards elected decision makers. As a consequence, citizens’ increased willingness to sanc-

tion embezzlement might not translate into greater accountability pressures on elected decision

makers, unless citizens are simultaneously provided with information about the true extent of em-

bezzlement. If citizens lack access to such information, self-interested decision-makers can exploit

the unjustiﬁed trust elections have bestowed on them. Conversely, if embezzlement is transparent,

these misperceptions are corrected. Therefore, information plays an important enabling role for

elections to reduce embezzlement through a social norm and sanctioning mechanism.

Finally, there is one additional way in which information access might interact with voters’ will-

ingness to sanction embezzlement: Citizens’ willingness to punish corrupt decision makers might

depend on their certainty about their beliefs. Citizens might be more willing to punish decision

makers based on facts, rather than mere suspicion. If that is the case, information would be im-

portant for electoral democracy not only because it corrects perceptive biases, but also because it

inherently increases citizens’ willingness to sanction embezzlement. This hypothesis can directly

be tested in the experiment. Figure 7 visualizes average rewards and punishments for given levels

of embezzlement. It appears that study participants are more willing to punish the decision maker

based on factual knowledge in the transparency condition, compared to suspected embezzlement



                                                 35
in the private information condition. Thus, transparency can increase accountability in two ways:

By correcting citizens’ tendency to underestimate embezzlement by elected decision makers and by

removing their hesitation to punish based on suspicion.

                                                 PUNISHMENTS                                                                              REWARDS
                               200                                                                                 200
  Average Expenditure (FCFA)




                                                                                      Average Expenditure (FCFA)
                               150                                                                                 150


                               100                                                                                 100


                               50                                                                                  50


                                 0                                                                                   0

                                     0.00      0.25     0.50    0.75      1.00                                           0.00      0.25     0.50    0.75      1.00
                                      Fraction Embezzled (expected or known)                                              Fraction Embezzled (expected or known)

                                            NO TRANSPARENCY    TRANSPARENCY                                                     NO TRANSPARENCY    TRANSPARENCY




Figure 7. Study participants spent more money on punishing decision makers if the extent of

embezzlement was known, rather than suspected (left panel). For rewards, the opposite appears to

be the case (right panel). The graphs show LOESS estimates with 95 percent conﬁdence intervals.



Conclusions

This study has presented evidence that democratic elections can reduce the embezzlement of public

resources, even if they do not increase citizens’ ability to hold decision makers accountable. This

is important, because electoral accountability is often constrained by term limits or insuﬃcient

political competition, or rendered irrelevant by alternative formal or informal accountability mech-

anisms. By experimentally comparing democratic elections to randomly selected decision makers,

this paper illuminated three additional causal mechanisms through which elections could have an

impact on the embezzlement of public resources.

First, electoral selection eﬀects beneﬁt benevolent candidates who are intrinsically motivated to

                                                                                 36
refrain from embezzlement. The experiment demonstrated that this is the case even in a low-

information environment, and in a study population that lacks access to formal education and to

prior experience with fair and competitive democratic elections. The result solidiﬁes the emerging

evidence that elected local leaders have more pro-social preferences than appointed leaders or

the general population (Lierl, 2014). It also highlights the importance of further research on the

social preferences of politicians and on the strategies by which corrupt candidates might be able to

overcome their electoral disadvantage.

Second, elections lower citizens’ tolerance for embezzlement. If a decision maker was elected instead

of randomly appointed, study participants incurred greater personal costs to punish embezzlement.

Since study participants had no instrumental reason for sanctioning the decision maker, and both

selection, it appears that elections either changed the social norms by which citizens evaluate

embezzlement, or their willingness to enforce such norms.

Third, elections caused citizens to underestimate how much embezzlement actually takes place.

This ﬁnding is not only novel, but also consistent with prior evidence that citizens are actually too

trusting towards elected local leaders (Gottlieb, 2016) and that informing citizens in advance about

their entitlements can substantially reduce embezzlement (Banerjee et al., 2016). It is also highly

problematic from a normative point of view, because it implies that elections might enable corrupt

decision makers to exploit citizens’ trust.

Transparency might therefore play an important enabling role for elections to reduce public corrup-

tion. While elections increase citizens’ willingness to sanction embezzlement, a lack of transparency

can undermine this eﬀect, because citizens are less suspicious towards elected decision makers than

towards non-elected decision makers. Information about the true extent of embezzlement counter-

acts citizens’ tendency to trust elected leaders more than they should be trusted.




                                                 37
References

Alatas, V., Banerjee, A., Hanna, R., Olken, B. A., Purnamasari, R., and Wai-poi, M. (2013). Does

  Elite Capture Matter? Local Elites and Targeted Welfare. Working Paper. National Bureau for

  Economic Research, Cambridge, MA.

Baldassarri, D. and Grossman, G. (2011). Centralized sanctioning and legitimate authority promote

  cooperation in humans. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 108(27):11023–11027.

Baldwin, K. and Mvukiyehe, E. (2015). Elections and Collective Action: Evidence from Changes

  in Traditional Institutions in Liberia. World Politics, 67(4):690–725.

Banerjee, A., Hanna, R., Kyle, J., and Olken, B. A. (2016). Tangible Information and Citizen

  Empowerment. Working Paper. Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA.

Banerjee, A. V., Green, D., McManus, J., and Pande, R. (2014). Are Poor Voters indiﬀerent to

  whether elected leaders are criminal or corrupt? Political Communication, 31(3):391–407.

Beath, A., Christia, F., and Enikolopov, R. (2014). Do Elected Councils Improve Governance?

  Experimental Evidence on Local Institutions in Afghanistan. Working Paper. Massachusetts

  Institute of Technology, Cambridge, MA.

Besley, T. (2005). Political Selection. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 19(3):43–60.

 o, P. D., Foster, A., and Putterman, L. (2010). Institutions and behavior: Experimental evidence
B´

  on the eﬀects of democracy. American Economic Review, 100(5):2205–2229.

Carson, L. and Martin, B. (1999). Random selection in politics. Praeger Publishers, Westport, CT.

                            echal, M. A., and Nicol`
Corazzini, L., Kube, S., Mar´                      o, A. (2014). Elections and Deceptions: An

  Experimental Study on the Behavioral Eﬀects of Democracy. American Journal of Political

  Science, 58(3):579–592.

Fearon, J. D. (1999). Electoral Accountability and the Control of Politicians: Selecting Good Types

  versus Sanctioning Poor Performance. In Przeworski, A., Stokes, S. C., and Manin, B., editors,



                                                38
  Democracy, Accountability, and Representation, chapter 2, pages 55–97. Cambridge University

  Press, London and New York.

Fehr, E. and Fischbacher, U. (2004). Third-party punishment and social norms. Evolution and

  Human Behavior, 25(2):63–87.

Ferraz, C. and Finan, F. (2008). Exposing Corrupt Politicians: The Eﬀects of Brazil’s Publicly

  Released Audits on Electoral Outcomes. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 123(2):703–745.

Ferraz, C. and Finan, F. (2011). Electoral Accountability and Corruption: Evidence from the

  Audits of Local Governments. American Economic Review, 101(4):1274–1311.

Frey, B. S. and Steiner, L. (2014). Random selection in politics, science and society: Applications

                                                         urich.
  and institutional embeddedness. Working Paper. CREMA, Z¨

Gottlieb, J. (2016). Greater Expectations: A Field Experiment to Improve Accountability in Mali.

  American Journal of Political Science, 60(1):143–157.

Grossman, G. (2014). Do Selection Rules Aﬀect Leader Responsiveness? Evidence from Rural

  Uganda. Quarterly Journal of Political Science, 9(1):1–44.

Grossman, G. and Baldassarri, D. (2012). The Impact of Elections on Cooperation: Evidence from

  a Lab-in-the-Field Experiment in Uganda. American Journal of Political Science, 56(4):964–985.

Henrich, J., Boyd, R., Bowles, S., Camerer, C., Fehr, E., and Gintis, H. (2004). Foundations of

  Human Sociality: Economic Experiments and Ethnographic Evidence from Fifteen Small-Scale

  Societies. Oxford University Press, Oxford.

Horowitz, J. L. (2011). Applied Nonparametric Instrumental Variables Estimation. Econometrica,

  79(2):347–394.

                    opez-P´
Leibbrandt, A. and L´     erez, R. (2012). An exploration of third and second party punishment

  in ten simple games. Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 84(3):753–766.

Lierl, M. (2014). Preferences or Incentives: What Motivates Village Leaders to Refrain From

  Embezzlement? Working Paper. Yale University, New Haven, CT.


                                                39
Mansuri, G. and Rao, V. (2013). Localizing Development: Does Participation Work? World Bank,

  Washington, DC.

                        o i Miquel, G., Qian, N., and Yao, Y. (2014). Political Reform in China:
Martinez-Bravo, M., Padr´

  Elections, Public Goods and Income Distribution. Working Paper. London School of Economics,

  London.

Myerson, R. (2015). Local Agency Costs of Political Centralization. Working Paper. University of

  Chicago, Chicago.

Olken, B. A. (2010). Direct Democracy and Local Public Goods: Evidence from a Field Experiment

  in Indonesia. American Political Science Review, 104(2):243–267.

Racine, J. S. and Nie, Z. (2014). Package ‘crs’. Technical report, The R Project.

Tsai, L. (2007). Solidary Groups, Informal Accountability, and Local Public Goods Provision in

  Rural China. American Political Science Review, 101(2):355–372.

Voors, M., Turley, T., Bulte, E. H., Kontoleon, A., and List, J. A. (2017). Chief for a Day: Elite

  Capture and Management Performance in a Field Experiment in Sierra Leone. Management

  Science, pages —-forthcoming.

Winters, M. S. and Weitz-Shapiro, R. (2013). Lacking Information or Condoning Corruption When

  Do Voters Support Corrupt Politicians? Comparative Politics, 45(4):418–436.




                                                40
Appendix


Contents

  Treatment eﬀects on embezzlement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42

  Treatment eﬀects on trust in the decision maker . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 42

  Treatment eﬀects on perceived fairness of the selection procedure . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 43

  Electoral selection eﬀects . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44

  Decision makers’ baseline preferences predict actual and suspected embezzlement . . . . . 45

  Suspected embezzlement correlates with actual embezzlement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46

  Touch screen ballot . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 48




                                                 41
Treatment eﬀects on embezzlement



                                           DV: Fraction of Group Resources Embezzled

                                             Unweighted                    Weighted
                                        (1)          (2)           (3)          (4)
           OLS coeﬃcients (standard errors in parentheses)

           β1 : Elections                -0.025         -0.013     -0.029       -0.025
                                         (0.030)        (0.028)    (0.029)      (0.026)
           β2 : Transparency             -0.0086        0.0031     -0.010       0.0011
                                         (0.030)        (0.028)    (0.029)      (0.026)
           β3 : Elections×Transparency -0.031           -0.037     -0.047       -0.045
                                         (0.043)        (0.039)    (0.042)      (0.037)
           P-Values for pre-speciﬁed hypothesis tests

           Hypothesis 1a
             H0 : β1 ≥ 0                  0.207         0.321      0.160        0.172
             H0 : β1 + β3 ≥ 0             0.032         0.037      0.005        0.004
           Hypothesis 1b
             H0 : β2 ≥ 0                  0.388         0.544      0.366        0.516
             H0 : β2 + β3 ≥ 0             0.093         0.114      0.026        0.050
           Hypothesis 2
             H0 : β3 ≤ 0                  0.767         0.825      0.871        0.890
           Observations (groups)          471           471        471          471
           Municipality ﬁxed eﬀects       yes           yes        yes          yes
           Group-level covariates                       yes                     yes

Table A-1: OLS estimates of average treatment eﬀects on embezzlement. All speciﬁcations in-

clude municipality ﬁxed eﬀects, but omission of municipality eﬀects does not noticeably change the

results. Columns (2) and (4) include group-level covariates: Average baseline embezzlement pref-

erence, number of women in the group, ethno-linguistic fractionalization of the group, geographic

fractionalization of the group (villages of origin), number of pre-existing social ties in the group

(one missing value imputed at mean), highest level of education represented in the group (four

missing values imputed at mean).




                                                  42
Treatment eﬀects on trust in the decision maker




                                                               DV: Suspected Embezzlement

                                        Population-weighted                                      Unweighted
                               (1)           (2)        (3)                          (4)          (5)       (6)
 OLS coeﬃcients

 Elections                     -0.080∗∗∗            -0.083∗∗∗          -0.087∗∗∗     -0.088∗∗∗    -0.084∗∗∗   -0.087∗∗∗
                               (0.025)              (0.025)            (0.021)       (0.025)      (0.025)     (0.021)
 Transparency                  -0.063∗∗             -0.066∗∗           -0.064∗∗∗     -0.059∗∗     -0.060∗∗    -0.064∗∗∗
                               (0.027)              (0.026)            (0.023)       (0.028)      (0.027)     (0.023)
 Elections×Transparency        0.050                0.059∗             0.062         0.057        0.059∗      0.062∗∗
                               (0.035)              (0.035)            (0.029)       (0.035)      (0.034)     (0.029)
 Constant                      0.36∗∗∗                                               0.37∗∗∗      0.34∗∗∗
                               (0.035)                                               (0.02)       (0.029)
 Observations (individuals)    1884                 1776               1776          1884         1776        1776
 Individual-level covariates                        yes                yes                        yes         yes
 Municipality eﬀects                                                   yes                                    yes
                     Standard errors in parentheses, adjusted for clustering by group.
                               ∗              ∗∗              ∗∗∗
                                   p < 0 .1        p < 0.05         p < 0.01 (two-sided)


Table A-2. Estimates of average treatment eﬀects on group members’ expectations. Individual-

level covariates are age, gender, years of education, and baseline embezzlement preference.




                                                              43
Treatment eﬀects on perceived fairness of the selection procedure




                                                              DV: Perceived Procedural Fairness

                                                          Population-weighted         Unweighted
                                                            (1)        (2)            (3)     (4)
                      Proportion perceiving random selection as fair

                      Control group                          0.918       0.918      0.915     0.915

                      Change in proportion (estimated via Logit regression)

                      Elections                             0.034∗∗∗    0.031∗∗∗    0.024∗     0.020
                                                            (0.013)    (0.000017)   (0.013)   (0.013)
                      Observations                            2263        2127       2263      2127
                      Nonresponses (dropped)                   92          88         92         88
                      Individual-level covariates                          yes                  yes
Standard errors in parentheses, adjusted for clustering by group.

∗              ∗∗              ∗∗∗
    p < 0 .1        p < 0.05         p < 0.01 (two-sided)


Table A-3. Estimates of treatment eﬀects on whether group members considered the procedure

by which the decision maker was selected fair. Individual-level covariates are age, gender, years of

education, baseline embezzlement preference, and transparency treatment.




                                                            44
Electoral selection eﬀects


           2.0



           1.5
                                                                               Election Outcome
 Density




           1.0                                                                    Losing Candidates
                                                                                  Winning Candidates


           0.5



           0.0
                 0.00          0.25         0.50           0.75         1.00
                              Baseline Embezzlement Decision


Figure A-1.             Baseline embezzlement preferences of winning and non-winning candidates (kernel

density estimates, nwinners = 236, nlosers = 944).




                                                      45
Decision makers’ baseline preferences predict actual and suspected embezzle-
ment


                                            DV: Actual Embezzlement                      Avg. Suspected
                                                                                         Embezzlement

                                            Pooled          Transparency   Private       Private
                                                                           Information   Information
                                            (1)             (2)            (3)           (4)
    OLS coeﬃcients

    Baseline preference                     0.56∗∗∗         0.56∗∗∗        0.56∗∗∗       0.26∗∗∗
                                            (0.046)         (0.064)        (0.033)       (0.064)

    Baseline preference                     -0.016          0.0042         -0.041        -0.054
    ×Elected                                (0.066)         (0.089)        (0.098)       (0.092)

    Elected                                 -0.022          -0.043         0.00050       -0.062
                                            (0.032)         (0.044)        (0.047)       (0.044)

    Constant                                0.12            0.12           0.13          0.25
                                            (0.023)         (0.032)        (0.033)       (0.031)
    Observations (groups)                   471             471            471           471
    adj. R2                                 0.37            0.40           0.34          0.13
    F-statistic                             93.92           53.81          41.13         13.12
Standard errors in parentheses.

∗              ∗∗              ∗∗∗
    p < 0 .1        p < 0.05         p < 0.01 (two-sided)


Table A-4.                 Decision makers’ baseline embezzlement preferences are strongly correlated both

with their later embezzlement choices (Columns 1 to 3) and other group members’ expectations

(Column 4).




                                                                  46
Suspected embezzlement correlates with actual embezzlement




                                                                       DV: Suspected Embezzlement

                                                           Population-weighted                 Unweighted
                                                            (1)        (2)                    (3)      (4)
          OLS coeﬃcients

          Actual embezzlement                              0.58∗∗∗            0.57∗∗∗       0.51∗∗∗   0.49∗∗∗
                                                           (0.031)            (0.033)       (0.037)   (0.037)

          Baseline embezzlement preference                                     0.026                  0.067∗∗∗
                                                                              (0.018)                 (0.019)

          Intercept                                        0.11∗∗∗            0.10∗∗∗       0.14∗∗∗   0.11∗∗∗
                                                           (0.011)            (0.011)       (0.012)   (0.013)

          Observations                                         1884             1884         1884      1884
          Groups                                                471              471         471        471
          adj. R2                                              0.35             0.35         0.27      0.27
                      Standard errors in parentheses, adjusted for clustering by group.
                                ∗              ∗∗              ∗∗∗
                                    p < 0 .1        p < 0.05         p < 0.01 (two-sided)


Table A-5. Study participants’ expectations correlate with actual embezzlement.




                                                               47
Touch screen ballot




Figure A-2. Touch screen ballots. On the ballot, candidates were identiﬁed by their badge colors.

The ballot order was randomized at the group level. Two candidates had to be selected in the ﬁrst

stage, one candidate in the runoﬀ stage. Votes were cast secretly in a voting booth and submitted

by touching the ﬁngerprint symbol. After submitting, a lock screen was displayed and the vote

was counted automatically. The tablet was returned to the facilitator, who would unlock it with a

password and activate a blank ballot for the next voter.




                                                48
