                                                              WPS8046


Policy Research Working Paper                                8046




         What to Do When Foreign Direct
        Investment Is Not Direct or Foreign
                         FDI Round Tripping

                                 Dilek Aykut
                                Apurva Sanghi
                                Gina Kosmidou




Macroeconomics and Fiscal Management Global Practice Group
April 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 8046


  Abstract
 As globalization has intensified, multinational enterprises’                       transshipping centers. In most cases, domestic companies
 investments have become a sophisticated set of financial                           round trip their investments to benefit from preferential
 transactions that are difficult to monitor and classify by                         treatments reserved for certain countries and their firms.
 the home and host countries. In some cases, what is classi-                        The most important policy measure to reduce round trip-
 fied as foreign direct investment is rather “indirect foreign                      ping activity and mitigate its impact is to improve the
 direct investment,” channeled through a third country.                             business environment for all firms; this can foster domes-
 Indirect flows have increased significantly in recent years,                       tic and foreign investment, and may, to some extent, also
 now accounting for almost 30 percent of global foreign                             curb foreign direct investment round tripping. Neverthe-
 direct investment flows. Indirect foreign direct investment                        less, countries also need to adapt to the new playing field
 flows also capture the flow of domestic funds channeled                            for foreign direct investment, and recognize the trade-offs
 through offshore centers back to the local economy in the                          of their national policies on capital flows. National policy
 form of direct investment, also known as “foreign direct                           measures must be complemented by international actions.
 investment round tripping.” These investments do not                               At the same time, all indirect foreign direct investment
 offer the benefits of typical foreign direct investment, and                       flows should be closely monitored, something that is best
 may lead to tax revenue and welfare losses. Round trip-                            conducted in coordination with international partners.
 ping is mostly channeled through offshore financial or



  This paper is a product of the Macroeconomics and Fiscal Management Global Practice Group. It is part of a larger effort
  by the World Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions
  around the world. Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The authors
  may be contacted at asanghi@worldbank.org.




         The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
         issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
         names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
         of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
         its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                       Produced by the Research Support Team
                     What to Do When
    Foreign Direct Investment
         Is Not Direct or Foreign
FDI Round Tripping
Dilek Aykut, Apurva Sanghi, and Gina Kosmidou
Contents

LIST OF FIGURES


Figure 1: Global capital flows ................................................................................................................. 5


Figure 2: International capital flows to developing countries ............................................................ 6


Figure 3: International arbitration ......................................................................................................... 10


Figure 4: Bilateral FDI flows in selected middle-income economies .............................................. 11


Figure 5: FDI Round tripping in Russia ............................................................................................... 12


Figure 6: All capital flows to Russia, including FDI inflows, fell sharply in 2014 and 2015 ......... 14



LIST OF TABLES


Table 1: Russian Federation: Inward foreign direct investment 2007-2015, millions of US
dollars ....................................................................................................................................................... 14


Table 2: Russian Federation inward portfolio investments 2015, millions of US dollars ............. 15



LIST OF TABLES


Box 1: Literature on Russian round tripping ....................................................................................... 15




                                                                                2 
 
Acronyms
BIT   Bilateral Investment Treaty


FDI   Foreign Direct Investment


ISDS Investor-state Dispute Settlement


MNE Multinational Enterprise


OFC   Offshore Financial Center


SPE   Special Purpose Enterprise


SPV   Special Purpose Vehicle


UIC   Ultimate Investing Country




                                         3 
 
International financial flows have risen in recent decades but so have their ebbs and flows.
Over the last two decades, international capital flows have become an important aspect of the global
economy as capital has increasingly moved across-borders, with investors searching for higher returns
- and at times safe havens- and companies going after new markets for their products. Following the
rapid increase in capital flows in the early 2000s, gross international capital flows peaked at US$12
trillion in 2007, accounting for over 20 percent of world GDP (Figure 1). Nevertheless, the 2008
global financial crisis was a bitter reminder of the risks associated with financial integration as gross
capital flows declined sharply. The global financial crisis that followed the September 2008 collapse
of Lehman Brothers severely constrained international flows as investors became extremely risk-
averse. They deserted international assets for what were perceived to be safer assets such as treasury
securities in the United States as well as gold. Alas, global capital flows have only recovered partially
since then and have experienced increased ebbs and flows. After slight rebounds in 2010 and 2014,
gross capital flows declined yet again in 2015, reflecting the ongoing uncertainty related to global
growth and geopolitical developments. Currently, international capital flows are much lower in
nominal terms, ranging from around US$3 to 4 trillion, and they represent only 5 percent of the world
GDP.


Figure 1: Global capital flows:
    a. Global capital inflows have demonstrated significant            b. FDI remains the most stable type of capital flows
                volatility since the early 2000s




                              Source: IMF “Capital Flows and Global Liquidity” (2016), authors’ calculations



The effects of these developments on capital flows to developing countries were as dramatic.
International capital inflows in emerging and developing countries were almost halved in 2008, at
US$ 758 billion compared to a peak of $1.3 trillion in 2007 (Figure 2).1 While the downturn impacted
almost all developing countries, Eastern Europe and Latin America bore the brunt of the financial
crisis, accounting for 70 percent of the decline in capital flows. Nevertheless, unlike developed
countries, the recovery was more pronounced for developing countries as international capital flows
bounced back to $1.3 trillion in 2010.
                                                            
1
  The group of emerging and developing countries used in this analysis comprises of selected economies including 
Argentina, Brazil, Chile, China, Colombia, the Czech Republic, El Salvador, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Kazakhstan, Korea, 
Malaysia, Mexico, Pakistan, the Philippines, Poland, Romania, Russia, South Africa, Thailand, Turkey, and Ukraine. 

                                                                     4 
 
Foreign direct investment has proved to be more stable than other capital flows…
Swings in international capital flows have become larger and more frequent since the global financial
crisis, driven mainly by portfolio and other investment flows, while FDI remains relatively more
stable. In periods of past downturn, other investment flows decreased the most, followed by portfolio
flows (Figure 1). 2 FDI investors—mostly multinational companies—take a longer-term view than
most portfolio investors and lenders that search for high yields in various maturities.
For emerging and developing countries, while FDI flows have remained more or less stable following
a short-lived dip in 2009, non-FDI capital flows experienced a considerable rebound as well. Despite
being shut out of international bond markets for a number of months in 2008, several of these countries
have managed to access international capital markets. This is mainly because global financial market
conditions have been favorable to bond issuances with low interest rate policies by high-income
central banks since 2010. Syndicated bank lending has remained weak as banks deleveraged for
several years. Nevertheless, FDI is still the largest component of capital flows, accounting for more
than half of the investment flows to developing countries.


Figure 2: International capital flows to developing countries:
    a. The effects of the global financial crisis were also                       b. Following the short-lived dip in 2010, FDI inflows to
    evident for developing countries….                                            developing countries recovered and have remained stable




        $ billion                   FDI          Portfolio      Other

     1,400
     1,200
     1,000
      800
      600
      400
      200
         0
      -200
      -400
             2000 2002 2004 2006 2008 2010 2012 2014


                                                           Source: International Financial Statistics, IMF.


Aside from its relative stability compared to the other capital flows, FDI inflows are favored by
emerging and developing countries because of the potential benefits they bring to host countries.
Several country experiences and literature over the years show that when multinational enterprises
(MNEs) invest in a country, the investment can potentially create jobs, increase productivity through



                                                            
2
     IMF, 2016, “Capital Flows and Global Liquidity.” 

                                                                                   5 
 
the provision of capital and technology, as well as advance R&D. 3 Moreover, it might also have
spillover effects, such as the development of managerial and technological skills and the


improvement of companies’ access to international markets. As a result, FDI can bring increased
revenues for the host state and a boost in the growth of the economy. Hence, these benefits render FDI
as not simply a capital flow but more importantly, a package of resources. Therefore, emerging and
developing countries are interested in attracting higher levels of FDI, not only due to its stability, but
also for its potentially broad set of benefits for the host country.
FDI flows are driven by various push and pull factors. While host country (pull) factors, (including
the size of the domestic and/or regional markets, and growth prospects, especially the regulatory
environment and overall investment climate), can determine who will receive the investment flows,
global financial conditions (such as growth prospects in developed countries, high global liquidity,
and low interest rates in advanced economies) support FDI flows.

As global production and corporate structures of MNEs have evolved over the years, their
investments have become a sophisticated set of financial transactions that are hard to
monitor and classify by the home and host countries…

The increasing fragmentation of production and the creation of global value chains (GVCs) results in
MNEs governing such chains to break up their business in smaller parts. In so doing, they take
advantage of the most favorable production locations for each production part of their final product
or they dispose of certain parts deemed non-core and focus on others. As a result, MNEs and their
affiliates often have multiple passports: “The top 100 MNEs in UNCTAD’s Transnationality Index
have on average more than 500 affiliates each, across more than 50 countries. They have 7 hierarchical
levels in their ownership structure (i.e. ownership links to affiliates could potentially cross 6 borders),
they have about 20 holding companies owning affiliates across multiple jurisdictions, and they have
almost 70 entities in offshore investment hubs.” 4

As MNEs manage their global operations to protect their intellectual property rights or to leverage
financial opportunities offered in a host country or at an investment hub, their ownership and corporate
structures have become extremely complex. Moreover, MNEs restructure their operations and
investments to seize opportunities for “tax arbitrage” to reduce their tax obligations, and they shop for
“investment treaties” to ease regulatory burdens or to increase their rights and protections. In recent
years, companies have also increasingly been using various financial flow techniques such as special
purpose enterprises (SPEs). An SPE is a legal person, separate from its final owner, established to
pursue specific, temporary objectives such as the financing of an affiliate abroad. This allows for the
limitation of the risk of the transaction to the value of the SPE, while saving taxes. 5 Moreover, MNEs
often change corporate structures rapidly due to reevaluations of their portfolio of activities and the
resulting merger and acquisitions (M&As).



                                                            
3
     Alfaro et al., 2004; Dunning, 2013; Harrison,1994; Kokko et al., 2007; McGuigan, 2007; Roy et al., 2006. 
4
     UNCTAD, 2016, “Global Investment Trends.” 
5
     ibid 
                                                               6 
 
Given the complexity of their operations and investment transactions, the development impact of
cross-border investments by MNEs can be narrower than the development impact of a project that is
traditionally considered as typical FDI, especially in terms of job creation, skills development, transfer
of technology, and creation of new capacities. Nevertheless, in this complex environment, there are
also non-equity transactions—hence not FDI by definition—undertaken by MNEs that can generate
similar benefits for the host economy as well. For example, MNEs can form different forms of
partnerships to carry out production such as joint ventures, contract manufacturing, business process
outsourcing, licensing, and franchising. Nevertheless production under these partnerships is still
heavily dependent on the requirements imposed by the MNE organizing the given value chain. Hence,
these types of partnerships can generate positive spillover effects without any cross-border
investment.

Even if an investment is classified as an FDI transaction, it may not be direct investment or
even foreign-sourced…

In some cases, MNEs invest in a country through intermediaries in third countries, constituting the
so-called indirect forms of FDI. These investments can be undertaken through permanently
established foreign affiliates or through established SPEs in a third country. While this form of
investment should be considered FDI, the nationality of the immediate investor and the ultimate
beneficiary owner will not match. 6 In the case of the SPE, the immediate investor is in fact only a
financial entity.

MNEs might prefer to invest in a country indirectly through another country perhaps to take advantage
of better tax regimes or less stringent corporate governance—through corporate inversions—, or
simply to leverage the cultural and geographic proximity—through nearshoring. 7 For example, when
the German telecom company, Deutsche Telekom, wanted to invest in the former Yugoslav Republic
of Macedonia, it did so through its majority owned affiliate Magyar Telekom (Hungary) in order to
benefit from the proximity between these two countries. Nevertheless, the investment in Makedonski
Telekom was as if it came directly from Germany, with all the top management being German rather
than Hungarian.” 8 Nonetheless, in some cases, the specific intent might be to conceal the identity of
the ultimate investor for various reasons.

Furthermore, indirect FDI flows may also capture funds that are not necessarily foreign sourced. These
are actually domestic funds channeled through offshore centers to the local economy in the form of
direct investment. As discussed later in detail, such behavior by domestic investors is called round
tripping and is triggered by various reasons including special treatment of foreign investors, tax
benefits, as well as governance and institutional concerns.

The rise of indirect FDI flows has implications both in the home and host economies.


                                                            
6
   This can include affiliates ever further removed from corporate headquarters in chains of ownership: dispersed 
shareholdings of affiliates, with individual affiliates being owned indirectly through multiple shareholders; cross‐
shareholdings, with affiliates owning shares in each other; and shared ownerships (e.g. in joint ventures). 
7
     K. Kalotay, 2012, “Indirect FDI.” 
8
     Ibid 
                                                               7 
 
The trend of FDI being directed towards “indirect” forms is not really new and has been well
documented since the 1990s. However, the share of these flows has increased in recent years in tandem
with an increase in globalization. It now accounts for about 30 percent of the global FDI flows and
has implications both in the home and host economies.

First, these flows are hard to monitor and properly classify. Even when indirect FDI is the result of a
legitimate corporate decision, it still distorts the data collection on FDI by altering the origin of the
flows. This prevents policymakers from having a clear understanding of the role of MNEs and of the
country of origin of the most important investors in their economy. Furthermore, distorted statistics
do not allow for accurate cross-country comparisons, which inform a country about the status and
attractiveness of its investment environment compared to its competitors.

Additionally, the lack of clarity regarding the actual country of origin in a host country’s FDI hinders
the sustainability and effectiveness of its investment policy. Most nations' investment policies tend to
focus on the direct owners of an affiliate, as do bilateral and multilateral investment treaties.
Therefore, concrete investment policy measures, such as ownership restrictions, joint venture
requirements, or eligibility criteria for facilitation, tend to operate at the direct ownership level:
“Almost 80 percent of countries worldwide prohibit majority foreign ownership in at least one
industry”. 9 The blurring of the nationality of the investor has rendered these policies obsolete, but
better monitoring and targeted efforts to register the ultimate beneficiary of an FDI project can help
to alleviate some of these negative impacts.

Moreover, indirect FDI does not necessarily have the prescribed longer-term view of more traditional
FDI, and in fact has resulted in increased FDI volatility over the last ten years. 10 Investment coming
through an SPE does not constitute any real industrial activity in the host economy since they are
based on tax and regulation considerations rather than productivity and competitiveness. This
delinking of FDI and production is worrisome if it results in losses in terms of tax revenues, missed
job creation, and missed transfer of technology for the most affected countries. This type of indirect
FDI shares many similarities with foreign portfolio investment in the sense that they can both be more
volatile, highly reversible, and driven by cyclical factors, including interest rates differentials,
business cycle conditions, market sentiments, and herd behavior.

And in the case of round tripping, these investments do not offer the benefits that one expects
from FDI, and they can lead to tax revenue and welfare loses.

Given that round-tripped investments are actually domestic investments classified as foreign direct
investments, they do not represent additional investment in the economy. Therefore, they will not
generate the spillover effects in terms of technology and know-how transfers that FDI flows are
expected to generate. At the same time, more often than not, indirect FDI is undertaken for reasons
that relate to tax arbitrage and institution shopping and will cause tax revenue losses in the host
country. Additionally, it can be linked to non-transparent activities, in the case of using offshore
financial centers, or even to illegal activities, such as corruption or money laundering. This reduces
the regulatory oversight and possibly even weakens the rule of law. Finally, round-tripped investments
create distortions in the investment environment and render the establishment of a level playing field
                                                            
9
     UNCTAD, 2016, “Investor Nationality: Policy Challenges.” 
10
      UNCTAD, 2016, “Global Investment Trends.” 
                                                                 8 
 
for the regulator difficult. Therefore, it is important to know how much of an economy’s FDI is due
to round tripping and what the main motivations for these types of activities are.

But round tripping activities might also reflect the increased sophistication of firms in
developing countries to address some of the shortcomings of their country of origin.

Round tripping activities might also indicate the increased sophistication of firms in developing
countries since they require an additional layer of expertise and knowledge to navigate the laws and
regulations of a foreign jurisdiction to set up an SPE/affiliate that will be used for round tripping.
Furthermore, the essential motivation might be to circumvent the institutional and financial
shortcomings of their country of origin rather than just tax avoidance or illegal activities.

Firms in developing countries might choose to operate from locations that offer them more services
and opportunities to access financing through listing companies in more developed stock exchanges
or raising funds in international markets. 11 For example, Hong Kong, with its better-developed
international stock and financial markets, offers opportunities for Chinese firms to raise funds in the
stock market or solicit better lending terms. In this case, the round-tripped investment may not
translate into a loss for the host country, China. This might be an important step for developing country
firms to expand their operations globally. For example, in the case of South African Breweries (SAB),
the company was originally established in South Africa but later moved its main listing on the London
Stock Exchange in 1999 to raise capital for acquisitions. The company made several global
acquisitions, changed its name to SABMiller plc, and became a globally successful firm. The firm
now operates in South Africa through its local subsidiary, and its assets are now classified as foreign
direct investment.

Similarly, companies might use round tripping to escape from the perceived excesses in state
control/intervention (“system escape” motive) and other uncertainties in the country of origin.
Similarly, operating from more “stable” locations, where the regulatory environment is perceived as
being more advantageous, constitutes the so-called “safety nests” motive. For example, Mittal Steel
(now part of ArcelorMittal), whose founders were born in India but resided in London, registered their
firm in the Netherlands to circumvent the heavy and bureaucratic Indian regulations, and they have
expanded their operations both in India and globally. Mittal Steel acquired the European steel
company Arcelor in 2006, and the merged company, ArcelorMittal, chose Luxembourg for its official
headquarters and is now the world's largest steel producer.

Investing through another country might enable firms to secure some of the protections extended by
the bilateral investment treaty (BIT) of the transit country. For example, treaty rights such as property
rights and protections related to investor-state dispute settlement (ISDS) options are especially
important to firms that undertake capital-intensive and risky projects. This is because the ISDS option
provides an explicit option to foreign investors to bring their claims to domestic courts or international
arbitration under the framework of UNCITRAL or ICSID. This allows the round trip investor to
choose the forum where a dispute with the host country will be settled, while a domestic investor
would automatically be subjected to the national court system without the option of international
arbitration. Another added benefit of international arbitration is that it uses the investment agreement

                                                            
11
  For the literature on motivation for round tripping see: Wein, 2010; Ledyaeva, 2015; Haberly and Wójcik, 2014; and 
Kalotay, 2012. 

                                                               9 
 
to determine the enforceable legal framework. For example, a dispute between a firm headquartered
in Mauritius and the Indian state can be adjudicated according to British law if British law is specified
as the applicable law in the investment agreement.

The institutional concerns seem to be justified given that international arbitration appears to be an
important tool for foreign firms operating in several middle-income countries (MICs). In fact, it is
middle-income countries that are subject to the highest number of ISDS cases against the state (Figure
3a). Additionally, it seems that some of these investments might be indirect since transshipment
centers and offshore financial centers (OFCs) such as Luxembourg, Switzerland, and Cyprus, as well
as the Netherlands host a considerable number of firms that seek international arbitration (Figure 3b).
Among the concluded original arbitration proceedings, 36 percent of the cases were decided in favor
of the state, 27 percent were decided in favor of the investor, while the rest were settled or
discontinued.

Figure 3: International arbitration:
 a. MICs are subject to the highest number of ISDS                              b. While several offshore centers seem to host some of
 cases against the state…                                                       these firms that seek arbitration.




                                                               Source: Investment Policy Hub UNCTAD



Seeking institutional protection through round tripping might be not that easy, however, as states
might dispute the nationality of the firm. For example, the Netherlands has grown notorious as a site
for ‘treaty shopping’ given that the country has more than 100 BITs, many of which have particularly
broad and strong ISDS provisions and hosts a considerable number of firms that seek international
arbitration. The complex national profiles of Dutch filers in particular have not gone unnoticed by
respondent states. In fact, Venezuela, South Africa and Indonesia have specifically withdrawn from
their BITs with the Netherlands, citing treaty shopping concerns.12

Several large emerging and developing countries, faced with challenges of FDI round
tripping, have taken steps to manage and reduce it, but with mixed results…
                                                            
12
  Rachel L. Wellhausen, 2016, “Recent Trends in Investor–State Dispute Settlement” Journal of International Dispute 
Settlement. 

                                                                                 10 
 
There are several well-documented cases of round-tripping corridors in the case of emerging and
developing countries: Hong Kong (for China), Mauritius (for India), the Caribbean financial centers,
especially the British Virgin Islands (for Brazil, and partly the Russian Federation), and Cyprus (for
the Russian Federation). Offshore financial centers (OFCs) and transshipment centers are the
destination of a sizeable portion of the outflowing FDI from BRICs.13

China and Hong Kong

The FDI round tripping case between China and Hong Kong and other OFCs is one of the most well-
known. In the 1990s, in an effort to attract FDI flows, China introduced large financial incentives for
FDI, including concessions on taxes, leasing of land and property, and special arrangements regarding
the retention and repatriation of foreign exchange. 14This preferential treatment for foreign capital
encouraged not only foreign but also domestic investors to move their money offshore, mainly to
Hong Kong and the British Virgin Islands, and bring it back as foreign investment. As a result, the
round tripping of domestic investment accounted for an estimated 30 to 50 percent of FDI inflows to
China between 1994 and 2008. 15These round-tripping activities have decreased since 2008, when
China withdrew the tax incentives for foreign investment and adopted a uniform tax system for
domestic and foreign enterprises. As a result, the level of round tripping between China and OFCs
declined to an estimated 14 percent of its FDI in 2010. 16 In July 2014, Chinese authorities took
additional steps to further reduce the remaining preferential treatment for foreign investors, allowing
domestic investors to use SPEs to move their money where there are “real and reasonable needs”, and
removing repatriation restrictions on earnings.17

India and Mauritius

In the case of India, Mauritius accounts for a large share of India’s FDI inflows (Figure 4a). While not all the
flows from Mauritius constitute round-tripped Indian capital, about 10 percent of FDI inflows over the last
decade are attributed to round tripping through Mauritius, a strategy used by Indian companies for tax evasion
and, in some cases, money laundering. 18 The reason for this was the 1983 Double Taxation Avoidance
Agreement between India and Mauritius that gave only Mauritius the right to tax capital gains arising from
sales of shares of an Indian company by a resident of Mauritius. However, Mauritius does not tax capital gains;
therefore, Indian companies based in Mauritius could fully avoid taxation in both jurisdictions. As a result, the
small island was, for many years, the top country of origin for India’s FDI. The Indian Finance Ministry has
estimated the cost of round tripping of FDI to India, in terms of loss of tax revenue, to be around $600 million

                                                            
13
   According to the recognized definition, OFC is a center which provides some or all of the following services: low or 
zero taxation; moderate or light financial regulation; banking secrecy and anonymity. See Svetlana et al., 2013. 
14
   Wladimir Andreff, 2014, “Outward foreign direct investment by Brazilian and Indian multinational companies: 
comparison with Russian‐Chinese multinationals.”; Balashova and Matyushok, 2014, The Trajectory of Growth and 
Structural Transformation of the World Economy Amid International Instability. 
15
  Carlos Casanova, 2015, “Chinese outbound foreign direct investment: How much goes where after round‐ tripping 
and offshoring?” 
16
      K. Davies, 2013, “China Investment Policy: An Update.” 
17
   Woon‐Wah Siu, and Lu Wang, 2014, “China’s New Foreign Exchange Control Rule on Outbound and Round‐Trip 
Investment.” 
18
      Not all the flows from Mauritius are round‐tripped Indian capital. See K.S. Chalapati Rao, and Biswajit Dhar, 2011. 
                                                                11 
 
annually. 19 The two countries signed an amendment to this treaty in 2016 hoping to curb tax evasion and the
accompanying welfare losses. 20


Figure 4: Bilateral FDI flows in selected middle-income economies:
 

    a. Almost half of India’s FDI comes from Mauritius and           b. Caribbean OFCs, Luxembourg, and the
    Singapore …                                                      Netherlands accounted for 55 percent of Brazilian
                                                                     OFDI in 2014.




    Source: UNCTAD


Critics of the amendment pointed out that changing the current preferential investment policies or
placing too high a burden of proof regarding the ultimate investment beneficiary would divert
legitimate investments away from India. Furthermore, this policy proved to be ineffective since
Mauritius was not the only country to which India had granted exclusive taxing rights with respect to
capital gains; Singapore and Cyprus had similar rights. 21 Hence, the mere announcement of the
signing of the clause with Mauritius led to a diversion of Indian companies from Mauritius to
Singapore (Figure 4a).22

                                                            
19
      Ian Taylor, 2014, “Africa Rising: BRICS ‐ Diversifying Dependency.” 
20
   The amendment, which goes into effect on April 1, 2017, has the following characteristics: i) Source‐based taxation 
of capital gains on shares; ii) Grandfathering clause: Once the agreement enters into effect, the sale of shares of a 
company that operates in India will be taxed at 50% of the applicable rate until March 2019; iii) Limitation of Benefits 
(LOB) clause: The benefit of 50% reduction in tax rate during the transition period will not be extended to shell and 
conduit companies. A resident is deemed to be a shell/ conduit company if its total 2016 expenditure on operations in 
Mauritius is less than Mauritian Rupees 1,500,000.  
Financial Express Online, “India‐Mauritius sign landmark tax pact; move aimed at tackling black money, round tripping: 
Key features”, 10 May 2016, available at: http://www.financialexpress.com/economy/india‐mauritius‐sign‐landmark‐
tax‐pact‐india‐can‐tax‐capital‐gains‐arising‐from‐alienation‐of‐shares/252398/ 
21
  The “Comprehensive Economic Cooperation Agreement” signed between India and Singapore in 2005. 
https://halshs.archives‐ouvertes.fr/halshs‐01279896/document 
22
  Shreesh, 2016, “The FDI Report: India Got $40 Billion in FY16, Singapore Overtakes Mauritius, Real Estate Loses 
Love.” 
                                                               12 
 
Brazil and Caribbean OFCs

Brazil’s bureaucratic regulations and heavy taxation on domestic earnings have created incentives for
companies to invest overseas. As a result, the Caribbean OFCs (especially the Bahamas, the British
Virgin Islands, the Cayman Islands, and the former Netherlands Antilles) have become an important
Brazilian outward FDI destination, accounting for one-third of Brazil’s $300 billion FDI stock (Figure
4b). The capital is later either transshipped from tax havens to third-countries or round-tripped back
to Brazil as FDI. Interestingly, the main source countries for FDI inflows in Brazil are the Netherlands
and Luxembourg, accounting for some 30 percent of the $700 billion FDI stock. These two countries
are within the network of around 30 countries that have double taxation prevention treaties with
Brazil.23 While the actual level has yet to be estimated, a considerable portion of investment coming
from these two countries is believed to be round tripped Brazilian investment, partly through OFCs.
Interestingly, in 2009, following the global financial crisis, Brazilian companies repatriated intra-
company loans from their affiliates to the parent companies at home to combat the global recession
that had a negative impact on Brazil.24 While tax treaties with certain countries provide incentives,
improving the regulatory framework and simplifying the tax regime should help to reduce and mitigate
the effects of round tripping.

Ukraine and Cyprus

Cyprus has long been a destination favored by companies investing in Ukraine primarily due to the
favorable double tax treaty in place between Cyprus and USSR since 1983. Obviously, there have
been drastic changes in the region since then, but the benefits provided by the Cyprus treaty for
investors to Ukraine still remain very favorable, with no withholding tax charged on dividends,
interest, or royalty payments from Ukraine to Cyprus, and capital gains not taxed in Ukraine.
Moreover, Cyprus, with its favorable tax regime, common-law based traditions, and offshore services
(such as trusts to preserve anonymity of beneficial owners), is viewed as a close and attractive
jurisdiction to funnel profits. Some Ukrainian firms are also motivated to channel their capital through
Cyprus because of the instability of the Ukrainian banking system, high taxes, and lack of
convertibility of the Ukrainian hryvnia. As a result, Cyprus has become an important destination for
Ukrainian companies that move their money to Cyprus and eventually reinvest into Ukraine. While
Cyprus is now the largest source of FDI into the Ukrainian economy, representing nearly 30 percent
of FDI inflows, Cyprus is coincidentally also one of the largest destinations for Ukrainian investment
abroad, commanding an impressive share of 92 percent of the outward FDI stock.25

Both Ukraine and Cyprus experienced major crises in recent years. In order to deal with the
repercussions of the European banking crisis and its large exposure to the Greek economy, Cyprus
and the European Union reached an agreement on a bailout package on March 25, 2013, under the
condition that the depositors of two large banks share a portion of each bank's losses. Temporary
restrictions on bank transactions were introduced and virtually all money transfers out of Cyprus and
within Cyprus were subject to various restrictions. Similarly, Ukraine introduced capital control
restrictions, such as the prohibition of the transfer of dividends and sales proceeds abroad, to limit the


                                                            
23
      KPMG, 2012, “High Growth Markets ‐ Investing in Brazil.” 
24
      Mike Peng, and Ronaldo Parente, 2012, “Institution‐based weaknesses behind emerging multinationals.” 
25
      Robert Kirchner et al., 2015, “Foreign Direct Investment in Ukraine: Past, Present, and Future.” 
                                                               13 
 
capital flight following the geopolitical crisis between 2014 and 2015.26 These, however, also served
as a brake on all inflows.


Figure 5: FDI Round tripping in Russia:
    a. Cyprus, the Netherlands, and other transshipment        b. Half of the foreign firms investing in Russia come
    centers command around 70 percent of inward and            from Cyprus and the British Virgin Islands (BVI)
    outward FDI of Russia (2014)…




    Other transshipment centers include the British Virgin     Source: “Offshore Foreign Direct Investment, Capital
    Islands, Bermuda, Luxembourg, the Bahamas, and             Round-Tripping, and Corruption: Empirical Analysis
    Switzerland.                                               of Russian Regions” (Ledyaeva et al. 2015)


Russia and Cyprus & OFCs

Similar to Ukraine, round tripping of capital is a prevalent problem for Russia. It has mainly taken
place through Cyprus and OFCs, which account for 70 percent of inward/outward FDI stock of Russia.
Cyprus leads as the main destination of FDI inflows and outflows for Russia, followed by the
Netherlands (Figure 5).

The factors that drive the round tripping by Russian companies are not necessarily related to the
preferential treatment granted to foreign investors since many Russian regional authorities, rather than
aiding foreign investors, have erected barriers in order to protect incumbent firms from outside
competition. Rather, system escape motives, such as the avoidance of domestic regulatory
uncertainties, play a more prominent role for the round tripping activities by Russian companies and
investors. As discussed earlier, companies may try to overcome the institutional weaknesses in their
home economies through this kind of capital round tripping that allows the companies to engage in
institutional and regulatory arbitrage. This also provides an insurance against political risk and
                                                            
26
   The temporary restrictions include the repatriation of proceeds received by non‐resident investors as a result of sale 
of securities issued by Ukrainian issuers (except sovereign bonds); repatriation of proceeds received by non‐resident 
investors as a result of the sale of equity stakes in Ukrainian enterprises other than securities (e.g. equity in a limited 
liability company); and the repatriation of dividends by non‐resident investors (except for dividends received from 
securities listed at one of the local stock). 

                                                               14 
 
uncertainty stemming from the political economy of the country. Given that the FDI round tripping
between Russia and OFCs is widely discussed among politicians and analysts, there are a few
analytical studies try to understand the motivation for round tripping, as well as the differences
between these types of investors and genuine foreign direct investors especially in light of the
governance environment (Box 1).


While tax avoidance might also play an important role through double taxation treaties with some of
the OFCs, the main motivation for Russian round tripping is believed to be institutional arbitrage.
The detailed analysis of firm-level FDI data that distinguished genuine foreign direct investors from
round-trip investors indicates that the use of offshore financial centers as “home base” would provide
Russian companies access to more developed infrastructure for financial operations vis-à-vis purely
domestic firms. In addition, an understanding of the Russian culture and business environment would
put the round-trip investors in a superior position when compared to genuine foreign investors. This
significant advantage allows Russian investors to better exploit economic opportunities in Russia
while concealing their identity and using the institutional benefits that foreign jurisdictions offer (such
as financing opportunities).

One study also underscores significant differences between round-trip Russian investors and genuine
foreign investors; While round-trip investors tend to invest in Russian regions that are resource-
abundant and illustrate poor governance indicators (corruption), genuine FDI investors tend to go to
regions with seaports and higher level of skilled labor.27 As a result, the share of round-trip investment
in total FDI is significantly higher in corrupt regions.

The high level of FDI round tripping in Russia also partly reflects concealed investments as investors
can hide their identity from local authorities in Russia via “offshore schemes”.28 Furthermore, as
discussed earlier, investing through another country might enable firms to secure some of the
protections extended by the bilateral investment treaty of the transit country. Given that there is room
for improvement on several fronts measured by the Doing Business indicators and beyond- in
particular to increase competition in the economy-, being covered by an international treaty becomes
a significant relative advantage for an investor,29 though it is not always easy to claim their rights.30



                                                            
27
  Svetlana Ledyaeva et al., 2015, “Offshore Foreign Direct Investment, Capital Round‐Tripping, and Corruption: 
Empirical Analysis of Russian Regions.” 
28
      Olga Kuzmina et al., 2014, “Foreign direct investment and governance quality in Russia.” 
29
   In past years, Russia has been active in undertaking reforms across multiple areas of business regulation. In some 
aspects of Doing Business, the business regulatory environment of Russia is now closer to best practice. However, to 
foster more growth opportunities for local firms, there is room for improvement on several fronts measured by the 
Doing Business indicators and beyond, in particular to increase competition in the economy. In the area of Trading 
Across Borders, streamlining the formalities for border compliance would reduce the time and cost involved in trading 
across borders, thereby benefiting both exporters and importers. For more see: “Russia Continues to Improve its 
Business Environment, says Doing Business report”, Press Release, October 25, 2016 available at: 
http://www.worldbank.org/en/news/press‐release/2016/10/25/russia‐continues‐to‐improve‐its‐business‐
environment‐says‐doing‐business‐report 
30
      Svetlana Ledyaeva et al., 2015 

                                                               15 
 
By the same token, the concealed investment through OFCs might be a way of laundering the proceeds
of corruption.31
The socio-economic implications of the high level of round-tripped FDI in Russia might be quite
significant. Although it might not be the main motivation, it is likely that some tax revenue has been
lost through double taxation treaties. More importantly, the nature of the FDI round tripping seems to
reinforce corruption in certain regions that are already perceived as more corrupt. This in turn puts
them in a disadvantaged position to receive genuine FDI flows that are more technologically advanced
than round-trip investments. Genuine FDI increases by more than 150 percent when a region improves
its governance quality from average to the top level. 32 The majority of real FDI in Russia comes from
developed countries and hence, it brings modern technologies and know-how into the host regions.
Therefore, in the long run, the high diversity in regional corruption might lead to uneven technological
development across Russian regions and thus, further deepen the inequality in Russia’s economic
geography.33

Round-tripped or not, FDI inflows have played an important role in the Russian economy and have
remained stable since the financial crisis (Figure 6). Nevertheless, all flows, including FDI, dried up
since 2014 as international sanctions, falling oil
prices, and geopolitical tensions continued to Figure 6: All capital flows to Russia, including FDI
damage economic growth prospects and erode inflows, fell sharply in 2014 and 2015.
investor interests in the country.

In addition to economic difficulties, a new
Russian anti-offshore law adopted at the end of
2014 is also impacting FDI flows. It has already
reduced the scale and scope of round tripped FDI:
In less than two years, from 2013 to September
2015, the FDI stock of Cyprus in Russia, and the
Russian FDI stock in Cyprus decreased by 50
percent. Nevertheless, because of the new law,
Russian investors that used Cyprus as an offshore
base to reinvest back in the country transshipped
some of their investment to third countries rather
than recycling them back into the home country.
This trend is also the main reason for the drop of
the British Virgin Islands from second place in 2009 to eighth in the 2015 rankings of the largest
foreign investors in the Russian Federation, although it still remains the second largest destination of
Russian outward FDI stock according to the Bank of Russia.34




                                                            
31
      Olga Kuzmina et al., 2014 
32
      ibid. 
33
      supra, Svetlana Ledyaeva et al., 2015 
34
      UNCTAD, 2016, World Investment Report. 
                                                               16 
 
               Table 1: Russian Federation: Inward foreign direct investment 2007-2015, millions of US dollars
Top 5 for 2015                2007        2008           2009            2010    2011           2012      2013         2014     2015
WORLD                       55,874       74,783        36,583       43,168      55,084         50,588    69,219       22,031   6,478
BAHAMAS                        354         -524          1,731       2,282       1,829          2,111     2,791        3,638   5,090
BRITISH VIRGIN               3,962        5,519          1,761       2,139       7,225          2,475     9,379        3,123   2,242
ISLANDS
JERSEY                         104           8               68           126     775            642        509        -717    2,122
BERMUDA                      8,369        9,959          2,243            436     594           -320        404        1,777   1,692
FRANCE                         415         604             696       2,592       1,107          1,232     2,121        2,224   1,686
Bottom 5 for 2015             2007        2008           2009            2010    2011           2012      2013         2014     2015
NETHERLANDS                 10,268       10,184         -3,391     3,733         7,383         10,330     5,716        1,102    -249
FINLAND                        677        1,415            518           347      217            349        216         124     -272
HUNGARY                         61         171             112            374     454            683        736         534     -452
LUXEMBOURG                   -2,062       1,403          6,195       2,892       4,106         10,814    11,638        -693    -5,770
CYPRUS                      11,917       20,428          4,182      12,287      12,999          1,985     8,266        3,158   -7,057
   Source: ROSSTAT 2016

   Round tripping is a phenomenon that affects all capital flows and is not limited to FDI. Transshipment
   and round tripping of funds also take place in Russian Portfolio flows since Luxembourg, Cyprus, and
   other OFCs top the list of countries of origin for these flows (Table 2). However, the vast majority of
   these funds come into Russia as long-term debt securities (securities with a maturity longer than 12
   months). The long-term nature of the inflows somewhat limit the potential volatility and consequently,
   the potential negative impacts on the economy. As a result, in this case, portfolio investment, which
   usually is more volatile by nature, behaves more like FDI.

           Table 2: Russian Federation inward portfolio investments 2015, millions of US dollars
          Country of                                                                                Total portfolio
                             Equity                 Debt          (of which)     (of which)
         residence of                                                                                investment
                            securities            securities       long term     short term
            issuer:                                                                                     assets

         Luxembourg              355                24,257          22,457           1,800               24,612

           Ireland               42                 19,337          19,279               58              19,379

         Netherlands             241                 4,179           4,118               61              4,420

        United States            546                 2,968               --              --              3,514

           Cyprus                437                 2,031           1,711               320             2,468

         Other OFCs              39                   90                 90              --              1,475

       Rest of countries        1,197               12,112          14,082               998             11,963

        Total value of
                                2,857               64,974          61,738           3,237               67,831
         investment
   Source: The Russian Institute of National Statistics




                                                                   17 
    
     Box 1: Literature on Russian round tripping
     The idiosyncratic nature of the round tripping phenomenon for Russia led to three main academic
     studies, which try to understand the motivation for round tripping as well as differences between these
     types of investors and genuine foreign direct investors.
     The study “Offshore Foreign Direct Investment, Capital Round-Tripping, and Corruption: Empirical
     Analysis of Russian Regions” (Ledyaeva et al. 2015) introduces the term secrecy arbitrage, a novel
     concept used in this study, which is explained as both licit capital looking for shelter from corrupt
     home country authorities and illicit capital generated by corruption that needs to disguise its origin.
     The paper argues that part of the round-tripped FDI consists of proceeds from corruption, laundered
     in OFCs and reinvested back to the location of origin. However, some portion is the round tripping of
     licit capital, as businesses use the secrecy provided by OFCs to hide their true identities as a way to
     deal with weak governance in local governments. Using firm-level data from the enterprise registry
     of the Russian State Statistics Service (Rosstat), the paper uses econometric methods to detect the
     relationship between region-level corruption in Russia, proxied by the Corruption dimension of the
     Index of Democracy provided by the Moscow Carnegie Center for the period 2000-2004, and the
     volume of round tripped FDI. The Rosstat data set provides information on 20,165 firms with foreign
     capital registered in Russia over the period 1997–2011. The study underscores the interconnections
     between political and business elites and their interventions in the political decision-making process,
     and establishes the link between round tripped FDI and corruption.
     The paper titled “Foreign Direct Investment and Governance Quality in Russia” (Kuzmina et al.
     2014) studies the effect of poor governance quality on foreign direct investment in Russia. Using a
     survey of businesses across forty administrative districts, it finds that moving from the average to the
     top governance quality across Russian regions more than doubles the FDI stock. The governance
     quality data are derived from the Index of Support (“Index Opory”) survey conducted in 2011. The
     paper concluded that poor governance quality had a significantly negative effect on foreign direct
     investment in Russia.
     The paper “If Foreign Investment is not Foreign: Round-trip versus genuine foreign investment in
     Russia” (Ledyaeva et al. 2013) uses the knowledge-capital model of the multinational enterprise to
     provide a formal empirical proof of the phenomenon of round-trip investment in Russia and studies
     the differences in location strategies between round-tripped and genuine FDI. Using the firm-level
     data from Rosstat between 1997 and 2011, the paper extracts two types of firms: firms owned by
     offshore owners (Cyprus and British Virgin Islands), and firms with genuine foreign owners. The
     paper looks into the question if and to what extent the role of regional factors in the location decisions
     of foreign investors across Russian regions differs between round-trip and genuine foreign investors.
     The analysis shows that round-trip investors leverage the “Dutch disease” in Russia while genuine
     foreign investors tend to invest more in regions with higher levels of skilled labor and more
     technological advancement.




United States and OFCs

It is not only developing countries that have to deal with round tripping FDI. A recent paper estimated
that when U.S. taxes go up by 1 percentage point, the capital inflows from OFCs increases by 2.8
percentage points. 35 Unsurprisingly, these inflows slow down when the IRS tightens its controls for
                                                            
35
     H.R.297, “Stop Tax Haven Abuse Act 114th Congress (2015-2016).”  
                                                               18 
 
tax fraud. The study's authors estimate that as a result, the U.S. has forgone up to $27 billion in tax
revenue since 2008.36 To address this problem, in 2015, the “Stop Tax Haven Abuse Act” was
introduced by the US Congress. Should this bill get approved, new restrictions on U.S. corporations
and other entities with foreign income will be introduced with respect to: “(1) tax deductions allocable
to deferred foreign income, (2) the recalculation of foreign income taxes, (3) intangible property
transferred overseas, (4) tax evasion activities by U.S. corporations reincorporating in a foreign
country, and (5) the interest expense tax deduction of certain subsidiaries of foreign corporations with
excess domestic indebtedness.”37

While reducing FDI round tripping has proven to be challenging, countries can try to limit
the incentives by eliminating any treatment differentials based on nationality of firms.

In an increasingly globalized world where OFCs facilitate the growing mobility of finance by
providing no/low tax, no/low regulation, secrecy and anonymity, MNEs and investors will continue
to seize any arbitrage opportunities to reduce their tax cost, circumvent restrictions and regulations
that limit the scope of their operations and profits, and mitigate operational and other business risks.
Of course, OFCs also facilitate illicit capital movements such as money laundering.

While core factors driving round tripping differ in each country case, such as tax and institutional
arbitrage, in all cases companies choose to round trip their investments to benefit from some
preferential treatment provided to certain countries and their firms. Hence, it is important for countries
to work towards eliminating any treatment differentials to limit these arbitrage opportunities as the
successful Chinese example indicated. This should apply both to the preferential treatment of either
foreign firms or domestic firms, as well as the preferential treatment applied by the nationality of
investors. In the same vein, modernizing the investment attraction system, by ensuring equal access
to incentives and special economic zones for foreign and local firms, will reduce the incentives for
round tripping. If any differentiation is required between firms, it should be according to the degree
of substantive business activity of the country, irrespective of the firm’s nationality.

In reality, the blurring of investor nationality of the MNEs has already made the application of rules
and regulations on foreign ownership more challenging, if not impossible. A range of mechanisms to
safeguard the effectiveness of foreign ownership rules has been developed, including anti-dummy
laws, general anti-abuse rules to prevent foreign control, and disclosure requirements. However, they
have yielded mixed results (like in the case of India). Even in the case of international and bilateral
trade agreements, policymakers should be aware of the de facto “multilateralization effect”. Almost
one-third of foreign companies that operate under major intra-regional investment treaty areas (such
as TPP, TTIP, and RCEP) are actually owned by parent companies outside the region, raising
questions about the ultimate beneficiaries.38
 

 

 


                                                            
36
   M. Hanlon et al., 2015, “Taking The Long Way Home: U.S. Tax Evasion And Offshore Investments In U.S. Equity
And Debt Markets.”
37
   H.R.297, “Stop Tax Haven Abuse Act 114th Congress (2015-2016).”  
38
   UNCTAD, 2016, World Investment Report 2016 Investor Nationality: Policy Challenges.
                                                               19 
 
 

In fact, the most important policy measure to reduce round tripping activity and mitigate
its impact is to improve the business environment for all firms, foreign and domestic.

This goes hand in hand with focusing on the stability of the host economy and trust in its regulatory
environment. As discussed, round tripping activities are also motivated by the firms’ desire to
circumvent the institutional and financial shortcomings of their country of origin. Hence,
strengthening the institutions can foster not only domestic and foreign investment, but may, to some
extent, curb investments from flowing out to tax havens or being round tripped.39 Moreover, even if
capital outflows and investment round tripping occur, a country can receive genuine FDI inflows that
will create jobs, bring positive externalities, and stimulate growth. For example, in Denmark, which
has a good business environment for all investors, FDI inflows created jobs that outnumbered the jobs
lost due to FDI outflows. Moreover, FDI inflows created highly skilled and specialized jobs, while
some medium-skilled administrative, customer relations, and trade functions jobs might have been
lost.40 This indicates that when a country operates as an open, flexible economy with a good
investment climate for all investors, it can benefit from the positive effects of international capital
movements.

Nevertheless, countries also need to adapt to the new playing field for FDI and recognize the
trade-offs of their national policies on capital flows.

Countries have to adapt to the fact that not all FDI is linked to production, and MNEs can carry out
activities that register as FDI even though they are purely financial in nature. This would require a
new mindset for the policymaker to be fully aware of the complexity of modern corporate structures
and MNE activities, which will possibly persist in the future. Policymakers need to better understand
the nature, motivations, size and impact of FDI round tripping in their countries to adopt a holistic
approach towards the problematic aspects of round tripping. As discussed earlier, FDI round tripping
may have various consequences for the host economy, ranging from foregone tax revenues, distortions
of the information and domestic competition, support of corruption, as well as possible welfare and
efficiency losses.

Nevertheless, any policy choice to reduce round tripping activities should be evaluated against its
possible trade-offs since it might also have undesired consequences. In some cases, measures to limit
round-tripped investment may lead to capital flight, where investment never makes it back home, and
reduce the investment levels in the host country. For example, Russia’s newly introduced anti-offshore
law might have achieved what it intended to do, at least partially, but at the same time, some Russian
investors transshipped part of their investment to third countries rather than recycling it back into the
home country. The new law was a contributing factor for the sharp decline in FDI inflows in 2015.41

Capital controls in general are complex instruments and might have a much broader effect than what
is intended. In the case of capital controls related to round-tripping FDI, such as on outward capital
flows, they would likely also deter legitimate and productive capital flows, including by genuine

                                                            
39
      M. Chari, and S. Acikgoz, 2015, “What drives emerging economy firm acquisitions in tax havens?” 
40
      Peter Jensen et al., 2006, “Offshoring in Europe—Evidence of a Two‐Way Street from Denmark.” 
41
      UNCTAD, 2016, World Investment Report 2016 Investor Nationality: Policy Challenges. 
                                                               20 
 
foreign direct investors, and worsen short-run foreign-exchange and long-run growth prospects.
Additionally, these policies tend to be “leaky” and have a mixed success record with eroding
effectiveness over time as companies find new ways to circumvent them. Furthermore, they can be
difficult and costly to enforce, even in countries with strong government institutions.

Nevertheless, several countries have, over the years, used them, as have Iceland, Greece, and Ukraine
more recently. In most of these cases, capital controls that were introduced in a transparent and
temporary manner on outflows of capital were more or less effective to “stop the bleeding”.
International co-operation, as discussed below, is also an important factor since the trade and
investment treaties across the world may prohibit the use of such measures.

All indirect FDI flows need to be closely monitored.

Ownership schemes such as SPEs and OFCs used by MNEs can obscure the ultimate source of FDI
coming into countries. Moreover, it is often difficult to ascertain the true nature of funds due to the
added challenge of obtaining information from a special purpose vehicle (SPV) company.42 These
challenges lead to considerable inconsistencies in FDI inflows/outflows statistics provided by
different countries. For instance, according to Rosstat (2005), Russian FDI in Kazakhstan for the
period 2000-2004 amounted to a mere USD 121 million whereas the respective figure provided by
the National Bank of Kazakhstan (2007) was USD 987 million.43

To mitigate such inconsistencies, the latest international guidelines by OECD provide a method to
produce FDI statistics by ultimate investing country (UIC).44 This method would offer policymakers
information on who ultimately controls the investment, reaps its rewards, and bears its risks. This
approach also allows for the identification of round tripping activities. Six countries are currently
reporting data on the inward stock of FDI by the ultimate investing country criteria: Austria, Estonia,
Finland, France, Poland, and the United States. Examination of their statistics reveals some common
patterns. Countries, such as Luxembourg, Cyprus, and the Netherlands, that are known as countries
MNEs pass investments through on the way to other destinations, are much less important as sources
of direct investment when measured according to the UIC than when measured according to the
immediate investing country. Round tripping was present in each country examined and was large
enough to make investors from the home country rank among the top ten sources of FDI in each of
the countries. However, with the exception of Estonia, they accounted for 5 percent or less of the total
inward investment position. 45 Nonetheless, for the success of this calculation method, it is vital for
countries to increase their disclosure requirements. This should be the case both for inward and
outward investors, especially concerning the origin of funds and information about the final
beneficiary owners.

National policy measures have to be complemented by international actions.

                                                            
42
     IMF, 2004, “Issues Paper #13: Round Tripping.” 
43
      Valtteri Kaartemo, 2007, New role of Russian enterprises in international business. 
44
   OECD, 2015, “Implementing the latest international standards for compiling foreign direct investment statistics, FDI 
Statistics by the Ultimate Investment Country.” 
45
      OECD (2015) 

                                                               21 
 
International cooperation is essential for leveraging the efficiency of national policy interventions.
For an issue that transcends national borders, any national policy response will prove inadequate
without international cooperation. An international coordinated response can better address the
complex problems of globalized markets. Such international efforts would include: a review of
international investment agreements; the closing of the scope for treaty shopping; a revision of rules
on access to investor-state dispute settlement (ISDS); tax cooperation and gradual harmonization of
tax rules with partners to reduce the scope for tax arbitrage; cooperation on the methods used to
measure and report FDI, its origin, and its destination; as well as continued international cooperation
in money laundering and criminal matters.46




                                                            
46
      UNCTAD, 2016,(pp. 159‐187) 

                                                               22 
 
REFERENCES
Alfaro, Laura, Areendam Chanda, et al. 2004. “FDI and economic growth: the role of local financial
markets.” Journal of International Economics, Volume 64, Issue 1, October 2004, Pages 89–112,
available at: http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0022199603000813,

Andreff, Wladimir. 2014. “Outward foreign direct investment by Brazilian and Indian multinational
companies: comparison with Russian-Chinese multinationals.”

Balashova, S., and V. Matyushok. 2014. The Trajectory of Growth and Structural Transformation of
the World Economy Amid International Instability. Peoples’ Friendship University of Russia,
pp.252-297, 2014. available at: https://halshs.archives-ouvertes.fr/halshs-01279896/document

Casanova, Carlos. 2015. “Chinese outbound foreign direct investment: How much goes where after
round- tripping and offshoring?” June 2015, Working Paper, No 15/17
https://www.bbvaresearch.com/wp-content/uploads/2015/07/15_17_Working-Paper_ODI.pdf

Chalapati Rao, K.S., and Biswajit Dhar. 2011. “India’s FDI Inflows: Trends and Concepts”, Feb
2011, available at: https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=1770222

Chari, M., and S. Acikgoz. 2015. “What drives emerging economy firm acquisitions in tax havens?”
Journal of Business Research, available at: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jbusres.2015.08.034

Davies, K. 2013. “China Investment Policy: An Update.” OECD Working Papers on International
Investment, 2013/01, OECD Publishing. Available at: http://dx.doi.org/10.1787/5k469l1hmvbt-en

Dunning, John. 2013. “Re-evaluating the benefits of Foreign Direct Investment.” Available at:
http://unctad.org/en/Docs/iteiitv3n1a3_en.pdf,

Ghosh Roy, Atrayee, and Hendrik Van den Berg. 2006. “Foreign Direct Investment and Economic
Growth: A Time-Series Approach.” Available at:
https://ideas.repec.org/a/bpj/glecon/v6y2006i1n7.html

Haberly, Daniel, and Dariusz Wójcik. 2014. “Tax havens and the production of offshore FDI: an
empirical analysis.” Journal of Economic Geography, 15 (1): 75-101 available at:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1093/jeg/lbu003,

Hanlon, M., E. Maydew, and J.Thornock. 2015. “Taking The Long Way Home: U.S. Tax Evasion
And Offshore Investments In U.S. Equity And Debt Markets,” Feb 2015, The Journal Of Finance,
Vol. Lxx, No. 1

H.R.297. 2015-2016. “Stop Tax Haven Abuse Act 114th Congress.” Available at
https://www.congress.gov/bill/114th-congress/house-bill/297




                                                23 
 
Harrison, Ann. 1994. “The role of multinationals in economic development: The benefits of FDI.”
The Columbia Journal of World Business, Volume 29, Issue 4, Pages 6-11. Available at
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/0022542894900280,

IMF. 2004. Committee on Balance of Payments Statistics and OECD Workshop on International
Investment Statistics, Direct Investment Technical Expert Group (DITEG), “Issues Paper (DITEG)
#13: Round Tripping.” Available at: https://www.imf.org/External/NP/sta/bop/pdf/diteg13.pdf

IMF. 2016. “Capital Flows and Global Liquidity.” Note for G20 IFA WG, available at
http://www.g20.org/English/Documents/Current/201608/P020160811536051676178.pdf

Jensen, Peter, et al. 2006. “Offshoring in Europe—Evidence of a Two-Way Street from Denmark.”
Available at: https://www.ciaonet.org/catalog/5238.
Kaartemo, Valtteri (ed.). 2007. New role of Russian enterprises in international business. Electronic
Publications of Pan-European Institute 18/2007, available at:
https://www.utu.fi/fi/yksikot/tse/yksikot/PEI/raportit-ja-
tietopaketit/Documents/kaartemo_182007.pdf


Kalotay, K. 2012. “Indirect FDI.” The Journal of World Investment & Trade, 13 (2012) 542–555,
available at:
http://www.kozminski.edu.pl/fileadmin/wspolne_elementy/Jednostki/CPrzedsiebiorczosci/Publikacj
e/Projekt_COFDI/Indirect_FDI_Kalotay_2012.pdf

Kirchner, Robert, Vitaliy Kravchuk, and Julian Ries. 2015. “Foreign Direct Investment in Ukraine:
Past, Present, and Future.” German Advisory Group Institute for Economic Research and Policy
Consulting, Policy Paper Series [PP/02/2015], available at:
http://www.beratergruppeukraine.de/wordpress/wpcontent/uploads/2014/06/PP_02_2015_en1.pdf

Kokko, Ari, Ruben Tansini, and Mario C. Zejan. 2007. “Local technological capability and
productivity spillovers from FDI in the Uruguayan manufacturing sector.” The Journal of
Development Studies, Volume 32, Issue 4, available at:
http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/00220389608422430,

KPMG. 2012. “High Growth Markets - Investing in Brazil.” Available at:
https://www.kpmg.com/NL/nl/IssuesAndInsights/ArticlesPublications/Documents/PDF/High-
Growth-Markets/Investing-in-Brazil-2012.pdf

Kuzmina, Olga, et al. 2014. “Foreign direct investment and governance quality in Russia.” Journal
of Comparative Economics, Volume 42, Issue 4, December 2014, Pages 874–891, available at:
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jce.2014.08.001 or
https://www.nes.ru/dataupload/files/CV/Papers/JCE%20Kuzmina%20Volchkova%20FDI.pdf

Ledyaeva, Svetlana, Karhunen Päivi, and John Whalley. 2013. “If Foreign Investment is not
Foreign: Round-trip versus Genuine Foreign Investment in Russia.” CEPII, WP No 2013-05,
available at: http://www.cepii.fr/pdf_pub/wp/2013/wp2013-05.pdf



                                                 24 
 
Ledyaeva, Svetlana. 2013. “Offshore Jurisdiction (including Cyprus), Corruption Money
Laundering and Russian Roundtrip-trip investment,” Working Paper 19019, available at:
http://dx.doi.org/10.3386/w19019,

Ledyaeva, S., P. Karhunen, R. Kosonen, and J. Whalley. 2015. “Offshore Foreign Direct
Investment, Capital Round-Tripping, and Corruption: Empirical Analysis of Russian Regions.”
Econ. Geog., 91: 305–341. http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/ecge.12093/abstract

McGuigan, Claire. 2007. “The benefits of FDI: Is foreign investment in Bolivia’s oil and gas
delivering?” Available at:
http://www.boliviainfoforum.org.uk/documents/774914491_Bolivia%20oil%20and%20gas%20inve
stment%20report%20final.pdf

OECD. 2015. “Implementing the latest international standards for compiling foreign direct
investment statistics, FDI Statistics by the Ultimate Investment Country,” March 2015. Available at:
https://www.oecd.org/daf/inv/FDI-statistics-by-ultimate-investing-country.pdf

Peng, Mike W., and Ronaldo C. Parente. 2012. “Institution-based weaknesses behind emerging
multinationals.” Rev. adm. empress, vol.52 no.3, São Paulo, May/June 2012. Available at:
http://www.scielo.br/scielo.php?pid=S0034-75902012000300007&script=sci_arttext&tlng=pt

Shreesh. 2016. “The FDI Report: India Got $40 Billion in FY16, Singapore Overtakes Mauritius,
Real Estate Loses Love,” 26 May 2016, Capital Mind. Available at:
http://capitalmind.in/2016/05/the-fdi-report-india-got-40-billion-in-fy16-singapore-overtakes-
mauritius-real-estate-loses-love/
Siu, Woon-Wah, and Lu Wang. 2014. “China’s New Foreign Exchange Control Rule on Outbound
and Round-Trip Investment,” Oct 2014, available at:
https://www.pillsburylaw.com/siteFiles/Publications/AdvisoryChinaOctober2014ChinasNewForeig
nExchangeControlRule.pdf

UNCTAD. 2016. “Investor Nationality: Policy Challenges” in World Investment Report 2016
Investor Nationality: Policy Challenges. Available at
http://unctad.org/en/PublicationChapters/wir2016ch1_en.pdf

UNCTAD. 2016. “Global Investment Trends” in World Investment Report 2016 Investor
Nationality: Policy Challenges. Available at
http://unctad.org/en/PublicationChapters/wir2016ch1_en.pdf

Wein, Shen. 2010. “When Private Equity Meets China: Clashes between Locked-In Transactional
Models and Chinese Regulatory Regime.” Company and Securities Law Journal 283-89, available
at: http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2332870

Wellhausen Rachel L., 2016, “Recent Trends in Investor–State Dispute Settlement” Journal of
International Dispute Settlement. https://academic.oup.com/jids/article/7/1/117/2357934/Recent-
Trends-in-Investor-State-Dispute-Settlement




                                                 25 
 
