                                                                WPS8075


Policy Research Working Paper                                  8075




                         Predicting Conflict
                                     Bledi Celiku
                                     Aart Kraay




Fragility, Conflict and Violence Cross Cutting Solution Area
  &
Development Research Group
Macroeconomics and Growth Team
May 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 8075


  Abstract
 This paper studies the performance of alternative prediction                       prediction of conflict, that minimize the prediction loss
 models for conflict. The analysis contrasts the performance                        function. The paper evaluates the predictive power of these
 of conventional approaches based on predicted probabili-                           approaches in a set of conflict and non-conflict episodes
 ties generated by binary response regressions and random                           constructed from a large country-year panel of developing
 forests with two unconventional classification algorithms.                         countries since 1977, and finds substantial differences in
 The unconventional algorithms are calibrated specifically                          the in-sample and out-of-sample predictive performance
 to minimize a prediction loss function penalizing Type                             of these alternative algorithms. The threshold classifier
 1 and Type 2 errors: (1) an algorithm that selects linear                          has the best overall predictive performance, and more-
 combinations of correlates of conflict to minimize the pre-                        over has advantages in simplicity and transparency that
 diction loss function, and (2) an algorithm that chooses                           make it well suited for policy-making purposes. The paper
 a set of thresholds for the same variables, together with                          explores the implications of these findings for the World
 the number of breaches of thresholds that constitute a                             Bank’s classification of fragile and conflict-affected states.




  This paper is a product of the Fragility, Conflict and Violence Cross Cutting Solution Area, and the Macroeconomics and
  Growth Team, Development Research Group. It is part of a larger effort by the World Bank to provide open access to its
  research and make a contribution to development policy discussions around the world. Policy Research Working Papers
  are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The authors may be contacted at at bceliku@worldbank.org or
  akraay@worldbank.org.




         The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
         issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
         names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
         of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
         its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                       Produced by the Research Support Team
                                              Predicting Conflict

                                            Bledi Celiku (World Bank, FCV)
                                           Aart Kraay (World Bank, DECRG)




JEL Codes: C53, C25, D74, O10




________________________
World Bank, 1818 H Street NW, Washington DC 20433, bceliku@worldbank.org, akraay@worldbank.org. We are grateful to
Leonardo Garrido for research assistance, and to Ana Areias, Dhruv Grover, Jonathan Hersh, Gary Milante, Nadia Piffaretti,
Nicholas Sambanis, Luis Serven, Jake Shapiro, Raju Singh, Roy Van der Weide, Michael Ward, Nils Weidmann, and seminar
participants at the World Bank, the 2017 Empirical Studies of Conflict Project Annual Meeting, and the 2017 Barcelona
Prediction for Prevention Workshop for helpful feedback. The views expressed here are the authors’ and do not reflect those
of the World Bank, its Executive Directors, or the countries they represent.
1. Introduction

        This paper analyzes alternative models for conflict prediction. We work with a country-year
panel dataset covering 114 developing countries since 1977, and define a set of conflict episodes based
on the frequency of battle deaths, the presence of UN peacekeeping operations, and the proportion of
the population forcibly displaced as refugees across international borders. In this dataset, we assess
alternative prediction models that seek to distinguish these conflict episodes from complementary non-
conflict episodes, using data on a number of country-level covariates observed prior to the start of the
episodes. Our interest in this prediction exercise is motivated by the desire of aid donors and
multilateral organizations such as the World Bank and the United Nations for a framework that can be
used to anticipate the outbreak of conflict.1 Ideally, the signals of the risk of conflict generated by such a
framework open the possibility of policy interventions to reduce the risk of conflict before it occurs,
rather than simply reactions to conflict after the fact.

        In this paper, we contribute methodologically and pragmatically to the extensive empirical
literature on conflict prediction. Our methodological contribution is based on the observation that
conventional approaches to predicting conflict, whether based on fitted values from binary response
regression models or machine learning algorithms such as random forests, suffer from an internal
inconsistency: the objective function that is optimized when the prediction model is fitted to the data is
different from the objective function that typically is used to evaluate the quality of the resulting
predictions. Consider for example predictions of conflict based on the fitted values from a probit or logit
regression model. Estimating the regression model involves maximizing a likelihood function which
typically weights all observations equally, and in particular does not assign any particular priority to
fitting conflict or non-conflict observations well. The same is true for random forest algorithms, where
the branches in the underlying classification trees are chosen to maximize the homogeneity of
observations in the resulting subgroups, again weighting all observations equally.

        In contrast, forecast performance typically is evaluated using a prediction loss function that
assigns specific weights to Type 1 error rates (i.e. the proportion of conflict observations incorrectly
classified as non-conflict) and Type 2 error rates (i.e. the proportion of non-conflict observations


1
 For example, in the latest donor replenishment of resources to the International Development Association (IDA,
the part of the World Bank that provides concessional loans and grants to the world’s poorest countries), the
World Bank committed to “adopt a risk-based approach for identifying fragility”, where “fragility” is understood to
mean vulnerability to the outbreak of conflict.

                                                         2
incorrectly classified as conflict). This inconsistency between the estimation and prediction objective
functions can be particularly acute in applications such as conflict prediction, where conflict is a
relatively infrequent event. In this case, the small number of conflict observations in the sample carry
only a small weight in the likelihood function that is maximized at the estimation stage, but failure to
predict conflict when it does occur may carry a high weight in the prediction loss function.

        While some ad-hoc solutions that in effect over-weight the relatively infrequent conflict
observations at the estimation stage are available, we suggest an alternative, and in our view more
direct, approach: using prediction algorithms that are calibrated to directly minimize the same
prediction loss function that is also used to evaluate the quality of the predictions. We implement two
such algorithms. The first algorithm is similar to predictions based on fitted values from binary response
regression models, in that it predicts conflict if a linear combination of correlates of conflict crosses a
given threshold. The difference is that the weights in this linear combination are chosen to directly
minimize the prediction loss function, rather than to maximize the likelihood function of the binary
response model. We refer to this algorithm as the “linear classifier”. The second algorithm chooses a
threshold for each of the correlates of conflict included in the model, together with the number of
breaches of thresholds that constitute a prediction of conflict. The thresholds and the number of
breaches are jointly chosen to minimize the prediction loss function. We refer to this algorithm as the
“threshold classifier”. We contrast the predictive performance of these algorithms with standard
predictions based on probit regressions and random forests, and document improvements in predictive
performance that come from our proposed approach of using prediction algorithms directly calibrated
to minimize the prediction loss function.

        Our pragmatic contribution is based on the observation that in some circumstances there may
be a tradeoff between the sophistication of a prediction methodology and its suitability for policymaking
purposes. For example, an international organization such as the United Nations or the World Bank
might want to use an assessment of the risk of conflict across countries as a tool to persuade donor
countries to devote resources to aid programs that could help to mitigate the risk of conflict. Such an
assessment could also be a crucial part of the policy dialogue with the countries that themselves are
identified as being at risk of conflict, and play a role in the process of persuading them to accept
assistance and adopt reforms that might reduce the risk of conflict. In such a setting, the acceptability
of the framework for identifying risks of conflict might in part depend on the simplicity and transparency
of the underlying model that is used to generate the predictions of conflict.


                                                      3
         As the techniques used for conflict prediction have become increasingly sophisticated, evolving
from predictions based on simple logit and probit regressions to tools from the machine learning
literature such as random forests and neural networks, there is a risk that the predictions generated by
more sophisticated models, even though possibly more accurate, may be less useful to policymakers in
these circumstances. In contrast, the threshold classifier we propose is arguably one of the most
straightforward and intuitive prediction algorithms for policymakers to understand. This is because the
threshold classifier has a very simple form: given data on            indicators of conflict, we predict conflict if
more than      ≤     of the indicators cross a pre-specified threshold value for each of the indicators.

         In fact, the threshold classifier we propose can be thought of as a more rigorously-founded
generalization of the rule that the World Bank currently uses to identify countries at risk of conflict. The
current rule is based on IDA countries’ scores on the Country Policy and Institutional Assessments (CPIA)
that are carried out by the World Bank, the Asian Development Bank, and the African Development
Bank, as well as the presence of a UN and/or regional peacekeeping or peacebuilding operation.
Specifically, countries with CPIA scores below 3.2 (on a 1 to 6 scale), and/or a UN peacekeeping
operation in the previous three years, are classified as “fragile situations”, and become the focus of
conflict-prevention interventions. This rule is a threshold classifier with           = 2 indicators and
corresponding thresholds (CPIA scores, with a threshold of 3.2, and a dummy for UN peacekeeping
operations, with a threshold of 0), together with an aggregation rule that signals risk of conflict if at least
    = 1 of these two thresholds is crossed.2 The threshold classifiers we study in this paper are
motivated by this simple policymaker-friendly rule, but we generalize it by considering a longer list of
explanatory variables, and more importantly, by choosing the corresponding thresholds and the number
of breaches required to signal conflict optimally to minimize a prediction loss function.

         This threshold-based decision rule for classifying conflict episodes is simpler and more
transparent than approaches that base predictions on a weighted average of predictors of conflict, and
also is simpler than more sophisticated machine learning algorithms such as random forests.
Interestingly, in our dataset we find that this pragmatic advantage of the threshold classifier does not
come at the cost of worse predictive performance. In most cases that we consider, the threshold
classifier also generates the lowest values of the prediction loss function among the different


2
  Another example of a threshold classifier in regular policy use is the World Bank/IMF Debt Sustainability
Framework for low-income countries. This framework features a set of thresholds for five different debt burden
indicators, together with a rule that predicts a risk of debt servicing difficulties or “debt distress” if any of these
thresholds are breached.

                                                            4
alternatives we consider. This combination of simplicity and good predictive performance makes the
threshold classifier an appealing option for operational policymaking purposes.

        While we develop the methodological and pragmatic contributions of this paper in the specific
setting of conflict prediction, both have wider relevance in other settings as well. In recent years there
has been a strong movement among empirical economists to apply predictive tools from the machine
learning literature to a variety of economic applications (see for example Mullainathan and Spiess (2017)
and Athey (2017) for recent reviews of this trend). In cases where these applications involve binary
predictions (e.g. poor vs. non-poor, employed vs. unemployed, etc.), it may also be possible to improve
the performance of prediction algorithms by eliminating the inconsistency between the estimation and
prediction stages that we emphasize in this paper. Similarly, the point that simple prediction algorithms
may be better suited for policy purposes carries over to other settings as well. For example, many anti-
poverty programs are intended to be targeted to a particular group of beneficiaries below a certain
income threshold. In cases where it is difficult to observe income directly, these programs rely on
“proxy means tests” to identify beneficiaries based on a small number of more easily-observable
characteristics. Both the practical implementation of such a targeting rule, as well as its political
acceptability to those who pay for and benefit from the program, may be enhanced by having a simple
and transparent algorithm such as the threshold classifier.

        The application of our contributions to conflict prediction builds on a large empirical literature
that has analyzed why some countries experience conflict while others do not. Much of this literature is
surveyed in Blattman & Miguel (2010), and World Bank (2011) contains an extensive discussion of this
literature and its implications for development policy. This literature has emphasized factors such as
ethnic tensions (Kalyvas (2008), Fearon and Laitin (2003)), economic greed or grievances (Collier and
Hoeffler (1998), Collier and Hoeffler (2002), Collier and Hoeffler (2004)), geographical factors and
natural resource endowments (Ross (2004), Fearon (2005)) and even the effects of climate change
(Hsiang et. al. (2013)). Hegre and Sambanis (2006) is an important early attempt to assess the
robustness of the many findings in this literature, using a variant of extreme bounds analysis to identify
a small set of consistently-significant predictors of conflict.

        A growing number of papers have built on the insights of this literature to develop models for
predicting conflict, and Cederman and Weidmann (2017) provide a recent non-technical overview.
Many of these follow the conventional regression-based approach, estimating econometric models of
conflict using probit or logit models in panel datasets, and then use the fitted values of these to predict

                                                       5
subsequent conflict events. In this sense, these studies are conceptually similar to the “probit classifier”
that we analyze in this paper. Papers in this category include Hegre et. al. (2013) who estimates a
multinomial logit model for conflict over the period 1970-2009 and use it to predict conflict forward
through 2050; Hegre et al (2016) who offer 100-year projections of conflict under alternative climate
change scenarios using a similar methodology; Brandt et. al. (2011) who focus on predicting the time-
series behavior of the severity of Israeli-Palestinian conflict; Chadefaux (2014) who emphasizes the
importance of high-frequency data on news reports of conflict as a predictor of conflict; Weidman and
Ward (2010) who emphasize spatial information as predictors of conflict; and Ward et. al. (2010) who
point out that the significance of correlates of conflict in the estimating equation is a poor guide to their
ultimate predictive performance, and that the addition of a statistically significant variable can actually
reduce the predictive power of these models.

        Other papers in this literature have used prediction algorithms from the statistical machine
learning literature. An early example is Beck, King and Zeng (2000), who contrast the predictive power
of a simple logit model of conflict with that of a neural network, emphasizing the ability of the latter to
capture the nonlinearities and interactions driving the incidence of conflict. O’Brien (2010) summarizes
the results of a major undertaking by the US military to develop a prediction model for “events of
interest” that averages together forecasts based on a wide range of methodologies, including text
analytics of news and political leader speeches. Perry (2013) uses random forests and naive Bayes
classifiers to develop an early-warning model of conflict, using subnational conflict data in Africa, and
finds that both methods improve over predictions based only on lagged conflict. More recently,
Muchlinski, Siroky, He, and Kocher (2016) compare the predictive power of alternative logistic models
with random forests. Blair, Blattman and Hartman (forthcoming) use variants on logit regressions as
well as random forests and neural networks to generate predictions of conflict using subnational data
from Liberia. Blair and Sambanis (2017) use random forests to predict conflict, distinguishing between
groups of explanatory variables that are more or less aligned with different theories of conflict. Finally,
Mueller and Rauh (2016) use text mining tools to generate frequencies of references to topics relating
to conflict in newspaper articles, and show that this variable has strong predictive power in a
conventional linear regression prediction framework.

        We build on this literature by proposing and evaluating the predictive performance of two
simple prediction algorithms that are calibrated to directly minimize the prediction loss function of
interest – the linear and threshold classifiers. We find that the in-sample predictive power of the


                                                      6
threshold classifier generally dominates that of the other classification rules, particularly as the number
of explanatory variables increases. For all classification rules, in-sample predictive power naturally is on
average better than out-of-sample predictive power. Here as well we find that the threshold classifier
performs better on average than the other classification rules. Interestingly, we find that the out-of-
sample predictive power of the probit and linear classifiers worsens as we consider models with more
explanatory variables, while it improves, although only modestly, for the threshold and random forest
classifiers. While the threshold classifier performs well overall, it is important to keep in mind that the
predictive power even of the best-performing model we consider is still modest: while the threshold
classifier typically correctly predicts around 90 percent of conflict episodes, at the same time it
incorrectly signals conflict in 30-40 percent of non-conflict episodes.

        Two key limitations of our approach are also worth noting at the outset. First, a number of
papers in the conflict prediction literature have exploited the power of machine learning techniques as a
data reduction device, which is particularly beneficial in the contexts where the set of potential
explanatory variables can be very large. These include LASSO-regularized logit regression (used in
Muchlinski, Siroky, He, and Kocher (2016) and Blair, Blattman and Hartman (forthcoming)), as well as the
capacity of random forests and neural networks to handle large numbers of potential explanatory
variables. In this paper, we do not address the issue of data reduction, and choose to work with
datasets with a modest number of explanatory variables selected in advance. It remains an open
question whether simple approaches such as the threshold classifier will continue to perform well when
the number of explanatory variables is much larger. A second limitation – shared with other papers in
the conflict prediction literature – is that it is difficult to make any claims of external validity of the
methodological choices we make here. Papers like ours can only show that a particular classification
algorithm works well in a particular dataset, and it is not possible to claim that the preferred approach in
this setting – the threshold classifier – would perform as well in other datasets and applications.
Nevertheless, the simplicity of the threshold classifier that makes it arguably more suitable for
policymakers is an advantage of this approach regardless of the specific dataset to which it is applied.

        The rest of this paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes the different algorithms for
predicting conflict, distinguishing between those that are calibrated to minimize a prediction loss
function that those that are not. Section 3 describes the methodology for identifying conflict episodes,
and introduces a set of correlates of conflict motivated by the existing literature, that we use to test the




                                                        7
conflict prediction algorithms. Section 4 contains our main empirical findings, and Section 5 offers
concluding observations and a discussion of policy implications.

2. Prediction Models for Conflict

             Our objective in this paper is to assess models for predicting conflict events. The conflict events
we work with are binary -- either conflict occurs or it does not. Predictions of conflict events are often
most useful when they also are binary -- either we predict that conflict will occur, or will not occur -- for
two reasons. First, a policy rationale for having predictions of conflict is that they can trigger a remedial
response on the part of policymakers and aid donors to reduce the risk of conflict. Such mobilization of
resources is best done in response to a clear binary prediction, rather than a vague statement that
conflict is more or less likely. Second, we will be choosing among different prediction rules based on an
evaluation of their predictive performance. While there are tools to evaluate continuous or density
predictions of binary variables, the most common approach is to generate binary predictions to match
the binary outcomes, and then evaluate how often predictions are “right” and how often they are
“wrong”.3

             In Section 3, we define a set of conflict events and complementary non-conflict episodes. Let
be a binary indicator taking the value one if episode is a conflict episode, and zero otherwise; and let
    ∗                                                            ∗
        denote the corresponding prediction of conflict, i.e.        is equal to one if we predict conflict, and zero
otherwise. When evaluating these predictions, we care about both Type 1 errors (failing to predict a
                                                         ∗
conflict episode or “missed calls”, i.e.      = 1 but        = 0) and Type 2 errors (incorrectly predicting
                                                                                   ∗
conflict when conflict does not occur or “false alarms”, i.e.           = 0 but        = 1) 4. We evaluate the
predictions of conflict using a prediction loss function that penalizes the rate of both types of errors, i.e.

    (1)                            	 =    (      	1	         ) + (1 − )(          	2	        )	




3
  One way to evaluate continuous predictions, such as the fitted probabilities from a probit regression, is to “bin”
them into deciles and then plot the mean of the outcome variable within bins against the mean of the fitted
probability within bins. A model with strong predictive power should generate a relationship close to the 45-
degree line. While this is a valid approach to evaluating continuous predictions, we do not pursue it further here
given that most of the literature focuses on evaluating binary predictions based on some combination of Type 1
and Type 2 error rates.
4
  The machine learning literature generally uses the terminology of “sensitivity” – the proportion of conflict
episodes correctly predicted to be conflict, i.e.one minus the Type 1 error rate; and “specificity” – the proportion
of non-conflict episodes correctly predicted to be non-conflict, i.e. one minus the Type 2 error rate. Yet another
equivalent terminology is false negatives for Type 1 errors, and false positives for Type 2 errors.

                                                          8
                                                                                                                              ∗
where the rates of the two types of errors in the sample of interest are                                	1	      =∑      ∑
                                           ∗
                               (       )
and       	2	          =∑     ∑
                                               ; and         and 1 −         are the weights on Type 1 and Type 2 errors. In
                                   (           )

the empirical results that follow we set                   = 0.5. Although we assign equal weight to the rate of Type 1
and Type 2 errors, since conflict episodes are relatively infrequent, this implies that we are assigning a
higher value to correctly predicting conflict episodes than to correctly predicting non-conflict episodes.

                                                                                                   ∗
        We consider four methods for generating predictions of conflict,                               , based on a 	x	1 column
vector of observable covariates for each episode,                        . In keeping with the objective of providing
predictions of future conflict based on currently-available information, the covariates are observed prior
to the beginning of each episode. However, to conserve on notation, we do not explicitly denote this
temporal ordering. In the next two subsections we describe the two conventional prediction rules
(based on probit regressions and random forests) and the two unconventional prediction algorithms
(the linear and threshold classifier calibrated to minimize the prediction loss function) that we consider.
Section 2.3 briefly discusses implementation issues for the linear and threshold classifiers.

2.1 Prediction Algorithms Based on Binary Response Regressions and Random Forests

        Conflict predictions based on fitted probabilities from binary response regression models are
common, and consist of two steps. The first step involves estimating a binary response regression
model relating the observed outcome to the explanatory variables, i.e.

                                                       	            =1 = (           +    )	
 (2)



where (. ) is a cumulative distribution function and ( ,                         )′ is a vector of parameters to be estimated.
The second step is a rule which predicts conflict if the fitted probabilities from the binary response
                                                            ∗
model are greater than some cutoff value                        , i.e.

                                                                             (           )≥    ∗
                                                                  1,             +
                                                       ∗
                                                   	       =
 (3)                                                                                           ∗
                                                                  0,         (   +       )<

                   ∗
The cutoff value       is chosen to minimize the prediction loss function in Equation (1), given the
estimated parameters of the probit model,                         and . The binary response model is most commonly a
probit or a logit specification, corresponding to a choice of Gaussian or a logistic distribution for (. ).



                                                                         9
In this paper we report results using a probit specification, and refer to this approach as the “probit
classifier”. Our findings are virtually identical if we use logistic regressions.

           The top panel of Figure 1 illustrates the probit classifier for a hypothetical dataset in which there
are      = 2 explanatory variables for each episode,           and    . The orange round data points correspond
to observations with no conflict, i.e. pairs of          and     for which the corresponding          = 0, while the
blue square data points correspond to pairs of             and       for which conflict is observed, i.e.     = 1.
The downward-sloping line traces out the boundary between predicted conflict and non-conflict, i.e. the
                                                    ∗
set of points where (        +         +     )=         . Points above this line correspond to pairs of       and
where the probit classifier predicts conflict, while points below the line correspond to predictions of no
conflict. Therefore, square data points lying in the upper-right shaded region correspond to correctly
predicted conflict events, while the round data points in this region correspond to false alarms.
Similarly, in the region below the line, square data points correspond to missed conflict events, while
round data points correspond to correctly-predicted non-conflict events. Note that the slope of the
boundary line depends only on the ratio of the estimated probit coefficients,                 / . However, the
                                                                        ∗
intercept of the line is determined by the cutoff probability               . Optimally choosing the cutoff probability
involves parallel up-and-down shifts of this line to find the location which minimizes the prediction loss
function in Equation (1).

           This prediction rule is very intuitive, and has the added advantage that it connects naturally with
the large empirical literature on correlates of conflict that has estimated many different versions of
Equation (2). The difficulty with this approach however is that it is not at all clear that it is the best
possible prediction rule given the observed data and the loss function in Equation (1). As discussed in
Elliott and Leili (2013) and Elliott and Timmerman (2016, Chapter 12), the problem is that the likelihood
function that is maximized in the estimation of the binary response model implicitly treats prediction
errors differently than the objective function that is optimized in the selection of the cutoff
probabilities.5 Moreover, these two objective functions could very well be contradictory. The key issue


5
    Note that the maximum likelihood problem for probit estimation is:


                                 max            (   +        ) + (1 −        ) (1 − (     +     ))	
                                  ,

The term inside the summation is the log-likelihood function for an individual observation. It consists of two terms
that are treated symmetrically. The first term rewards values of the parameters that assign a high fitted
probability ( +        ) to conflict episodes where = 1, while the second term rewards values of the
parameters that assign low fitted probability to non-conflict epsides where = 0. The first term is analogous to

                                                            10
is that the likelihood function treats both types of errors symmetrically, and moreover weights each
observation in the sample equally. This means that the implicit weights on the rates of Type 1 and Type
2 errors at the estimation stage can be very different from those used to choose the cutoff probabilities
that generate the predictions. For example, if the sample happens to contain many non-conflict
observations, the estimation procedure will implicitly assign more weight to finding parameter values
that correctly predict non-conflict episodes, and will not assign much weight to correctly predicting
conflict. As a result, the objective function in the estimation stage is different from the one in the
                                                                        ∗
prediction stage, which explicitly chooses the cutoff probability           to minimize the prediction loss
function. Returning to the top panel of Figure 1, the downward-sloping line that defines the probit
classifier has a slope and an intercept that are chosen to optimize different and potentially-contradictory
objective functions.

         A similar issue arises with predictions based on random forests. As with the probit classifier,
predictions based on random forests are a two-step process: (1) fitting a random forest to the data, and
(2) retrieving the predictions for each observation and finding a cutoff to classify observations as conflict
or non-conflict. Random forests are a collection of classification trees that are fitted to bootstrapped
subsamples of the data. Classification trees themselves are sequential binary partitions of the
explanatory variables that seek to best discriminate between conflict and non-conflict observations at
each partition of the data. The bottom panel of Figure 1 illustrates a two-level classification tree for the
same hypothetical dataset as the top panel. In this two-variable example, a classification tree can be
constructed by first finding a threshold      for     that provides the best separation between conflict and
non-conflict episodes. The next step is to find two distinct thresholds for          , conditional on     being
above its threshold,      , or below its threshold,      , that provide the best separation between conflict
and non-conflict episodes in these two subsamples. The observations in the resulting four regions, or
terminal “nodes”, are predicted as conflict or non-conflict based on the majority of observations within
the terminal nodes.

         Random forests are a technique for improving the predictions of individual classification trees by
averaging across a large number of trees fitted to bootstrapped subsamples of the data. The basic idea
is to generate independent classification trees in randomly-selected subsamples of the data, and based
on randomly-selected subsets of the explanatory variables. The individual classification trees are grown


the complement of Type 1 errors, i.e. correctly-predicted conflict episodes or “sensitivity”, while the second term
is analogous to the complement of Type 2 errors, i.e. correctly-predicted non-conflict episodes, or “specificity”.

                                                         11
to be very “deep”, so that only a small number of observations remain in each terminal node.
Individually these trees are noisy predictors, but averaging across a large number of them results in
more stable predictions. Specifically, at each bootstrap iteration, a classification tree is fitted to a
subsample of the data, and the fitted classification tree is used to predict the outcome in the remaining
data not used for fitting the tree. These “out-of-bag” predictions are aggregated across all trees, and
the proportion of trees classifying a particular observation as conflict can be interpreted as a prediction
of the likelihood of conflict for that observation. Just as in the binary response regression approach,
these proportions or “vote counts” can be compared with some cutoff value above which a prediction of
conflict is generated. We select this cutoff value for the vote counts to minimize the prediction loss
function.

        Classification trees use the criterion of “node purity” to determine the optimal thresholds at
which to split the data at each branch of the tree. Most commonly this criterion takes the form            ,
where       and   denote the proportion of conflict observations in the subsamples of observations
below and above the threshold. This criterion is equal to zero in the case of a split that perfectly
separates conflict and non-conflict observations, since either      = 0 and      = 1, or vice versa,
corresponding to the case of perfect node purity. Thresholds at each level of the classification tree are
set to maximize node purity by minimizing this criterion. Crucially for our purposes, the splitting
criterion treats all observations symmetrically, and in particular does not distinguish between Type 1
and Type 2 errors. In this sense, the random forest classifier shares the same potential problem that the
probit classifier does – the estimation and prediction stages in the algorithm optimize different and
potentially contradictory objective functions.

        This shortcoming of the probit and random forest classifiers motivates the two other prediction
rules we consider, that are discussed in the following subsections. Following the suggestion of Elliott
and Leili (2013) and Elliott and Timmerman (2016, Chapter 12), we focus on prediction rules that are
calibrated to directly minimize the prediction loss function of interest. We also note that this potential
difference between the objective function at the estimation stage and the prediction loss function is
related to the emphasis placed by Muchlinksi et. al. (2016) on the “class-imbalanced” nature of conflict
data. Given their definition of conflict, conflict is a very rare event in the sample they study, and they
note the benefits of relying on “rare-events” logit estimation, which in effect over-weights the relatively
scarce conflict observations, as a way to address this problem. They do not however follow the logic of




                                                      12
this observation to the point of this paper, which is to rely on a prediction algorithm that is calibrated to
minimize the prediction loss function of ultimate interest.

2.2 Prediction Algorithms that Minimize the Prediction Loss Function

          In this subsection we discuss two prediction algorithms that avoid the potential contradictions
between the estimation and prediction stages in the probit and random forest classifiers by instead
directly minimizing the prediction loss function. The first is a simple variant on the probit classifier,
which bases predictions on a linear combination of the observed covariates that minimizes the
prediction loss function in Equation (1). Specifically, we define this prediction rule:

                                                             1,           ′   ≥
                                                     ∗
                                                	        =
 (4)
                                                             0,           ′   <

where, without loss of generality, we can normalize the cutoff value                  = 1. We then choose the values
of     that minimize the prediction loss function in Equation (1).

          This prediction rule is similar to the probit classifier in the sense that it bases predictions on
whether a linear combination of covariates falls above or below some cutoff value. The difference
however is that in the probit classifier, the relative weights assigned to the explanatory variables are
pinned down by the estimated probit slope coefficients,                  , while in the linear classifier the relative
weights are chosen to directly minimize the prediction loss function that we ultimately care about. To
see this more clearly, note that we can re-write the probit classifier as:

                                                              1			,			        ≥1
                                                     ∗
                                                	        =
 (5)
                                                             0,               <1




where      ≡(      ( ∗) −    )     is a simple rescaling of the probit slope coefficients. These rescaled
probit coefficients are directly comparable to the relative weights assigned by the linear classifier, ,
and to facilitate the interpretation of the results, we report the rescaled probit coefficients in the tables
that follow.

          The top panel of Figure 2 illustrates the linear classifier for the same hypothetical dataset as
before with      = 2 explanatory variables,         and      . Recall that the orange round data points
correspond to observations with no conflict, while the blue square data points correspond to conflict

                                                             13
observations. The downward-sloping line traces out the boundary between predicted conflict and non-
conflict based on the linear classifier, i.e. the set of points where           +        > 1. As before, points
above this line correspond to pairs of        and     where the linear classifier predicts conflict, while points
below the line correspond to predictions of no conflict. The main difference between the top panel of
Figure 1 and the top panel of Figure 2 is that in Figure 2, both the slope and the intercept of the
downward-sloping line are chosen optimally to minimize the prediction loss function. In contrast in the
probit classifier in Figure 1, only the intercept of the line is chosen to minimize classification errors,
while the slope is pinned down by the estimated coefficients in the probit regression. As discussed in
the previous subsection, this means that the slope of the boundary for the probit classifier reflects the
maximum likelihood optimization problem, which assigns different implicit weights to Type 1 and Type 2
errors than does the prediction loss function that we ultimately want to minimize.

         This prediction rule is related to a class of machine learning algorithms known as “support
vector classifiers”.6 In the case of two explanatory variables as illustrated in Figure 2, the basic idea
behind these algorithms is again to find a line in       ,     -space that best separates observations into
predicted conflict and non-conflict episodes. However, the line is chosen to minimize a different
objective function from the prediction loss function in Equation (1) that we use throughout. Typically,
the support vector classifier uses a loss function that penalizes the magnitude of misclassifications,
defined as the Euclidian distance in ( ,        )- space between each misclassified observation and a band
around the separating line. The objective function for the support vector classifier is to maximize the
width of this band subject to a penalty for the size of misclassifications. This leads to the same problem
as with the probit classifier – the objective function used to calibrate the classifier is not the same as the
objective function used to evaluate the predictions. For this reason, we use the linear classifier defined
in Equation (4) and the prediction loss function in Equation (1) rather than an off-the-shelf support
vector classifier. 7




6
 For a detailed discussion of these algorithms see Hastie, Tibshirani and Friedman (2015, Chapters 4 and 12)
7
 The linear classifier and the probit regression both also are similar to the venerable naive Bayes classifier that has
been used in the machine learning literature since the 1960s, and still is commonly used for text classification
schemes. The naive Bayes classifier is also one of the two machine learning models used to predict conflict in
Perry (2013). With Gaussian covariates, the naive Bayes classifier generates predictions as linear functions of
covariates, and is formally equivalent to a logit regression that also generates predictions based on a linear
combination of covariates. It also shares the problem noted in the main text that it is designed to match the
observed data as closely as possible, which may imply a different weight on Type 1 and Type 2 errors than the
prediction loss function that is used to evaluate the predictions.

                                                          14
          Our last prediction algorithm is a “threshold classifier”, that consists of a set of thresholds or
cutoffs for each of the         explanatory variables,          , and a rule that predicts conflict if at least    of the
cutoffs are crossed, with 1 ≤          ≤    . Specifically, the prediction rule for the threshold classifier is:


                                                           1			,			      (        )   ≥
                                                   ∗
                                               	       =
    (6)
                                                           0,             (       )   <


where     (       )   is an indicator value taking the value one if           ≥       and zero otherwise. In the threshold
classifier, the thresholds        and the minimum number of breaches required to predict conflict, , are
chosen to minimize the prediction loss function in Equation (1).8

          The bottom-left panel of Figure 2 illustrates the threshold classifier in the case of               =2
covariates, and where           = 1, i.e. at least one threshold needs to be breached to generate a prediction
of conflict. This generates an L-shaped shaded region in which conflict is predicted if                   ≥       or       ≥   ,
and a rectangular complementary region in the bottom-left of the graph where                         <     and         <
and accordingly, conflict is not predicted. In the case where                 = 2 is shown in the bottom-right panel of
Figure 2. In this case, the region for predicting conflict would be the rectangular area in the top-right of
the graph where            ≥    and     ≥    , and the remaining unshaded L-shaped region corresponds to
predictions of no conflict. The threshold classifier chooses the thresholds, and the minimum number of
breaches required to signal conflict, to minimize the prediction loss function.

          The main advantage of the threshold classifier is that it generates a very simple and intuitive
method for classifying conflict episodes that is easy for policymakers and other non-technical users of
the classification rule to understand. We can think of a covariate of conflict breaching its threshold, i.e.
      ≥       for a given episode as providing some signal of the likelihood of conflict based on that
variable. If sufficiently many such signals (i.e. at least             such signals) are observed, then the observation
is classified as a conflict episode. This simplicity comes at the expense that the orientation of each
covariate needs to be specified in advance, such that higher values of the variable correspond to a

8
  An early application of this approach is Reinhart et al. (1998) who generated threshold-based leading indicators
of currency crises. In contrast with this paper, they considered predictions based on one indicator at a time. In
this univariate setting all three algorithms in this paper reduce to simple threshold rules. However, when
combining information from different explanatory variables, the three algorithms considered here aggregate
information across different explanatory variables in different ways.

                                                                 15
greater risk of conflict. Otherwise, exceeding the threshold does not constitute a signal of conflict. In
many cases there is a natural intuitive orientation -- for example, it seems reasonable to suppose a priori
that a greater incidence of conflict among neighbors raises the risk of conflict at home. But in other
cases the orientation might be unclear. To address this issue systematically, we orient each of the
explanatory variables to be consistent with the estimated sign in the corresponding probit regression.
That is, if a variable enters positively in the probit regression (such that higher values are associated with
a higher risk of conflict), then we do not reorient the variable. If on the other hand a variable enters
negatively in the probit regression, then we reverse the orientation of the variable. To facilitate the
interpretation of results, we reorient variables in this way (i.e. based on the signs of the slopes in the
probit regression) for all variables and for all the classification rules, even though this step is of course
not necessary for the other prediction algorithms.




2.3 Implementation Issues

          Implementing the probit classifier is straightforward, since it simply requires the estimation of a
probit regression, followed by a one-dimensional grid search over cutoff probabilities to find the optimal
                     ∗
cutoff probability       that minimizes the prediction loss function. The grid search itself is automated in
the lroc command in Stata. To implement the random forest classifier, we rely on the
randomForest package in R.9

          Implementing the linear classifier and the threshold classifier is more challenging because it
involves minimizing an objective function that is flat in much of the parameter space, and otherwise
jumps discontinuously. To see why, consider for example the threshold classifier, and consider what
happens when we search over candidate values of the threshold for explanatory variable             that happen
to fall strictly between two adjacent observations          and    ,   (assume observations have been
ordered by increasing values of       ). For any threshold in this range, the conflict/no conflict prediction
does not change for any observation, and so the prediction loss function also does not change.
However, when the candidate threshold moves just outside this range by crossing either             or     ,   ,
the classification of observations changes and the objective function changes discontinuously. The size
of the “flat” regions of the parameter space and the size of the discontinuous “jumps” in the objective
function depend on how large the sample is and how evenly the covariates are distributed over their


9
    https://www.rdocumentation.org/packages/randomForest/versions/4.6-12/topics/randomForest

                                                       16
relevant ranges. In the fairly small samples we work with (around 500 observations), the objective
function is sufficiently flat and discontinuous that standard gradient-based minimization algorithms fail.

        A natural alternative to gradient-based minimization is to simply do brute-force grid searches
over the parameter space. This however becomes increasingly costly as the number of covariates
increases, and particularly so for a reasonably fine grid of candidate parameter values. Instead, we rely
on the Nelder and Mead (1965) method, which is a derivative-free heuristic minimization algorithm
(available as an option within the Mata optimize module). Since its convergence properties are not
known in general, we first verify that the Nelder-Mead algorithm finds a minimum that is close to the
one identified by brute-force grid searches, for several examples with up to four covariates for which
grid searches are not too computationally costly. To ensure robustness of the minimum identified by
this algorithm to the choice of initial parameters, we minimize the prediction loss function for 100
randomly-chosen sets of initial conditions. The distribution of the initial parameters is centered on the
probit weights for the linear classifier, and on the median value of each covariate in the conflict sample
for the threshold classifier.

3. Measuring Conflict and Its Correlates

        In this section we briefly describe the cross-country panel conflict dataset that we use to
evaluate our four prediction algorithms. The first subsection describes our definition of conflict, and the
following subsection enumerates the explanatory variables we draw on as predictors of conflict.

3.1 Identifying Conflict Episodes

        Our starting point is a panel dataset of country-year observations covering 114 developing
countries since 1977. As discussed in more detail below, the sample of countries and the time period
are dictated by data availability. Our primary measure of conflict is a binary indicator of whether at least
25 battle-related deaths occur in a country in a given year.10 This is a standard threshold for “minor
armed conflicts” used in the literature to capture smaller conflicts, and naturally also includes much
rarer civil war events which typically are measured using a higher threshold of 1,000 battle deaths. We
supplement this measure with two additional indicators. The first is a binary indicator measuring
whether a UN peacekeeping operation (UNPKO) is present in a given country year. This is intended to


10
  Data comes from Uppsala Conflict Data Program/PRIO Armed Conflict Dataset. It defines armed conflict as “a
contested incompatibility which concerns government and/or territory where the use of armed force between two
parties, of which at least one is the government of a state, results in at least 25 battle-related deaths.”

                                                     17
measure cases in which conflict exists, but is held in check by the presence of a UNPKO, so that battle
deaths fall below the threshold for conflict. The second is a dummy variable equal to one if at least 5
percent of the population of a country is involuntarily displaced as refugees across international
borders, and zero otherwise. This measure is intended to capture episodes of conflict that may not
cross the threshold of battle deaths but nevertheless are sufficiently severe to cause significant
involuntary displacement of people. 11 The threshold of 5 percent is somewhat arbitrarily selected, and
corresponds to the 99th percentile of all non-zero refugee observations in the data.

        Figure 3 helps to visualize the three criteria we use to identify conflict, using the Central African
Republic as an example. The dotted lines show the number of battle deaths and the ratio of displaced
population as a fraction of the population of the country of origin. The horizontal lines represent the
thresholds for battle deaths and total displacement ratio. Whenever the dotted line is above the
corresponding horizontal line, or there is a UN peacekeeping mission, the corresponding year is coded as
a conflict year.

        Figure 4 displays the contribution of individual criteria to identifying conflict country-year
observations in our full dataset. Over half of the conflict country-year observations are captured only by
the battle deaths criteria, while just 6 percent are captured only by the refugees share of total
population (by country of origin). The UN Peacekeeping Mission presence criteria account for a further
19 percent of the conflict-year observations while the remaining 24 percent are identified jointly by at
least two of the three criteria.

        We next translate these annual country-year observations on conflict into “conflict episodes”
that constitute our estimation sample.12 We are primarily interested in predicting the onset of conflict,
rather than its duration. We therefore identify conflict episodes as the first year in which one of the
three indicators signals conflict. In many countries, conflict years are immediately preceded by other
conflict years. To make sure that only distinct episodes of conflict are identified, we drop conflict
episodes that are preceded by conflict in any of the previous three years.13 Non-conflict episodes are
defined as non-overlapping periods of five consecutive years in which none of the three events related

11
   Data comes from UNHCR Population Statistics. Data on IDPs are published by the Internal Displacement
Monitoring Centre (IDMC) and have various challenges in collection, hence we do not include these data in the
analysis. For an in depth discussion please see World Bank (2016)
12
   This methodology is similar to Kraay & Nehru (2006), who define episodes of debt servicing difficulties in a
analogous way.
13
   An important point of the World Development Report 2011, was that modern violence comes in various forms
and repeated cycles.

                                                       18
to conflict take place. The non-conflict episodes begin in the first year for which it is possible to identify
five consecutive years with no conflict. As with the conflict episodes, we also require the non-conflict
episodes to be preceded by three years of no conflict. Figure 3 illustrates how we transform the annual
observation on conflict indicators into conflict episodes, using the case of Central African Republic as an
example. For this country, we have three non-conflict episodes in 1980, 1985 and 1990, and two
conflict episodes, beginning in 1998 and 2006, and shaded gray. In 1998 the conflict episode is triggered
by the presence of a UNPKO, whereas in 2006 the conflict episode is triggered by the battle death count
criterion crossing the threshold.

        We construct the conflict and non-conflict episodes using annual data for 114 countries over the
period 1977-2014 for which our core explanatory variables -- discussed in more detail below -- are
available.14 Through this method, we arrive at a sample of 69 conflict events, and 422 non-conflict
events. Our dependent variable in the empirical work that follows is a dummy variable taking the value
one for conflict episodes, and zero for non-conflict episodes. The 69 conflict episodes identified are
listed in Table 1, which identifies the country name and the start year of each episode. The list is
dominated by Sub-Saharan African countries, but a number of other conflicts from other regions appear
as well. The conflict episodes vary in length, with a median length of two years and an interquartile
range from one to six years. Some conflict episodes are very prolonged: the 90th percentile of conflict
length is 17 years. In the empirical work that follows, we do not seek to account for this variation in the
duration of conflict once it has begun, but rather focus on the prediction of conflict conditional on being
in a non-conflict state.



3.2 Correlates of Conflict

        We work with a selection of variables that have been emphasized in the existing literature as
important correlates of conflict (Fearon & Laitin (2003); Collier & Hoeffler (2004); Hegre and Sambanis
(2006); Besley and Persson (2011); Esteban, Mayoral, and Ray (2012); Hegre, Karlsen, Nygard, Strand,
and Urdal (2012)). Our goal here is not to innovate relative to this existing literature by isolating novel
drivers of conflict. Rather, we wish to have a set of covariates of conflict that is broadly representative
of those used in the existing literature, that we can use as a benchmark from which to assess the


14
  The key variable that limits the sample considerably is the World Bank’s Country Policy and Institutional
Assessment (CPIA) ratings, which starts in 1977 and is available only for developing-country clients of the World
Bank.

                                                        19
predictive power of alternative classification rules for conflict. We also do not seek to exhaustively
consider all of the variables that have been proposed in this voluminous literature. Doing so would raise
a further set of questions relating to model selection – what is the appropriate subset of variables to
include in the prediction algorithm? The issue of identifying a robust subset of correlates of conflicts
from the many variables proposed in the literature is discussed at length in the robustness analysis of
Hegre and Sambanis (2006), and Muchlinksi et. al. (2016) and Blair, Blattman and Hartman
(forthcoming), which consider LASSO-regularization as a technique for selecting a subset of explanatory
variables in their logit-based predictions. Since we do not seek to innovate on the issue of variable
selection, we work with a fixed and relatively small number of potential predictors of conflict to
illustrate the performance of the different conflict prediction rules.

           Purely for presentational purposes, we organize these variables into three broad categories:
latent tensions, shocks, and institutions.15 Since we are interested in models that can predict conflict
based on information prior to the beginning of an episode, we measure all explanatory variables as
averages over the three years prior to beginning of the conflict and non-conflict episodes. In the
category of latent tensions, we include a number of variables that are intended to capture underlying
factors contributing to between-group tensions that may escalate into conflict. We use two innovative
recent measures of income inequality, both taken from Alesina, Michalopoulos, and Papaioannou
(2016). The first combines satellite night light density -- a spatially-disaggregated proxy for per capita
income -- with maps delineating the boundaries of different ethnic groups, to obtain a proxy for income
inequality across ethnic groups. The second simply measures inequality across pixels within a country
and therefore proxies for overall spatial inequality. Both measures are available only at decadal
frequency, and we linearly interpolate the intervening years to obtain annual data that can be averaged
over the three years prior to each conflict and non-conflict event. Following a large literature that has
documented the importance of conflict over the income generated by natural resources, we include a
measure of natural resource rents as a share of GDP. These are constructed in World Bank (2011) and
are based on estimates of the difference between commodity prices and unit costs of production, for a
large number of commodities. These are aggregated across commodities produced in a country, and
expressed as a share of GDP. We also rely on standard measures of ethnic and religious fractionalization
that measure the probability that two randomly-selected individuals in a country will belong to different
ethnic or religious groups. We also include the share of men aged 15-29 in the total population,


15
     Details on the data sources are in the appendix.

                                                        20
following earlier literature that has documented associations between prevalence of young men and
conflict. Finally, in this category of latent tensions, we include the country’s history of conflict, defined
as the fraction of years since 1970 in which conflict, as defined in our dependent variable, is observed.

        In the category of shocks, we gather several types of events that the existing literature has
emphasized as increasing the risk of conflict. This category includes two external shocks: the income
effect of changes in the terms of trade, which tends to be positively correlated with conflict in our
sample, and number of neighboring countries in conflict, which also tends to be positively correlated
with conflict in the country of interest. We also include a composite measure of the incidence of natural
disasters, taken from Besley and Persson (2011). This is a binary indicator of whether any of the
following types of natural disasters occur in a given country and year: extreme temperature events,
floods, landslides and tidal waves. Finally, in this category we include per capita GDP growth, as a crude
proxy for other shocks hitting the economy that might contribute to the risk of conflict.

        The final category is intended to capture institutions that may reduce the likelihood of conflict,
by offsetting some of the forces in the two previous categories. We use the World Bank’s Country Policy
and Institutional Assessment as an omnibus proxy for the overall quality of policies and institutions. In
the specific World Bank institutional context, this measure is of particular interest because the Bank’s
past efforts to classify countries at risk of conflict have relied heavily on selecting countries with low
scores on this particular indicator. Turning to measures of political accountability, we include the
Freedom House composite indicator of civil liberties and political rights. We also use the Political Terror
Scale, which is a long-standing effort to numerically code narrative descriptions of human rights
violations in annual reports by Amnesty International, U.S. State Department and Human Rights Watch.
Finally, we include in this category the log-level of real GDP per capita, following many papers that have
documented a greater prevalence of conflict in low-income countries, and the logarithm of population,
following previous papers that have documented an association between country size and conflict.

        Table 2 provides descriptive statistics for these explanatory variables in the three-year period
prior to the start of conflict and non-conflict episodes in our dataset. A glance at this table reveals many
patterns that would be expected from the large empirical literature on conflict. Income inequality,
ethnic fractionalization, income inequality across ethnic groups, natural resource rents as a share of
GDP, and the history of past conflict are all on average higher prior to conflict events than non-conflict
events. Interestingly, however, religious polarization is on average lower in conflict events. Turning to
the variables in the institutions group, per capita income and the CPIA indicator are both lower prior to

                                                      21
the start of conflict episodes. The Freedom House and Political Terror Scale variables are both oriented
so that higher values correspond to worse outcomes, and we also observe on average higher values of
both measures prior to conflict episodes. In the shocks category, growth is lower prior to conflict
events, and natural disasters are neighbors in conflict are both higher before conflict. In contrast,
positive terms of trade shocks tend to precede conflict events in our sample.




4. Results

         Table 3 provides a first look at the univariate predictive power for the various correlates of
conflict. The rows of the table correspond to the correlates of conflict discussed in Section 3, grouped
into the three categories of latent conflict, institutions, and shocks. The first three columns of the table
report the Type 1 and Type 2 error rates, as well as the prediction loss function, for predictions of
conflict based on each variable individually. Since the classifiers in this table generate predictions using
a single variable, all four classification rules collapse to the same form – setting a threshold value for the
single explanatory variable above which the classifier signals conflict.16 In this table, in all cases the
threshold is set to minimize the prediction loss function – and therefore all four classifiers generate the
same threshold and predictions.

         Table 3 shows substantial heterogeneity across the individual variables in terms of their ability
to predict conflict. Type 1 errors or missed conflicts range from 4% to 88% of all conflict episodes, while
Type 2 errors or false alarms range from 6% to 83% of all non-conflict episodes. Variables such as the
spatial inequality and the young male population share stand out as generating predictions with very
low Type 1 error rates, implying that they are consistently high in conflict episodes. In contrast,
variables such as the CPIA and natural disasters stand out in terms of having very low Type 2 error rates,
i.e. they consistently have good values in episodes with no conflict, but not necessary poor values in
conflict episodes. The balance of Type 1 and Type 2 errors reflected in the objective function also shows
significant heterogeneity, ranging from 33% to 47%. To put these values of the prediction loss function
in context, note that had we simply predicted conflict at random with a probability equal to the
unconditional probability observed in the sample, the prediction loss function would be 50%.17 The two


16
   For the purposes of this table we simplify the random forest to a single classification tree with a single
explanatory variable, which corresponds to a single partition of the data.
17
   To see this, note that if the unconditional probability of conflict is , the probability of correctly predicting a
conflict is , while the probability of generating a missed conflict is (1 − ), implying a Type 1 error rate of

                                                           22
variables with the best predictive power, i.e. the lowest value of the prediction loss function, in each
group are highlighted (ethnic inequality, natural resource rents, Freedom House, Political Terror Scale,
real GDP growth, and neighbors in conflict).

              In the next two columns of Table 3, we report the percentile of the distribution of each variable
at which the optimal threshold is set, as well as the actual value of the variable at that percentile. In
order to interpret the figures in this column, it is important to recall that variables that are negatively
correlated with conflict in our sample have been re-oriented to be positively correlated with conflict.
These variables (religious fractionalization, the CPIA, per capita income, real GDP growth, and the
income effect of changes in the terms of trade) are indicated with a “*” in Table 3. For these variables,
values below the reported threshold (in percentile and value terms) correspond to predictions of
conflict, while for all other variables, values above the reported threshold correspond to predictions of
conflict. To take a specific example, the threshold for predicting conflict based on the CPIA is set at the
22nd percentile of the distribution of re-oriented CPIA scores. This means that observations in the
bottom 22 percent of the CPIA distribution would have conflict predicted based on this variable.
Interestingly, the value of this threshold of 3.2 is identical to the one used by the World Bank for many
years to determine whether a country should be classified as “fragile”18.

              In Table 4 we turn to the more interesting question of assessing predictions of conflict based on
multiple explanatory variables. When we consider the joint predictive power of groups of correlates of
conflict, the different classification rules combine the information from multiple explanatory variables in
different ways, with important implications for overall predictive power. We illustrate the differences
between classification rules by considering predictions based on three sets of variables. In Model 1 we
examine predictions based on a parsimonious set of six variables, selected as the best two predictors of
conflict within the three categories of explanatory variables, i.e. the highlighted rows in Table 3. In
Model 2, we consider predictions based on the set of nine explanatory variables that individually are
significantly correlated with conflict at the 95% significance level (based on the z-statistics in the last
column of Table 3). Finally, in Model 3, we generate predictions based on the full set of all 16
explanatory variables. Naturally, the selection of variables in these three models is somewhat arbitrary,


  (       )
      (       )
                  = (1 − ). Along the same lines, the Type 1 error rate is , and with a weight on Type 1 errors of   =
0.5, this implies a prediction loss function of 0.5.
18
   Details on this rule for identifying fragile states can be found at:
http://pubdocs.worldbank.org/en/154851467143896227/FY17HLFS-Final-6272016.pdf


                                                               23
and one could in principle generate predictions based on any combination of explanatory variables. We
focus on these three models simply for reasons of space, and assess the predictive power of the
alternative classifiers in these three models. In Table 4, we focus on in-sample predictions. That is, the
classification rules are estimated using the full sample of episodes, and then we examine how well the
rules classify observations in the same full sample. Out-of-sample predictive power is assessed in Table
5 and the discussion below.

        The three vertical panels of Table 4 correspond to the three models. Within each panel, the
columns labelled PC/RF/LC/TC correspond to the probit classifier, random forest, linear classifier, and
threshold classifier, respectively. The first three rows of the table summarize the predictive power of
the different classification rules in these three models. Moving from left to right, to models with
increasing numbers of explanatory variables, we see that predictive power, as measured by the
minimized value of the prediction loss function, generally improves. More interestingly, we find that the
predictive power of the threshold classifier dominates that of the other three classifiers, and particularly
as the number of explanatory variables increases. In the most parsimonious Model 1 with only six
explanatory variables, the linear classifier improves slightly over the probit classifier (with the prediction
loss function declining from 0.30 to 0.29), and the threshold classifier improves further to 0.27. The loss
function is highest for the random forest classifier – however it is difficult to compare this measure of
predictive power with that of the other algorithms since it is based on predictive performance in the
“out-of-bag” samples rather than in the full sample.19

        Moving to Models 2 and 3 with more explanatory variables, the threshold classifier performs
better in both in absolute terms and relative to the other classifiers. This is most pronounced for Model
3 which includes all 16 explanatory variables, and for which the prediction loss function falls to 20%. In
contrast, the addition of more explanatory variables in Model 3 relative to Model 1 improves the
predictive power of the probit and linear classifiers only modestly (to 29% and 28% respectively).
Interestingly, the linear classifier does not outperform the probit classifier by a very large margin,
despite the conceptual differences between the two outlined in the previous section. Overall,
however, the combination of the threshold classifier with a fairly large number of explanatory variables
has clearly the best performance in terms of in-sample predictive power.



19
  Reporting predictions based on the “in-bag” observations would be equally misleading, as in random forests the
individual classification trees are grown to be very deep so that there is only one observation in each terminal
node – where by construction the classification tree perfectly fits the data.

                                                       24
         The remaining rows of Table 4 document the roles of the different explanatory variables in
generating predictions based on these three classification rules. For the probit and linear classifiers, the
table reports the weights assigned to each variable in the linear combination on which predictions are
based (i.e. Equations (4) and (5) in the previous section). All the underlying variables have been
normalized to run from zero to one, so the weights reported in the table can be interpreted as their
relative importance in contributing to the predictions of conflict. Given the largely similar predictive
performance of the probit and linear classifiers, it is not surprising that they apply broadly similar
weights to the different explanatory variables. For example, in Model 3, the correlation across variables
of the weights assigned by the probit and linear classifiers is 0.94.

         The column for the threshold classifier reports the percentile of the distribution of each
explanatory variable at which the optimal threshold is set, i.e. the same as in Column 4 of Table 3. As
before, for the variables marked with a “*” that have been reoriented, the threshold corresponds to the
percentile below which a signal of conflict is issued, while for the remaining variables the threshold
corresponds to the percentile above which a signal of conflict is issued. Note also the bottom row of
Table 4, where we report the optimal number of breaches of thresholds required to signal a conflict
event, which increases from two in Models 1 and 2, to five in Model 3. Finally, for the random forest
predictions, we report the mean improvement in node purity for each variable, a standard measure of
predictor importance in a random forest classifier. These are normalized to 1 for the least important
predictor, with higher values corresponding to a greater improvement in predictive power.
Interestingly, there is some correspondence between the variables identified as important in the
threshold classifier and the random forest: in Model 1, the correlation between the measures of
importance for the two models is 0.68 (in absolute value). However, this correspondence across
methodologies declines as the number of explanatory variables increases, and for Model 3 the same
correlation is only 0.13 (again in absolute value).

         The analysis in Table 4 focuses on the in-sample predictive power of the different classification
rules. In Table 5 we turn to the more important question of out-of-sample predictive power. We do this
by dividing the dataset into an estimation sample and a prediction sample, successively using years
between 1990 and 2000 as dividing points.20 The three horizontal panels of the table correspond to


20
  In the machine learning literature, it is common to use cross-validation methods in which the dataset is
separated into randomly selected subsamples (or “folds”). The model is estimated sequentially leaving out one
fold at a time, and then used to generate predictions in the left-out fold. This is repeated across all folds and the
average predictive power across the left-out folds is used as a measure of out-of-sample predictive performance.

                                                          25
predictions based on the same three sets of variables as in Table 4 (i.e. Models 1, 2, and 3), and the rows
correspond to different breakpoints. For example, the row for 1990 means that the classification rule
was estimated using data between 1977 and 1989, and the predictions are for the period 1990-2014.
Finally, the columns of the table report the in-sample and out-of-sample value of prediction loss
function, which summarizes the predictive power of the four classification rules. For ease of
comparison, in each row the entry shaded in gray corresponds to the model with the best out-of-sample
predictive power in that row, i.e. the lowest value of the prediction loss function.

         Several observations about this table are of interest. First, for the probit, linear, and threshold
classifiers, on average in-sample predictive power is better than out-of-sample predictive power.21
While for the more parsimonious Model 1 and Model 2, these differences are not large (a few
percentage points), they are more pronounced for Model 3 which generates predictions based on 16
variables. This reflects a tendency of these classification rules to somewhat overfit in sample, with
adverse consequences for out-of-sample predictive power. The second observation is that for the
probit and linear classifiers, out-of-sample predictive power is best in the most parsimonious Model 1,
and declines sharply as additional variables are added in Models 2 and 3. In contrast, for the random
forest and threshold classifiers, out-of-sample predictive power improves moving from Model 1 with 6
variables to Model 3 with 16 variables, although the improvement is small.

         The final observation concerns the relative out-of-sample predictive power of the four
classification rules. A glance at the gray-shaded cells in Table 5 indicates that across all three models
and all 11 sample splits, the threshold classifier most often has the best predictive power (in 21 out of
33 cases). The probit classifier has the second-best out-of-sample predictive performance, in 8 cases,
although as noted abve the probit classifier does poorly in the less parsimonious Model 3. Finally, the
random forest and linear classifiers are only rarely the best predictors, at two cases each.

         A natural – and difficult to answer – question is the extent to which these findings, particularly
on the superior performance of the simple threshold classifier, generalize to other settings. While there


The approach taken here is conceptually identical, in that the model is estimated in one subset of the data and
used to generate predictions in the remaining subset. However, in this country-year panel setting, there is a
natural temporal ordering of the data, and splitting the data by time period is arguably a more relevant exercise, as
it answers the question: “how would prediction algorithms have fared ex post if we had used them to predict
conflict based on the information available as of 1990, as of 1991, etc.?”.
21
   For the random forest classifier, recall that the in-sample measure of goodness of fit is based on the “out-of-bag”
subsamples of the training dataset, and therefore is not comparable with the out-of-sample predictions that are
based on the entire prediction sample.

                                                         26
is little we can offer in terms of systematic evidence, in Appendix B we document similar, although less
stark, evidence on the relative performance of the different prediction algorithms in the well-known
Hegre and Sambanis (2006) dataset.

5. Policy Implications and Conclusions

        A robust predictive framework for conflict events can provide policymakers with the opportunity
to respond more proactively to different risks of conflict, including with policy interventions to address
the structural causes or triggers of conflict. This papers aims to strengthen predictions of conflict by
evaluating the predictive performance of alternative algorithms that might form the basis for such a
framework. We have considered the in-sample and out-of-sample predictive power of four classification
rules: two conventional algorithms based on probit regressions and random forests, and two
unconventional algorithms designed to directly minimize the prediction loss function – the linear and
threshold classifiers. In this particular setting, we find that the threshold classifier dominates the other
classification algorithms in terms of in-sample and out-of-sample predictive power, particularly in
models with more explanatory variables. Moreover, we have argued that the simplicity of the threshold
classifier makes it an attractive tool when conflict predictions are intended to inform policy discussion
around aid and conflict-prevention strategies.

        While these differences across prediction algorithms are non-trivial, it is important not to lose
sight of the fact that the out-of-sample predictive power of these methods is modest. While the best-
performing threshold classifier can correctly predict over 90 percent of conflict events, it also incorrectly
classifies around 30 percent of non-conflict events as conflict (in Model 3 in Table 4). Whether this
rather high rate of “false alarms” is acceptable or not depends in large part on the policy purposes for
which these classification algorithms are intended. For example, if resources for conflict prevention
programs are scarce, allocating them using a classification rule with a high rate of “false alarms” may
result in a highly inefficient targeting of these resources to places where they are most needed. This
suggests that before using any of these classification algorithms for policy purposes, careful thought
should be given to the weight on Type 1 and Type 2 errors in the prediction loss function.

        As noted above, a policy goal of an exercise such as this is to inform frameworks for anticipating
the outbreak of conflict. To illustrate how the classification algorithms discussed here might do so in
practice, we generate a list of countries that would be considered to be at risk of conflict, based on the
most recently-available information in our dataset on the various predictors of conflict, and the four


                                                     27
classification algorithms. Specifically, we take the average of each of the explanatory variables over the
most recent period 2012-2014 included in the dataset, and feed these through all four classification
rules to generate four alternative lists of countries “at risk” of conflict according to these models. For
comparative purposes we also report the list of countries “at risk” of conflict based on the World Bank
criteria for being a “fragile or conflict-affected state”. As noted earlier, this classification was based on
having CPIA scores below a threshold of 3.2, and/or the presence of a UN and/or regional peacekeeping
or peacebuilding operation, and we take the most recent classification of countries (i.e. the World
Bank’s FY17 list).22 Finally, we focus only on countries in which none of our three annual indicators of
conflict is observed in any of the three years 2012-2014. This is to be consistent with the emphasis in
our empirics on predicting transitions from non-conflict into conflict.

         The results of this exercise are shown in Table 6. The rows of the table correspond to the 87
countries satisfying the criteria outlined above, the columns correspond to the four classifiers as well as
the Bank’s listing of fragile and conflict-affected situations (FCS). In the table entries, ones indicate
predictions of conflict, and zeros predictions of no conflict. The probit, linear, and threshold classifiers
all predict conflict in 35, 43, and 37 of these countries respectively, while the random forest algorithm
predicts conflict in 26 countries. It is useful to compare these predictions with the World Bank’s
classification of fragile situations. There are 10 countries that appear on the FCS list and they are
highlighted in light gray. Of these, five countries also have conflict predictions from all four classification
algorithms (Burundi, Djibouti, Guinea-Bissau, Chad, and Zimbabwe). A further four countries have
conflict predictions based on two or three of the algorithms.

         Perhaps more interesting are cases where there is disagreement between the classification
algorithms and the World Bank list. There is only one country on the World Bank list, Togo, for which
none of the classification algorithms predicts conflict. In contrast, there are eight countries not on the
World Bank list, but where all four conflict prediction algorithms do signal conflict and they are
highlighted in dark gray: Bangladesh, Mauritania, Malawi, Nepal, Niger Senegal, Tajikistan, and
Uzbekistan. Interestingly enough, in the latest replenishment round of IDA, an exceptional Fragility,
Conflict, and Violence (FCV) Risk Mitigation Regime was established that would make countries who
want to address FCV risks to be eligible for up to 1/3 of the country’s indicative allocations with a cap of


22
  Note that a country can only appear on the World Bank’s list of fragile and conflict-affected states if its CPIA
score was publicly disclosed, which is done only for countries eligible for borrowing from IDA. For this reason,
countries for which CPIA scores are not publicly disclosed are indicated with as missing values in the fifth column
of Table 6.

                                                         28
US$300 million per country per replenishment. The four countries that were selected to be eligible for
this replenishment round were Guinea, Nepal, Niger and Tajikistan23. For Guinea, three of the four
prediction algorithms signal conflict, while for the other three countries, all prediction algorithms signal
conflict. This suggests that having such processes in the future be informed by robust classification
algorithms would enhance the ability of policymakers to make informed decisions.

        It is useful to focus on the fourth column containing the predictions based on the threshold
classifier, which as we have shown in the previous section tends to have better predictive power than
the other classification rules. The threshold classifier signals a risk of conflict in 37 of the 87 countries
reported in Table 6. Interestingly, there is only one case where the threshold classifier predicts conflict
but none of the other classifiers do, which is Belarus. Conversely, there are only a handful of cases
where the threshold classifier does not predict conflict but at least two out of three of the other
classifiers do: Indonesia, Kyrgyz Republic, Sri Lanka, Madagascar, Sierra Leone, and Zambia. Finally,
while not explicitly shown in Table 6 for reasons of space, it is also interesting to document the role of
the 16 different indicators in triggering signals of conflict for the threshold classifier. There is
considerable variation across indicators in this respect. Three of the individual indicators rarely see
breaches of their corresponding thresholds: the young male population share, GDP per capita growth,
and terms of trade shocks cross thresholds in five or fewer countries. In contrast, spatial inequality,
history of conflict, the political terror scale, natural disasters, and neighbors in conflict breach their
corresponding thresholds in 30 or more of the 87 countries in Table 6.

        While a variable with more breaches of its corresponding threshold is more likely to contribute
to predictions of conflict, recall that a minimum of five variables must breach their thresholds in order to
generate a conflict prediction. Thus, it also matters how often a given variable crosses its threshold for
countries for which at least four other variables cross their own thresholds as well. To capture this
notion of specificity, we also calculate the proportion of breaches for each indicator that occur in
countries where at least four other variables breach as well, i.e. in countries where the threshold
classifier signals conflict. The CPIA and the political terror scale stand out in this respect: although these
two indicators individually signal conflict in only 9 and 21 countries respectively, in 8 out of 9 cases for
the CPIA and in 18 out of 21 cases for the political terror scale, the threshold classifier also predicts
conflict with a total of at least five breaches. At the other extreme, the thresholds for spatial inequality


23
  See details at http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/652991468196733026/pdf/106182-BR-IDA18-
Fragility-Conflict-and-Violence-PUBLIC-IDA-R2016-0140.pdf.

                                                       29
and natural disasters are low and these two variables generate 47 and 46 signals of conflict,
respectively. Yet in only 17 of these cases (for spatial inequality) and 23 of these cases (for natural
disasters) does the overall threshold classifier predict conflict.

        One final observation suggests directions for future work. While we have documented
substantial differences across four classification algorithms in terms of predictive performance, even the
best-performing threshold classifier has only modest predictive power. An open question is whether
some combination of stronger covariates and more robust prediction algorithms can substantially
improve over this predictive performance. In identifying such algorithms, the results of this paper
suggest two considerations are important: calibrating the prediction algorithm to directly minimize the
prediction loss function, and ensuring that the algorithm features a prediction rule that is simple and
transparent if the algorithm is to be used for policy purposes.




References

Alesina, Alberto, Stelios Michalopoulos, and Elias Papaioannou. 2016. "Ethnic Inequality." Journal of
Political Economy 124 (2): 428-488.

Athey, Susan (2017). “Beyond Prediction: Using Big Data for Policy Problems”. Science. 355:483-485.

Beck, Nathaniel, Gary King and Lanche Zeng. 2000. "Improving Quantitative Studies of International
Conflict: A Conjecture." American Political Science Review 94 (1): 21-35.

Besley, Timothy, and Torsten Persson. 2011. "The Logic of Political Violence." The Quarterly Journal of
Economics 126 1411–1445.

Blair, Robert, Christopher Blattman, and Alexandra Hartman (forthcoming). “Predicting Local Violence”.
Journal of Peace Research.

Blair, Robert and Nicholas Sambanis 2017. “Forecasting Civil Wars: Theory and Structure in an Age of
Big Data and Machine Learning”. Manuscript, University of Pennsylvania.

Blattman, Christopher, and Edward Miguel. 2010. "Civil War." Journal of Economic Literature 48:1, 3-57.

Bodea, Cristina, Masaaki Higashijima, and Raju Singh. 2016. "Oil and Civil Conflict: Can Public Spending
Have a Mitigation Effect." World Development (78) 1-12.

Breiman, L. 2001. “Random Forests”. Machine Learning 45(1), 5-32.

Cederman, Lars-Erik and Nils B. Weidmann. 2017. "Predicting Armed Conflict: Time to Adjust Our
Expectations?" Science 474-476.


                                                      30
Chadefaux, Thomas. 2013. "Early Warning Signals for War in the News." Journal of Peace Research.

Collier, P, and A. Hoeffler. 2002. "On the Incidence of Civil War in Africa." Journal of Conflict Resolution
46,13–28.

Collier, P., and A. Hoeffler. 2004. "Greed and grievance in Civil War." Oxford Economic Papers 56, 563–
595.

Collier, Paul, and Anke Hoeffler. 1998. "On economic causes of Civil War." Oxford Economic Papers
50(4), 563-573.

Elliott, Graham and Allan Timmermann. 2016. Economic Forecasting. Princeton: Princeton University
Press.

Elliott, Graham and Robert Leili. 2013. "Predicting Binary Outcomes." Journal of Econometrics. 174: 15-
26.

Esteban, Joan, Laura Mayoral, and Debraj Ray. 2012. "Ethnicity and Conflict: An Empirical Study."
American Economic Review 102(4): 1310-1342.

Fearon, J. D. 2005. "Primary Commodities Exports and Civil War." Journal of Conflict Resolution.

Fearon, J. D., and D. D. Laitin. 2003. "Ethinicity, Insurgency, and Civil War." Am. Polit. Sci. Rev. 97,75–90.

Hegre, Havard and Nicolas Sambanis. 2006. "Sensitivity Analysis of Empirical Results on Civil War Onset."
The Journal of Conflict Resolution 50 (4).

Hegre, Havard, Halvard Buhaug, Katherine Calvin, Jonas Nordkvelle, Stephanie Waldhoff and Elisabeth
Gilmore. 2016. "Forecasting Civil Conflict Along the Shared Socioeconomic Pathways." Environmental
Research Newsletter 11: 1-8.

Hegre, Håvard, J Karlsen, H Nygard, H Strand, and H Urdal. 2013. "Predicting Armed Conflict, 2010–
2050." International Studies Quarterly.

Hsiang, Solomon M., Marshall Burke, and Edward Miguel. 2013. "Quantifying the Influence of Climate on
Human Conflict." Science.

Kalyvas, S. N. 2008. "Ethnic Defection in Civil War." Comparative Political Studies 41, 1043–1068.

Kraay, Aart, and Vikram Nehru. 2006. "When is External Debt Sustainable?" The World Bank Economic
Review 20 (3), 341-365.

Muchlinski, David, David Siroky, Jingrui He and Matthew Kocher. 2016. "Comparing Random Forest with
Logistic Regression for Class-Imbalanced Civil War Onset Data." Political Analysis 24: 87-103.

Mueller, Hannes and Christopher Rauh (2016). “Reading Between the Lines: Prediction of Political
Violence Using Newspaper Text”. CEPR Discussion Paper No. 11516.

Mullainathan, Sendhil, and Jann Spiess. (2017). “Machine Learning: An Applied Econometric Approach.”
Journal of Economic Perspectives 31 (2): 87-106.




                                                      31
Nelder, John A. and R. Mead. 1965. "A Simplex Method for Function Minimization." Computer Journal
308-313.

O'Brien, Sean P. 2010. "Crisis Early Warning and Decision Support: Contemporary Approaches and
Thoughts on Future Research." International Studies Review 12: 87-104.

Perry, Chris. 2013. "Machine Learning and Conflict Prediction: A Use Case." Stability: International
Journal of Security and Development 2(3) 1-18.

Reinhart, Carmen, Graciela Kaminsky and Saul Lizondo. 1998. "Leading Indicators of Currency Crises."
IMF Economic Review 1-48.

Ross, M. 2004. "What Do We Know about Natural Resources and Civil War? ." Journal of Peace Research
41, 337–356 .

Ward, M, Brian Greenhil, and Kristin Bakke. 2010. "The perils of policy by p-value: Predicting civil
conflicts." Journal of Peace Research Vol 47, Issue 4, 363 – 375.

Weidmann, Nils B. and Michael D. Ward. 2010. "Predicting Conflict in Space and Time." The Journal of
Conflict Resolution 54 (6): 883-901.

World Bank. 2011. World Development Report 2011: Conflict, Security, and Development. World Bank.
Washington, DC: World Bank.

World Bank. 2011. The Changing Wealth of Nations: Measuring Sustainable Development in the New
Millennium". World Bank.

World Bank. 2016. Forcibly Displaced: Toward a Development Approach Supporting Refugees, the
Internally Displaced, and Their Hosts. Washington, DC: World Bank.




                                                    32
Appendix A: Data Sources

 Battle Death Data           UCDP/PRIO Armed Conflict Dataset version 4-2016
 Presence of UN              Coded from here
 Peacekeeping missions
 Refugees (by country or     UNHCR population statistics
 territory of origin)
 Ethnic Income Inequality,   Alesina, Michalopoulos, & Papaioannou (2016). Ethnic income
 Spatial Inequality          inequality combines satellite night light density -- a spatially-
                             disaggregated proxy for per capita income -- with maps delineating the
                             boundaries of different ethnic groups, to obtain a proxy for income
                             inequality across ethnic groups. Spatial Inequality measures inequality
                             across pixels within a country and therefore proxies for overall
                             inequality. Data is available only at decadal frequency, and we linearly
                             interpolate the intervening years to obtain annual data.
 Natural Resource Rents (%   "The Changing Wealth of Nations: Measuring Sustainable
 of GDP)                     Development in the New Millennium" , World Bank (2011). It is based
                             on estimates of the difference between commodity prices and unit
                             costs of production, for a large number of commodities. These are
                             aggregated across commodities produced in a country, and expressed
                             as a share of GDP.
 Ethnic and Religious        Alberto Alesina, Arnaud Devleeschauwer, William Easterly,Sergio
 Fractionalization           Kurlat, and Romain Wacziarg. "Fractionalization" Journal of Economic
                             Growth, vol. 8, no. 2, June 2003, pp. 155-194.
 Male 15-29 Pop. Share       Share of male population aged 15-29 in the total population. From UN
                             POPIN Database
 History of Conflict         Fraction of years since 1970 that a country has been in conflict. It is
                             adjusted appropriately for countries that became independent after
                             1970
 CPIA                        World Bank's Country Policy and Institutional Assessment
 Freedom House               Composite indicator (average) of civil liberties and political rights
                             coming from Freedom House
 Political Terror Scale      Composed as an average indicator of the numerically coded indicators
                             from yearly country reports of Amnesty International, the U.S. State
                             Department Country Reports on Human Rights Practices, and Human
                             Rights Watch’s World Reports.
 Log GDP per capita          Penn World Tables 9.0.
 Log Population              World Development Indicators
 GDP per capita Growth       Penn World Tables 9.0.
 TOT change                  Income effect of changes in the terms of trade, comes from Penn
                             World Tables 9.0. It is complemented with data from World
                             Development Indicators for countries with missing data
 Natural Disaster            Incidence of natural disasters, constructed from EMDAT similar to
                             Besley and Persson (2011). This is a binary indicator of whether any of
                             the following types of natural disasters occur in a given country and
                             year: extreme temperature events, floods, landslides and tidal waves.
 Neighbors in Conflict       Binary indicator of whether a country has any neighbors in conflict

                                                33
Appendix B: Performance of Classification Algorithms in the Hegre and Sambanis (2006) Dataset

         In this annex we briefly describe how the four classifications algorithms described in the main
text perform in the conflict dataset in Hegre and Sambanis (2006), (HS). In their seminal contribution,
HS were the first to systematically document the robustness of the relationship between civil conflict
and many of the correlates of conflict that had been proposed in the previous literature. HS considered
a set of 88 such variables, and used a variant of extreme bounds analysis to isolate a subset of 18
variables that were robustly associated with conflict, in the sense of having a weighted average p-value
smaller than 0.05. We take these 18 variables, listed in Table 3 of HS, together with two of the three
“core” variables included in all of their specifications (logarithm of population and the logarithm of GDP
per capita, Table 2 in HS) as our set of candidate explanatory variables.24

         We use the HS primary definition of civil war as our measure of conflict. As in the original HS
contribution, conflict episodes begin in the first year that conflict is observed. HS treat all country-years
in which conflict is not observed as non-conflict observations, and then logit regressions to estimate the
relationship between conflict and contemporaneous explanatory variables in a country-year panel. Here
we use the HS conflict data to create a set of conflict episodes and complementary non-conflict episodes
in the same way as in the main text. Conflict episodes begin in a year where conflict is observed, and no
conflict is observed in the three previous years. Non-conflict episodes begin in the first of non-
overlapping five-year periods in which conflict is not observed, and which are preceded by three years of
no conflict as well. As in the main text, and consistent with our emphasis on predicting future conflict
based on contemporaneously-available data, we measure the explanatory variables as annual averages
in the three years prior to the start of the episode. Transformed in this way, the dataset consists of XX
conflict episodes and YY non-conflict episodes.

         Annex Table 1 summarizes the predictive performance of the four classification algorithms in
the HS data. Model 1 in the left panel considers a model with the top 10 most significant variables from
HS, while Model 2 in the right panel considers a model with all 20 variables. The first block of the table
considers the in-sample fit of the two models, and is analogous to Table 4 in the main text. Here the
threshold classifier performs best in Model 1 with 10 explanatory variables, but the random forest
classifier performs best in Model 2. The second and third panels of the table divide the sample at 1980
and at 1990 respectively, and report the in-sample predictive power for the four classifiers estimated in
the first half of the sample, followed by the out-of-sample predictive power in the second half of the
sample. In Model 2 with 20 explanatory variables, the threshold classifier has the best out-of-sample
predictive performance for both sample splits, although extremely close to that of the linear classifier in
the sample split at 1980. In the more parsimonious Model 1, the linear classifier edges out the
threshold classifier by a tiny margin when the sample is split at 1980, and both perform only marginally
better than the random forest classifier. Somewhat surprisingly, the probit classifier has the best out-of-
sample performance when the sample is split at 1990. Despite this aberration, overall the results that
emerge from Annex Table 1 are broadly similar to those in the main text: the threshold classifier
performs relatively well as an out-of-sample prediction rule, and there is little evidence of a penalty in



24
  We do not include the third core variable (number of years at peace) since it was not consistently significant in
the HS specifications. We obtained the dataset from the replication materials generously provided by Muchlinsky
et. al. (2016) who also work with this dataset.

                                                        34
terms of worse predictive power relying on this simple and transparent classification rule relative to
more sophisticated alternatives such as the random forest classifier.




     Annex Table 1: Predictive Performance of Classification Rules in the Hegre-Sambanis Dataset


                                    Model 1 -- HS Top 10 Variables                   Model 2 -- HS Top 20 Variables
                                    PC       RF       LC       TC                  PC        RF         LC        TC

  Full Sample
   Type 1 Error                    0.073     0.122     0.098        0.134        0.098       0.244       0.122      0.256
   Type 2 Error                    0.497     0.504     0.439        0.370        0.454       0.244       0.383      0.295
   Objective Function              0.285     0.313     0.268        0.252        0.276       0.244       0.252      0.276

  Split Sample at 1980
  In-Sample
   Type 1 Error                    0.204     0.163     0.082        0.184        0.102       0.347       0.082      0.286
   Type 2 Error                    0.365     0.494     0.445        0.310        0.449       0.125       0.414      0.208
   Objective Function              0.284     0.329     0.263        0.247        0.276       0.236       0.248      0.247
  Out-of-Sample
   Type 1 Error                    0.333     0.061     0.121        0.303        0.102       0.333       0.082      0.286
   Type 2 Error                    0.410     0.628     0.549        0.368        0.449       0.261       0.414      0.208
   Objective Function              0.371     0.344     0.335        0.336        0.276       0.297       0.248      0.247

  Split Sample at 1990
  In-Sample
   Type 1 Error                    0.197     0.409     0.076        0.167        0.091       0.152       0.091      0.227
   Type 2 Error                    0.380     0.242     0.458        0.320        0.434       0.305       0.396      0.354
   Objective Function              0.288     0.325     0.267        0.243        0.262       0.228       0.243      0.291
  Out-of-Sample
   Type 1 Error                    0.188     0.375     0.125        0.313        0.375       0.125       0.250      0.188
   Type 2 Error                    0.410     0.306     0.528        0.419        0.376       0.520       0.371      0.358
   Objective Function              0.299     0.325     0.327        0.366        0.375       0.322       0.311      0.273
 Notes: This table reports the Type 1 and Type 2 error rates together with the minimized value of the prediction loss
 function, for in-sample and out-of-sample predictive performance, splitting the sample at the indicated year.




                                                               35
                                          Table 1: Start Year of Conflict Episodes
     Azerbaijan                  2005   Egypt, Arab Rep.           1993   Mali                      1994 Rwanda                    2009
     Azerbaijan                  2012   Egypt, Arab Rep.           2014   Mali                      2007 Senegal                   1990
     Burundi                     1991   Ghana                      1981   Mozambique                2013 Senegal                   2011
     Burkina Faso                1987   Guinea                     2000   Mauritania                2010 Sierra Leone              1991
     Bangladesh                  2005   Gambia, The                1981   Malaysia                  1981 El Salvador               1979
     Bhutan                      1992   Guinea-Bissau              1998   Malaysia                  2013 Suriname                  1986
     Central African Republic    1998   Haiti                      2004   Niger                     1991 Togo                      1986
     Central African Republic    2006   Indonesia                  1997   Niger                     2007 Togo                      1993
     China                       2008   Iran, Islamic Rep.         2005   Nigeria                   2009 Thailand                  2003
     Cote d'Ivoire               2002   Kenya                      1982   Nicaragua                 1978 Tajikistan                2010
     Cameroon                    1984   Lao PDR                    1989   Nepal                     1996 Trinidad and Tobago       1990
     Congo, Rep.                 1993   Liberia                    1980   Panama                    1989 Tunisia                   1980
     Congo, Rep.                 1997   Liberia                    1989   Peru                      1982 Turkey                    1984
     Comoros                     1989   Sri Lanka                  1984   Peru                      2007 Ukraine                   2014
     Comoros                     1997   Lesotho                    1998   Paraguay                  1989 Uzbekistan                1999
     Djibouti                    1991   Mexico                     1994   Romania                   1989 Uzbekistan                2004
     Djibouti                    1999   Mali                       1990   Rwanda                    1980 Venezuela, RB             1992
     Algeria                     1991
Notes: This table lists the conflict episodes studied in the paper, identified by the country and the start year of the episode.




                                                                      36
                                                Table 2: Summary Statistics

                   Average before episode of
                   Latent Conflict
                   Ethnic Income Inequality                              0.472                               0.578
                   Natural Resource Rents (% of GDP)                     8.291                               13.099
                   Ethnic Fractionalization                              0.480                               0.549
                   Religious Fractionalization                           0.445                               0.387
                   Spatial inequality                                    0.456                               0.534
                   Male 15-29 Pop. Share                                 0.136                               0.137
                   History of Conflict                                   0.077                               0.116
                   Institutions
                   CPIA                                                  3.749                               3.393
                   Freedom House                                         3.730                               4.739
                   Political Terror Scale                                2.265                               2.685
                   Log GDP per capita                                    8.392                               7.873
                   Log Population                                        15.542                              15.954
                   Shocks
                   GDP per capita Growth                                 0.024                               0.016
                   TOT change                                            0.012                               0.010
                   Natural Disaster                                      0.487                               0.551
                   Neighbors in Conflict                                 0.490                               0.720
                   No. obs.                                               422                                  69
Notes: This table reports means of the correlates of conflict considered in the paper, separately by conflict and non-conflict episodes.




                                                                    37
                                     Table 3: Univariate Predictions of Conflict
                                                     In Sample Predictions        Estimated Thresholds  Area Under `| Z-statistic |
                                                     T1       T2       Obj      Percentile Actual Value ROC Curve     in Probit
       Latent Conflict
       Ethnic Income Inequality                        0.145     0.661      0.403      0.312      0.413          0.610           3.24
       Ethnic Fractionalization                        0.493     0.339      0.416      0.624      0.629          0.634           2.12
       Religious Fractionalization*                    0.609     0.239      0.424      0.542      0.525          0.516           1.81
       Spatial inequality                              0.043     0.827      0.435      0.153      0.157          0.586           2.42
       Natural Resource Rents                          0.377     0.400      0.389      0.566       6.156         0.653           2.95
       Male 15-29 Pop. Share                           0.130     0.777      0.454      0.208       0.127         0.506           0.58
       History of Conflict                             0.522     0.296      0.409      0.678       0.044         0.568           1.78
       Institutions
       CPIA*                                           0.623     0.194      0.409      0.224       3.200         0.617           3.36
       Freedom House                                   0.145     0.521      0.333      0.420       3.333         0.664           4.39
       Political Terror Scale                          0.290     0.405      0.348      0.552       2.500         0.670           4.26
       Log GDP per capita*                             0.275     0.448      0.362      0.489       8.390         0.658           4.22
       Log Population                                  0.406     0.455      0.430      0.352     15.043          0.567           1.91
       Shocks
       GDP per capita Growth*                          0.623     0.182      0.403      0.210      -0.009         0.555           1.20
       TOT change*                                     0.145     0.749      0.447      0.705       0.024         0.484           0.56
       Natural Disaster                                0.884     0.057      0.470      0.935      1.667          0.506           0.79
       Neighbors in Conflict                           0.290     0.469      0.380      0.483      0.667          0.618           3.60
Notes: This table summarizes predictions of conflict based on each of the individual explanatory variables, taken one at a time. T1 and T2
refer to Type 1 and Type 2 error rates, and Obj refers to prediction loss function. The last two columns report the percentile rank and the
value of the threshold that separates conflict and non-conflict episodes. Since with a single explanatory variable the probit, threshold, and
linear classifiers are identical, results are reported for the probit classifier only.
 * indicates that orientation of variables has been reversed so that higher values are associated with a greater risk of conflict. Values of
these variables below the indicated threshold correspond to predictions of conflict. For all other variables, values above the indicated
threshold correspond to predictions of conflict.




                                                                     38
                                    Table 4: Multivariate Predictions of Conflict
                                                    Model 1                         Model 2                          Model 3
                                            PC     RF    LC       TC        PC      RF   LC         TC       PC     RF    LC         TC
     Predictive Performance
     Type 1 Error                         0.174 0.087 0.116 0.130          0.188 0.246 0.101 0.101         0.174 0.290 0.101 0.072
     Type 2 Error                         0.429 0.630 0.464 0.408          0.431 0.396 0.462 0.398         0.405 0.334 0.460 0.310
     Objective Function                   0.301 0.359 0.290 0.269          0.310 0.321 0.282 0.250         0.290 0.312 0.281 0.191
     Explanatory Variables
     Latent Conflict
     Ethnic Income Inequality             0.187 5.950 0.175 0.788           0.13 5.59 -0.04 0.98           0.101   4.635   0.125    0.632
     Ethnic Fractionalization*                                              0.02 4.66 -0.15 0.95           0.056   3.652   0.077    0.890
     Religious Fractionalization*                                                                          0.184   4.376   0.071    0.747
     Spatial inequality*                                                   0.256 6.548 0.156 0.989         0.210   4.990   0.186    0.493
     Natural Resource Rents               0.405 5.907 0.634 0.142          0.372 7.232 0.596 0.205         0.315   5.713   0.371    0.165
     Male 15-29 Pop. Share*                                                                                0.063   4.247   0.051    0.947
     History of Conflict                                                                                   0.064   3.115   0.161    0.088
     Institutions
     CPIA*                                                                 0.204   6.342   0.375   0.581   0.081   5.811   0.107    0.594
     Freedom House                        0.724 3.921 0.763 0.666          0.131   5.333   0.300   0.858   0.119   4.761   0.152    0.741
     Political Terror Scale               0.373 6.400 0.317 0.532          0.467   4.378   0.629   0.661   0.387   4.007   0.415    0.508
     Log GDP per capita*                                                   0.539   7.261   0.320   0.603   0.393   6.136   0.414    0.591
     Log Population*                                                                                       0.110   5.556   0.082    0.786
     Shocks
     GDP per capita Growth*               0.373 6.400 0.317 0.532                                          0.079   5.536    0.097   0.539
     TOT change                                                                                            0.002   4.378   -0.019   0.958
     Natural Disaster                                                                                      0.041   1.840    0.076   0.191
     Neighbors in Conflict                0.242 1.000 0.258 0.999          0.164 1.000 0.380 0.664         0.103   1.000    0.138   0.921

      Number of Breaches                                              2                               2                                5
Notes: PC=Probit Classifier, RF=Random Forest, LC=Linear Classifier, TC=Threshold Classifier. Top panel reports Type 1 and Type 2 error
rates and the minimized value of the prediction loss function. Remaining rows report measures of importance in predicting conflict for
individual explanatory variables. Columns for PC and LC report weights on indicated variables in linear combination of variables used to
predict conflict. Columns for TC report the percentile of the distribution of the indicated variable where the optimal threshold is set --
lower values imply more breaches and therefore a greater role in predicting conflict. Columns for RF report mean improvement in node
purity, normalized to 1 for the lowest improvement -- higher values imply greater importance. Number of breaches refers to number of
thresholds that must be crossed to signal conflict. Variables indicated with * have orientation reversed, i.e. variables that are negatively
correlated with conflict in our sample have been re-oriented to be positively correlated with conflict.




                                                                     39
                          Table 5: In-Sample and Out-of-Sample Predictive Power

                    Probit Classifier    Random Forest        Linear Classifier   Threshold Classifier
    Cutoff      In-Sample Out-Sample In-Sample Out-Sample In-Sample Out-Sample In-Sample Out-Sample
   Model 1
     1990         0.342          0.430          0.405           0.375          0.274          0.418          0.312          0.335
     1991         0.324          0.392          0.404           0.381          0.296          0.380          0.296          0.330
     1992         0.340          0.404          0.376           0.390          0.309          0.407          0.292          0.345
     1993         0.360          0.327          0.366           0.354          0.341          0.357          0.309          0.296
     1994         0.353          0.297          0.381           0.367          0.341          0.333          0.310          0.284
     1995         0.354          0.289          0.385           0.324          0.332          0.345          0.282          0.352
     1996         0.338          0.286          0.358           0.350          0.327          0.306          0.300          0.299
     1997         0.334          0.290          0.368           0.336          0.329          0.305          0.276          0.327
     1998         0.331          0.299          0.367           0.380          0.326          0.295          0.275          0.358
     1999         0.359          0.231          0.385           0.363          0.334          0.258          0.286          0.380
     2000         0.354          0.280          0.379           0.343          0.328          0.238          0.288          0.305
   Average        0.344          0.320          0.379           0.360          0.322          0.331          0.293          0.328
   Model 2
     1990         0.321          0.438          0.371           0.427          0.290          0.362          0.211          0.309
     1991         0.336          0.444          0.404           0.394          0.276          0.422          0.208          0.303
     1992         0.329          0.414          0.373           0.400          0.267          0.389          0.218          0.322
     1993         0.346          0.368          0.404           0.378          0.287          0.317          0.224          0.287
     1994         0.348          0.312          0.384           0.328          0.296          0.341          0.212          0.299
     1995         0.345          0.338          0.386           0.380          0.284          0.330          0.214          0.271
     1996         0.339          0.369          0.360           0.341          0.293          0.385          0.202          0.313
     1997         0.320          0.308          0.360           0.355          0.287          0.315          0.217          0.345
     1998         0.323          0.309          0.369           0.386          0.297          0.288          0.211          0.325
     1999         0.339          0.279          0.350           0.338          0.320          0.308          0.238          0.343
     2000         0.325          0.266          0.349           0.348          0.296          0.272          0.236          0.327
   Average        0.334          0.350          0.374           0.370          0.290          0.339          0.217          0.313
   Model 3
     1990         0.324          0.486          0.429           0.406          0.285          0.361          0.204          0.347
     1991         0.292          0.472          0.448           0.367          0.260          0.432          0.196          0.357
     1992         0.326          0.443          0.472           0.365          0.273          0.355          0.195          0.262
     1993         0.323          0.422          0.425           0.383          0.267          0.374          0.195          0.351
     1994         0.325          0.506          0.410           0.347          0.260          0.370          0.201          0.312
     1995         0.307          0.516          0.416           0.330          0.245          0.408          0.201          0.244
     1996         0.300          0.449          0.386           0.356          0.251          0.370          0.189          0.302
     1997         0.287          0.499          0.380           0.278          0.245          0.443          0.204          0.236
     1998         0.282          0.364          0.347           0.326          0.257          0.324          0.178          0.324
     1999         0.279          0.444          0.362           0.317          0.252          0.394          0.202          0.332
     2000         0.281          0.446          0.375           0.328          0.242          0.337          0.200          0.367
   Average        0.302          0.459          0.405           0.346          0.258          0.379          0.197          0.312
Notes: This table reports the minimized value of the prediction loss function, for in-sample and out-of-sample predictive performance,
splitting the sample at the indicated year. Model 1, 2, and 3 are as defined in Table 4.


                                                                   40
          Table 6: Conflict Predictions Based on Alternative Classification Algorithms
                                           Classifications Based on 2012-2014 data (1=Conflict, 0 otherwise)
                                               Probit       Random Forest    Linear     Threshold      FCS List
                  Angola                          1               1             1            1            ..
                  Albania                         0               0             0            0            ..
                  Argentina                       0               0             0            0            ..
                  Armenia                         0               0             1            0            ..
                  Burundi                         1               1             1            1            Y
                  Benin                           0               0             1            1            N
                  Burkina Faso                    1               0             1            1            N
                  Bangladesh                      1               1             1            1            N
                  Bulgaria                        0               0             0            0            ..
                  Bosnia and Herzegovina          0               0             0            0            ..
                  Belarus                         0               0             0            1            ..
                  Belize                          0               0             0            0            ..
                  Bolivia                         0               0             0            0            N
                  Brazil                          0               0             1            0            ..
                  Botswana                        0               0             0            0            ..
                  Chile                           0               0             0            0            ..
                  China                           1               1             1            1            ..
                  Cameroon                        1               0             1            1            N
                  Congo, Rep.                     1               1             1            1            N
                  Comoros                         0               1             0            1            Y
                  Cape Verde                      0               0             0            0            N
                  Costa Rica                      0               0             0            0            ..
                  Djibouti                        1               1             1            1            Y
                  Dominican Republic              0               0             0            0            ..
                  Ecuador                         1               0             1            1            ..
                  Fiji                            0               0             0            0            ..
                  Gabon                           0               0             0            0            ..
                  Georgia                         0               0             1            1            ..
                  Ghana                           0               0             1            0            N
                  Guinea                          1               0             1            1            N
                  Gambia, The                     1               0             1            1            Y
                  Guinea-Bissau                   1               1             1            1            Y
                  Equatorial Guinea               1               1             1            1            ..
                  Guatemala                       0               0             0            0            ..
                  Honduras                        0               0             0            0            N
                  Croatia                         0               0             0            0            ..
                  Indonesia                       0               1             1            0            ..
                  Jamaica                         0               0             0            0            ..
                  Jordan                          1               0             1            1            ..
                  Kazakhstan                      0               1             0            1            ..
                  Kenya                           1               0             1            1            N
                  Kyrgyz Republic                 1               0             1            0            N
                  Cambodia                        1               0             1            1            N
                  Korea, Rep.                     0               0             0            0            ..
                  Lao PDR                         0               0             1            1            N
                  St. Lucia                       0               0             0            0            N
                  Sri Lanka                       0               1             1            0            N
                  Lesotho                         0               0             0            0            N
Note: Table continues on next page


                                                           41
     Table 6, Cont’d: Conflict Predictions Based on Alternative Classification Algorithms
                                                    Classifications Based on 2012-2014 data (1=Conflict, 0 otherwise)
                                                        Probit       Random Forest    Linear     Threshold      FCS List
                     Morocco                               1               1             1            1            ..
                     Moldova                               0               0             0            0            N
                     Madagascar                            1               1             1            0            Y
                     Mexico                                1               0             1            1            ..
                     Macedonia, FYR                        0               0             0            0            ..
                     Mongolia                              0               0             0            0            N
                     Mauritania                            1               1             1            1            N
                     Mauritius                             0               0             0            0            ..
                     Malawi                                1               1             1            1            N
                     Namibia                               0               0             0            0            ..
                     Niger                                 1               1             1            1            N
                     Nicaragua                             0               0             0            0            N
                     Nepal                                 1               1             1            1            N
                     Panama                                0               0             0            0            ..
                     Peru                                  1               1             1            1            ..
                     Poland                                0               0             0            0            ..
                     Paraguay                              0               0             0            0            ..
                     Romania                               0               0             0            0            ..
                     Senegal                               1               1             1            1            N
                     Sierra Leone                          1               0             1            0            Y
                     El Salvador                           0               0             0            0            ..
                     Swaziland                             0               0             0            0            ..
                     Seychelles                            0               0             0            0            ..
                     Chad                                  1               1             1            1            Y
                     Togo                                  0               0             0            0            Y
                     Tajikistan                            1               1             1            1            N
                     Turkmenistan                          1               1             1            1            ..
                     Trinidad and Tobago                   0               0             0            0            ..
                     Tunisia                               0               0             0            0            ..
                     Tanzania                              1               0             1            1            N
                     Uruguay                               0               0             0            0            ..
                     Uzbekistan                            1               1             1            1            N
                     St. Vincent and the Grenadines        0               0             0            0            N
                     Venezuela, RB                         1               1             1            1            ..
                     Vietnam                               0               0             0            0            N
                     Vanuatu                               0               0             0            0            N
                     South Africa                          0               0             0            0            ..
                     Zambia                                1               0             1            0            N
                     Zimbabwe                              1               1             1            1            Y



                     Predict Conflict                     35              26            43            37
                     Predict No Conflict                  52              61            44            50
Notes: This table reports predictions of conflict based on the most recently-available data 2012-2014 for each country for which complete
data on all explanatory variables is available and no conflict signals are observed over this period. Predictions are based on model 3. FCS
List refers to the World Bank classification of “fragile situations” as of FY2017, and is based on a country having a CPIA score below 3.2
and/or a UN Peacekeeping Operation.


                                                                     42
                               Figure 1: Probit Classifier and Classification Tree

                                                             Probit Classifier

                                         1
                                                        Predict
                                                        Conflict
                                      0.75



                                       0.5



                                      0.25

                                                                             Predict No
                                                                             Conflict
                                         0
                                              0         0.25          0.5          0.75             1

                                                          Classification Tree

                                         1
                                                  Predict                   Predict
                                                  Conflict                  Conflict
                                       0.75



                                        0.5
                                                         =      	

                                                                                           =    	


                                       0.25
                                                     Predict No              =
                                                                                       Predict No
                                                     Conflict                          Conflict
                                         0
                                              0         0.25          0.5          0.75             1

Notes: This figure illustrates the two conventional classification rules studied in the paper, for a hypothetical dataset with two
explanatory variables. Conflict observations are indicated as blue squares and non-conflict observations are orange circles. The shaded
region in each graph identifies the region in the data for which conflict is predicted.




                                                                    43
                                     Figure 2: The Linear and Threshold Classifiers

                                                           Linear Classifier

                                                 1
                                                                   Predict
                                                                   Conflict
                                               0.75



                                                0.5



                                               0.25
                                                                        Predict No
                                                                        Conflict
                                                 0
                                                      0   0.25       0.5         0.75      1

                 Threshold Classifier (       = 1)                               Threshold Classifier (       = 2)

            1                                                                   1
                                                                                                             Predict
                                 Predict
                                                                                                             Conflict
                                 Conflict
          0.75                                                                0.75



           0.5                                                                 0.5



          0.25                                                                0.25

                          Predict No                                                                    Predict No
                                                                                                        Conflict
                          Conflict
            0                                                                   0
                 0        0.25          0.5       0.75      1                        0     0.25        0.5           0.75     1

Notes: This figure illustrates the two unconventional classification rules studied in the paper, for a hypothetical dataset with two
explanatory variables. Conflict observations are indicated as blue squares and non-conflict observations are orange circles. The shaded
region in each graph identifies the region in the data for which conflict is predicted.




                                                                   44
                            Figure 3: Identifying Conflict Episodes: Central African Republic Example




Notes: This graph illustrates the mapping from conflict-years to conflict events. The graph plots the number of battle deaths and the corresponding threshold; the
number of displaced persons and the corresponding threshold; and an indicator for UN Peacekeeping Operations. The years corresponding to conflict episodes are
shaded.



                                                                                  45
                                       Figure 4: Contribution of Indicators to Conflict Years

                                 60



                                 50
        Number of Observations




                                 40



                                 30



                                 20



                                 10



                                  0
                                      1977
                                      1978
                                      1979
                                      1980
                                      1981
                                      1982
                                      1983
                                      1984
                                      1985
                                      1986
                                      1987
                                      1988
                                      1989
                                      1990
                                      1991
                                      1992
                                      1993
                                      1994
                                      1995
                                      1996
                                      1997
                                      1998
                                      1999
                                      2000
                                      2001
                                      2002
                                      2003
                                      2004
                                      2005
                                      2006
                                      2007
                                      2008
                                      2009
                                      2010
                                      2011
                                      2012
                                      2013
                                      2014
                                      Battle Deaths Only   Refugees Only        UN Peacekeeping Only   2+ Joint events

Notes: This graph shows the contribution of each of the indicators of conflict to the total number of observed conflict episodes for each
year in the dataset.




                                                                           46
