                                                  WPS8026


Policy Research Working Paper                    8026




       The Contribution of Increased Equity
         to the Estimated Social Benefits
             from a Transfer Program
      An Illustration from PROGRESA/Oportunidades

                               Harold Alderman
                               Jere R. Behrman
                                 Afia Tasneem




Development Economics Vice Presidency
Operations and Strategy Team
April 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 8026


  Abstract
 Most impact evaluations of Conditional Cash Transfers                              parameters, the welfare gains from current redistribution
 (CCTs) and Unconditional Cash Transfers (UCTs) focus                               for the Mexican PROGRESA CCT program can be as
 on the returns to increased human capital investments that                         large, or possibly much larger, than the estimated present
 will be reaped largely or exclusively in the future (e.g., when                    discounted value of future earnings from human capital
 current children have increased productivities as adults).                         investments in lower and upper secondary schooling. These,
 But the objectives of these programs are not only to increase                      moreover, are underestimates of the gains from redistribu-
 human capital investments with implications for future                             tion because, in addition to current gains, such gains will
 levels and distributions of income but also to alleviate cur-                      be augmented in the future through the distribution of
 rent poverty and reduce current inequality. The current                            the returns on the human capital investments induced by
 distributional gains from such programs depend on the                              cash transfer programs. Therefore, to fully evaluate such
 degree of inequality aversion in the social welfare function.                      programs, it is critical to incorporate the distributional
 Simulations show that, for a range of inequality aversion                          gains, not only the impacts on human capital investments.




  This paper is a product of the Operations and Strategy Team, Development Economics Vice Presidency. It is part of a
  larger effort by the World Bank to provide open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy
  discussions around the world. Policy Research Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org.
  The authors may be contacted at h.alderman@cgiar.org.




         The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
         issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
         names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
         of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
         its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                       Produced by the Research Support Team
The Contribution of Increased Equity to the Estimated Social Benefits
           from a Transfer Program: An Illustration from
                    PROGRESA/Oportunidades
                   Harold Alderman, Jere R. Behrman, and Afia Tasneem




 JEL Codes: H23 Public Economics; I15 Health, Education and Welfare; I32 Welfare,
 Well-Being, and Poverty; O15 Income distribution, O22 Project analysis

 Keywords: Program evaluation; redistribution; cash transfer programs


 Alderman (corresponding author, e-mail h.alderman@cgiar.org) is a senior research fellow at the
 International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI), Washington, DC, USA. Behrman (e-mail
 jbehrman@econ.upenn.edu) is the WR Kenan, Jr. Professor of Economics and Sociology and
 Research Associate of the Population Studies Center, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia,
 PA, USA. Afia Tasneem (e-mail afiata@gmail.com) is a consultant to the World Bank. The
 authors acknowledge partial support for their time working on this paper from Grand Challenges
 Canada (Grant 0072-03 to the Grantee, The Trustees of the University of Pennsylvania) as well as
 the CGIAR Research Program on Policies, Institutions, and Markets led by IFPRI. Sarah Baird,
 David Coady, Jef LeRoy, Susan Parker, Sherman Robinson, attendees at an IFPRI lunch
 presentation and the 2015 Meeting of the Northeast Universities Development Consortium and
 the journal editor and reviewers provided useful advice on earlier drafts.
Transfer programs in low- and middle-income countries have increased appreciably in the last
decade. By 2010, between 0.75 and 1.0 billion people in these countries were recipients of
conditional and unconditional cash support, including over 60 million people in Brazil, 30
million in Mexico, and nine million in Ethiopia (DFID, 2011). Many of these programs,
particularly conditional cash transfer (CCT) programs, are expected to create human capital.
Others, such as public works [workfare], construct physical assets as well as target income to
low-income households, which indirectly may increase human capital investments (Mani et al.
2014). Many of these programs are designed to address both current poverty and future income
growth and poverty (Levy 2006, Alderman and Yemtsov 2014). They combine efficiency and
equity motives because poorer households are more likely to face capital, information, and
insurance market imperfections that limit their investments below levels that would be implied
by efficiency (Das, Do, and Özler 2005, Behrman and Skoufias 2010, Blank 2002).
       While there are numerous studies that evaluate the impact of such programs on human and
physical capital and others that assess the targeting effectiveness of transfers and, thus, their
contribution to poverty reduction, attempts to combine these two objectives to indicate the
overall effectiveness of transfer programs are limited by the absence of a common metric. Take,
for example, education. A range of studies have reported the impact of transfer programs on
schooling (Baird et al. 2014, Behrman 2009, Behrman, Parker, and Todd 2013, Fiszbein and
Schady 2009, Orazem and King 2008). Often the estimated increased schooling from a given
level of transfer is compared with the impact of equal value alternative investments in the sector,
thus providing a cost-effectiveness ranking.1 Alternatively, benefits can be converted into the
expected impact on the present discounted value of lifetime earnings (assuming individual
earnings are the only impact of policy interest) and compared to the present discounted value of
costs (Behrman, Parker, and Todd 2011, BPT in the remainder of this paper).
       In both these examples, however, the impact on the current distribution of consumption is
ignored. It is hard to argue that society does not value the poverty reduction or the increased
equity resulting from a transfer given that society chooses to use resources to administer the
targeting of such programs to the poor. Indeed, Alesina, Tella, and MacCulloch (2004) provide
                                                            
     1.  Dhaliwal et al. (2013) present a variation of this approach, assigning the transfer from PROGRESA as a cost
in a cost-effectiveness comparison of diverse schooling investments but excluding all but a single type of benefit as
an outcome due to the challenges of aggregation of distinct categories of benefits. To no surprise, it appears costly to
achieve the results studied.  

                                                               2 
 
survey data that shows that even well-off individuals have a lower tendency to report themselves
happy when inequality is high. If the values of increased equity or reduced poverty are policy
goals, then standard benefit-cost estimates are presumably lower bounds for the true benefit-cost
ratios of multi-objective policy packages that are directed towards current distributional goals as
well as enhanced investments.2 This point is often acknowledged; Blank (2002) provides a crisp
theoretical model that places the efficiency and equity gains of transfers in a simple framework
that illuminates efficiency and equity tradeoffs. But few studies of the human capital and other
investments from transfers actually offer quantitative assessments.
       Is looking only at the investment potential of a transfer program a minor underestimation,
one that could, perhaps, be ignored when prioritizing investments? While the distributional social
benefit cannot be directly measured, leaving it out of any assessment implicitly assumes that the
social value of redistribution is zero, a tacit assumption that is hard to defend in the context of
targeted transfer programs. To illustrate the range for the possible contribution of increased
consumption of low-income households to the total impact of a well-known CCT program,
Mexico’s PROGRESA,3 the current paper estimates social benefits under different assumed
degrees of social inequality aversion using an explicit social welfare function. In particular, we
construct a grid of the total benefits from the PROGRESA transfers that are conditional on
attending lower or upper secondary school, including the social value of increased consumption
by the poor under different assumed values for a parameter that measures social welfare of
different outcomes given distributional weights. Because the benefits from current consumption
are immediate while the benefits from human capital investments accrue after a number of years,
the relative contribution from redistribution to social welfare also depends, in part, on the
discount rate. As this is also not directly observed, and there is some debate about the appropriate
discount rate to use, the simulations are presented with redistribution parameters on one axis and
discount rates on the other. Clearly, both matter since, if redistribution of current consumption
has any value at all, the share of its contribution to total benefits is higher the larger the discount
rate for future earnings impact of program-induced human capital investments.


                                                            
     2. The standard argument for separating equity from efficiency considerations in project evaluation, with the
former being addressed in separate transfers, clearly does not apply to CCTs.
3.  PROGRESA was subsequently renamed Oportunidades, and its successor is currently entitled Prospera. The data
employed here cover the transition to Oportunidades. However, for convenience we use PROGRESA to convey both
phases of the program in the period.  

                                                               3 
 
         Our particular illustration is informative about a program that has been analyzed extensively
from both the perspective of human capital improvements and distributional efficiency. Among
the latter is a study by Coady and Skoufias (2004), which decomposes welfare gains from
targeting and redistribution using different welfare weights. The results are presented in relative
terms and one that is scale-neutral. Wodon et al. (2003) also compare the social welfare of
PROGRESA relative to other programs using an index based on decomposition of the Gini
index. No study that we know of, however, is designed to include the distributional benefits of
PROGRESA together with the value of the gains in future productivity. Brent (2013) does
attempt this task for a pilot program for orphans and vulnerable children in Kenya, offering an
approach that includes both dimensions of the CCT programs in cost-benefit analysis using
primary school enrollments as well as distribution of consumption. That particular example has a
favorable outcome under reasonable assumptions about the implicit social welfare function, but
the results are driven largely by the distribution component.
         In contrast, the current study shows that even when the transfer program has an appreciable
role in increasing human capital investments and thus anticipated future earnings, the value of
achieving these goals is enhanced when equity considerations are made explicit. Thus, modeling
the contribution to social welfare of transfers provides an additional perspective on the
assessment of dual roles of a transfer program.



                                              I. APPROACH

The simulation is based on an additive social welfare function in which social welfare W is
summed over individual well-being,           of the N individuals in the society.


    1)                                                                                              1;




An important characteristic of this welfare function is that a single distribution parameter, ε,
indicates how society values inequality. A higher value of ε implies greater inequality aversion.
As ε → ∞, W becomes Rawlsian and the lowest individual wellbeing is at the core of social
welfare as equity considerations dominate entirely. If ε = 0, W is utilitarian with no concern


                                                     4 
 
about distribution. Figure 1 illustrates these possibilities. The straight isowelfare line is for ε = 0.
Moving along an isowelfare curve from an equal distribution with xi = xj at point a to a very
unequal distribution with xi << xj at point b has no impact on social welfare for this function with
ε = 0. In this extreme case, the distribution of individual welfare is irrelevant in the sense that it
does not affect social welfare, which is identical along the linear isowelfare curves. At the other
extreme, with ε → ∞, the welfare function is L-shaped. If one starts with equal distribution at
point a' and increases either xi or xj, there is no impact on welfare.4 All that matters is the
wellbeing of the worst-off member of society, for which reason this welfare function is called
Rawlsian. At this extreme, distribution is everything in the sense that the only way to increase
social welfare is to improve the consumption of the unit with the lowest wellbeing. In between
these two extremes are an infinite number of possible isowelfare curves. Those that are closer to
the L-shaped extreme by being fairly sharply curved weigh equality much more than those that
are closer to the linear extreme by having little curvature.
         This welfare function also has the property that the ratio of marginal social utility of two
individuals is the reciprocal of the ratio of their wellbeing raised to the power of the distribution
parameter, ε.5

         2)


This expression indicates again that if ε = 0 then there is no difference in the marginal social
utility with different distributions between the ith and jth individual; and, thus, society places no
value on redistribution. If the ith individual is poorer than the jth, and thus xj/xi is greater than
one, then for all values of ε > 0, social welfare increases at a faster rate with an increase of
wellbeing for the ith individual than an equal increase in wellbeing for the jth. As ε increases, the
social gain of redistribution from richer to poorer individuals also increases.



                                                            
     4. We have assumed symmetry around the 450 line so the corner of the isowelfare curve is on this line. One
could allow asymmetry (what Behrman, Pollak, and Taubman 1982 call “unequal concern” because welfare weights
are such that, for the same consumption level, some families are weighted more heavily in the welfare function than
others), but this complication would not add much to our analysis.
     5. Squire and van der Tak (1975) start with equation 2 and integrate back to get equation 1. Equation 2,
however, is also a property of an alternative social welfare function,                        as used by Behrman
and Birdsall (1988). Equation 2 also makes it apparent that the overall origin of this social welfare function stems
from the convexity of utility under constant relative risk aversion as acknowledged in Atkinson (1970).

                                                               5 
 
       Equation 2 has been applied to various studies of taxation and redistribution (Deaton 1997,
Coady and Skoufias 2004, Coady and Harris 2004). These studies often compare the relative
outcomes of different taxation instruments and do not present their result in terms of a dollar
metric that can be combined with the investment returns of a transfer program, which is our
objective. Indeed, equation 1 is not anchored in a manner conducive to direct comparisons. The
value of aggregate welfare is asymptotic at 1, approaching infinity from below and negative
infinity from above. That is, the value of W becomes negative if ε > 1, a parameter value that is
often explored in the literature (Deaton 1997, Olken 2007, Coady and Skoufias 2004). Therefore,
direct comparisons of W are meaningful for a given value of ε but not for changing values of ε.
       This study, however, is not attempting to measure aggregate welfare but only the sum of
marginal changes relative to the change at a reference value, δW/δxj. To do this, we require a few
additional assumptions. First, we focus on equation 2, aggregating weighted marginal changes
attributable to the program. Consistent with much of the literature, we use per capita
consumption or expenditures as the measure of individual wellbeing (Deaton 1997). However, in
order to make direct comparisons of changes in W when the value of ɛ varies, we need to
calibrate the calculations. We first set xj to mean per capita consumption.6 However, many
studies based on equation 1 focus on relative income inequality and do not require a cardinal
value as is necessary here in order to sum changes in welfare with the present discounted value
of increased earnings. We thus also set δW/δxj = 1. If this simulation achieves our objective of
opening up a line of inquiry, the sensitivity to alterative measurement approaches can be
explored. We return to this issue briefly below.
       The costs of the program include both transfers per se and administration costs, which on
average were 10.6 pesos for every 100 pesos transferred in the first four years of the program
(Caldés et al. 2006). This, however, included targeting of beneficiaries as well as external
evaluation. Marginal costs by the fourth year dropped to only 5.4 pesos per 100, of which 11%
was for identification and incorporation of beneficiaries and 6% was for external evaluation. We
assume that these marginal costs are the costs in the year of the study and will be part of the




                                                            
    6. Alternatively, one can calibrate based on median per capita expenditures as in Olken (2007). Coady and
Skoufias (2004) calibrate on the mean income for the poorest quintile. Atkinson and Brandolini (2010) use per
capita income in their study of global inequality.

                                                               6 
 
financing needs in the year corresponding to the consumption survey.7 We also need to consider
financing of transfers themselves. In the standard benefit-cost literature in the absence of
distributional weights, transfers are not considered either a cost or a benefit as they are assumed
merely to shift resources and not actually use them. Once one considers distributional weights
for beneficiaries, one needs to consider these for financing as well. Few, if any, taxation systems
are free of economic distortions. While the issue of how different taxation policies affect the
relative net social value of a transfer program is important (Coady and Harris 2004), it is an issue
for which we do not have anything to add to the literature. Nevertheless, we do take the
distributional impact of revenue into account by modeling the program in a manner that offsets
the transfers paid out and administration with revenues (so that the net resources available to the
economy are unchanged). In particular, we assume that the program is financed out of general
taxation with the consumption of each individual’s resources reduced by his or her share of the
total taxation bill. However, we also assume that the program is financed by a reallocation of
current revenue, and thus total revenue is not affected. Therefore, there is no additional
deadweight loss from additional taxation.



                                                               II. DATA 

The program used for this illustration is the support to lower and upper secondary school
students under PROGRESA. While this is only one component of the well-known conditional
cash transfer program in Mexico, subsequently called Oportunidades and recently renamed
Prospera, it is particularly suited to this study as the contribution to future earnings have been
estimated (BPT 2011), allowing us to focus on the distributional component and the relative
magnitude of the two components under different assumptions. We use the 2002 nationally-
representative Mexican Family Life Survey (MxFLS) as the basis of our simulations below.8
These data were obtained in January 2014 from the MxFLS website (URL: http://www.ennvih-
mxfls.org). The survey covers 8,440 households and 35,677 individuals with 532 individuals
aged 8–21 from 413 households in lower or upper secondary school reporting that they received
a transfer from PROGRESA. This data set has a major advantage over the various surveys used
                                                            
     7. Caldes et al. also discuss assumptions needed to address fixed costs and the need to retarget periodically.
These are important issues for overall benefit-cost estimations but are outside the illustration in this study.
     8. This means that our simulations are conditional on the coverage of PROGRESA in 2002, not lower coverages
for earlier years or higher coverages for later years.  

                                                                  7 
 
for impact evaluations of both PROGRESA and Oportunidades; although most of those studies
use pre- and post-implementation surveys, they do not have a national representation that allows
for the study of the distribution of benefits and taxation over the full population that is
undertaken here.
       For the current study, the transfer received by these recipients was based on the allocation
formula reported in BPT (see table 1) rather than the amount reported per individual in the
survey data. We assume that the monthly support for secondary school students was provided for
only ten months of the year in accord with the academic year.
       Taking our measure of current welfare as current consumption, it is not necessarily the case
that consumption (x) increases on a one-for-one basis with a unit of transfer (t). We assume that
δxi/δti = δxi/δyi * δyi/δti where yi is incremental expenditures. While the former derivative is
likely close to one (by construction in this study)9, δyi/δti < 1 in most cases because labor
allocation will be affected by a transfer due to the substitution effect coming from the change in
the price of schooling whenever the transfer includes conditionality. Thus, the increment of
income from the transfer will be somewhat offset by reduced labor earnings (Blank 2002).
       The Mexican Family Life Survey reports consumption after the distribution of PROGRESA.
To derive an estimate of what consumption would have been in the absence of the program, we
subtract the net per capita transfer (vi), from observed consumption, wherein net transfer is the
transfer to all families with eligible individuals in lower or upper secondary school minus
assumed labor reallocation to schooling as well as the household’s share in the taxes necessary to
fund the program. BPT report that male PROGRESA recipients aged 12 to 16 reduced their labor
by 28.6%. Thus, we subtracted 28.6% of the average of labor earnings of males in that same age
bracket who were not in school and also in the poorest quartile of the population—roughly the
share of population that was targeted in PROGRESA at the time—from the estimated transfer
received by the families of similar males who were in school.10 Taxation is assumed to come
from the Value Added Tax (VAT) and is based on the household’s share of total taxable


                                                            
     9. Thus, we are ruling out many forms of savings although we recognize that this is a simplification from
behavior (Gertler, Martinez, and Rubio-Codina 2012).
     10. This assumes that the labor reallocation is due to the reallocation of current income and current consumption
to investment in schooling that leads to the future earnings estimated by BPT. To the degree that the change in labor
is partially increased leisure—outside the welfare measure used here—the overall welfare gain for PROGRESA
beneficiaries is somewhat underestimated in our procedure.

                                                               8 
 
consumption with the non-exempt categories based on Davila and Levy (2010). As indicated, the
aggregate taxation is set equal to the aggregate value of the transfer.
     While most households do not receive a transfer for lower and upper secondary school
students—even those that receive PROGRESA support based on compliance with other
conditions may not have a student in the appropriate age bracket—all do pay a share of taxation.
There is, thus, a marginal welfare gain or loss for each household from this component of the
program.
     In theory, the social welfare function is based on individual wellbeing, and different
individuals in a household may have different weights in the social welfare function. However,
as the aggregation is additively separable in the absence of different individual weights, the
summation is unaffected by utilizing changes in household consumption, although the weights
themselves are based on per capita expenditures. The total distributional benefit, D is obtained
by

     3) D =                  ,


where vi is net transfer to N individuals in society and change in consumption is assumed to be
equal to this net transfer. As the welfare weights, (xj/xi)ε, depend on the level of consumption, we
take the average of pre- and post-PROGRESA distributions. That is, xi = ½(xi0 + xi1) where the
superscripts 0, 1 indicate pre- and post-program consumption.
     Unfortunately, of course, the underlying social welfare function is not directly observable.
Not only is the parameter ε not derived from observations, the underlying functional form used
in this study is not the only plausible candidate for modeling the social policy objectives of the
government. For example, it is not necessarily the case that the government’s objective in means
testing is redistribution per se as implied in this study, but poverty reduction—in which case ε =
0 for all households above the poverty line. Coady and Skoufias (2004) use such an approach to
assess alternative targeting strategies for PROGRESA and also employ equation 2 for deriving
the social valuation of increased income. Little and Mirrlees (1994) report that, while myriad
attempts to ascertain the value of distribution from governments’ revealed preferences were
attempted by World Bank staff in the 1970s, few were applied and interest rapidly waned.
Behrman and Birdsall (1988) present such a study designed to uncover the revealed social
preference based on investments in schooling in Brazil and find the estimated value for ε to be

                                                  9 
 
0.68. This is close to the value for ε of 0.57, at which the benefits begin to exceed the costs for
the Kenyan CCT studied by Brent (2013). While, below we report the results of the study using a
range of values for Є, we confine some of the sensitivity analyses to results with a value of 0.7
for clarity.



                                                               III. RESULTS

Table 2 reports the present value of the increased schooling from the component of PROGRESA
for lower and upper secondary school based on BPT and using a range of plausible discount
values.11 BPT, however, focused only on labor market returns for males. As there is substantial
evidence that education enhances both labor returns for females (Alderman and King 1998) as
well as non-labor market returns often at equal or greater rates (Schultz 2002) we assume that the
discounted future benefits do not differ by gender. As the gains in schooling are based on
participation in the program for six years, these have been divided by six and multiplied by the
number of beneficiaries in the sample in order to compare with the annual distributional benefits.
       In principle, with neither welfare weights on transfers nor taxes, when ε = 0 a fully paid-for
program should have no distributional benefits or losses. However, there is an estimated
reallocation of labor into time spent in school that reduces current consumption in PROGRESA
households. In some studies this might be considered a cost; indeed, it is likely that households
view this as an opportunity cost when deciding on their schooling investments. However, as the
reduction in current consumption does influence the estimated distribution when ε > 0, for
parallel purposes the implication of reduced consumption is also included in the estimates of the
distributional benefits when ε = 0. The distributional benefits at various values of ε are reported
in figure 2a.
       Figure 2b presents the total peso value of the program including both distributional gains and
net present value (NPV) of human capital for the entire sample in the MxFLS. Our goal is not to
scale this result for the entire national investment in the program but to illustrate the relative
contribution of increased current consumption of low-income households. Thus, the proportion

                                                            
     11. Equation 1 imposes a lower bound on any discount rate that is consistent with the rate of income growth
when ɛ > 0. This is because the marginal contribution of future income to welfare declines as income grows at a rate
that is determined by ɛ. This is additional to pure time preference. However, since BPT do not base the estimated
returns to schooling on any assumed growth in productivity, this bound does not apply to this study.

                                                                   10 
 
of the total benefits that is attributable to the long-term increase of worker productivity is
presented in figure 2c. When ε = 0.7, there are appreciable distributional benefits from current
consumption even with a relatively high weight placed on future productivity, that is, when the
discount rate is low. With this distribution parameter, when the discount rate rises from 3% to
5%, the share of benefits attributed to future earnings drops from 84 percent of total benefits to
69 percent. When ε = 1, future gains in productivity amount to about two-thirds of the total at 3%
discount rate and decline to about a half when discount rate is 5% as illustrated in figure 2c; at
higher values for ε the human capital component becomes a negligible portion of the total.
    While PROGRESA is targeted to roughly a quarter of the population, there is a social welfare
gain for transfers to all households when the transfer they receive exceeds their share of taxation
since the welfare function is continuous in consumption over the population. Thus, under the
assumption that the welfare weight is based on equation 2 with the reference consumption, xj, at
mean per capita expenditure, what is commonly called a program leakage does not necessarily
preclude net distributional gains depending on the share of beneficiaries in any expenditure
category and the share of the costs assigned to them. This effect is illustrated in table 3 for ε =
0.7. A third of the PROGRESA recipient households have expenditures between the 25th
percentile and the mean consumption and 12% actually have consumption per capita higher than
the mean (this consumption category represents less than half the households since, as is
commonly observed, expenditures are skewed upwards and the mean is above the median). The
transfer to all of the 413 PROGRESA secondary-school transfer recipient households in the
MxFLS leads to net increases of social welfare for these households—that is, none pay more
taxes for this program than they receive as benefits—although the social welfare gain per peso
spent by the government is less than one for the better-off recipients while it is about two for the
poorest quartile. Given that the tax needed to finance the program is distributed among the entire
population in this simulation according to the share of consumption subject to the VAT, the
payments lead to a net social welfare loss for the entire population above the 25th percentile of
expenditures per capita, that is, for both recipients and non-recipients in that group.
    In figure 3 we take the illustration one step further by considering an additional distribution
issue, the distribution of deadweight costs over the population. Often the cost of the funds for an
investment is based on the cost of servicing a loan. In the public finance literature, it is generally
argued that the revenue for loan repayment ultimately comes from taxes and incurs distortion of

                                                 11 
 
economic behavior. Estimates of the marginal social cost of public funds typically run in the
range of 20 to 25% of the revenue (Auriol and Warlters 2012, Harberger 1997). If this cost is
neutrally distributed over the population, or if no welfare value is placed on distribution, the cost
can be put into the denominator of a benefit-cost ratio or netted out as a lump sum from total
benefits. If the deadweight costs are not borne equally over the population, such an approach
slightly distorts the welfare benefits. The estimates in figure 3 assume that the aggregate
deadweight loss is 25% of the tax revenue and the share of the loss is proportional to the earnings
of the household (here proxied by consumption).
    Finally, our choice of setting δW/δxj = 1 at mean consumption has an implication for
distribution; as the mean is higher than the median, the transfer program will appear to provide
more distribution using the mean rather than the median. To ascertain the degree that the results
are sensitive to this assumption, we re-estimated the main results using the median for xj (see the
figures in the annex). When the discount rate is 0.05 and ε = 0.7, the estimated social welfare
value of the component of PROGRESA transfers attributed to distribution using a benchmark set
at median expenditures declines by 21% and the share of total benefits from increased human
capital rises from 69% of the total to 74%. By construction, the relative decline is larger when
the distribution parameter is larger. The differences are not major relative to the overall patterns
observed.



                                         IV. DISCUSSION

Governments, including that of Mexico, devote substantial resources to means testing or
otherwise targeting transfer programs. They clearly value increased consumption of the poor in
and of itself as well as any contribution the transfers may make to increased investment in human
capital (Levy 2006). The results here indicate that, under a range of plausible social welfare
weights and discount rates, this redistribution can account for a high share of the total social
benefits of the transfers. Total benefits have also increased appreciable since the 2002 MxFLS
survey. There were 2.5 times as many beneficiaries in Prospera in 2015 than were covered in
2002, not including individuals who had been assisted by Programa de Apoyo Alimentario and




                                                 12 
 
were shifted to Prospera.12 While this program expansion should have a significant impact on the
value of redistribution when ε >0, the share of total benefits from redistribution and from human
capital investments cannot be ascertained with the data available.
       The study has also concentrated on only a subset of PROGRESA recipients, those who
received a transfer conditional on attending lower and upper secondary school. Additional
families with younger children benefited from the program, all of whom would contribute to
distributional gains using equation 2. However, the present discounted productivity gains from
increased schooling—given the high rates of primary school enrollment existing in Mexico prior
to the introduction of the program—are likely to be a relatively small share of the total. If almost
all the effects of the transfers to primary school age children are distributional, we underestimate
the share of distributional gains in our simulations. PROGRESA also targeted nutritional
investments for young children. However, the gains depend on the targeting of an additional
supplement (Behrman and Hoddinott 2005), and valuing the nutritional gains depend on a range
of additional assumptions on the impact of nutrition on schooling outcomes (Alderman,
Behrman, and Puett 2017). Thus, illustrating the contribution of this component of PROGRESA
adds to the complexity of exposition and yet would reiterate the main point of this illustration.
       Thus, assessing a transfer program in terms of a single education (health) outcome—in effect

asking “is the transfer the most cost-effective way to allocate the education (health) budget?”—

will provide a misleading answer compared to using the human capital improvements as one

dimension of the answer to the question “is the program the best way to allocate the funds

devoted to transfers given multiple objectives?”

       The current study has not explored the possibility that the investments in schooling not only

raise future productivity but also increase future equity. That is, we estimate the value of changes

in welfare during the investment period but not the present discounted value of all future changes

in distribution. These future distributional benefits are likely to accrue from expansions of

schooling. They could also stem from investments out of transfers as documented by Gertler,
                                                            
    12. We are indebted to Citlalli Hernández Juárez who provided this calculation based on data from the
Dirección General de Padrón y Liquidación de PROSPERA.


                                                               13 
 
Martinez, and Rubio-Codina (2012).13 While conceivably future distributional gains stemming

from PROGRESA would add an extra dimension to our results and would likely reinforce the

contribution of the program to social welfare, these discounted future distributional gains likely

would not qualitatively alter our main results.

       We do, however, explore one additional distributional issue, that of UCTs compared to

CCTs. While we do not have a counterfactual to indicate the impact of a UCT on schooling—

likely positive, even if smaller than the impact of a CCT (Baird et al. 2014)—we can indicate the

distributional benefits of a UCT that provides total transfers similar to the transfers studied here.

A starting point would be to assume that every family with per capita income less than the 25th

percentile and with a child between eight and 21 received an UCT. But, as a comparison with

the distributional value of the CCT is most informative when the aggregated amount of transfer

is the same, the per beneficiary transfer needs to be scaled back to have the total transfer budget

unchanged. The administrative costs for the UCT are reduced in this exploration to 4.1 pesos per

100 transfers to account for the fact that the costs of monitoring conditions reported in Caldes et

al. (2006) would not be required. Assuming ε = 0.7, the estimated distributional component of

the social welfare value of the UCT would be 3.4 million pesos, that is five times that

corresponding distributional value in the CCT reported in figure 2a.

       This, however, is still an unrealistic comparison that favors redistribution benefits since it
assumes perfect targeting when, in fact, only 54% of the households receiving PROGRESA
schooling benefits in our sample were in the poorest expenditure quartile as indicated in table 3.
If we compute a scenario in which UCT benefits are distributed with the same probability of
targeting errors as the CCT, then the social welfare value of the transfers is only two million
pesos when ε = 0.7. As mentioned, we do not include a present discounted value (PDV) for the
human capital component for UCTs as this is not available. Although this component is
                                                            
     13. Presumably, on average such investments are welfare-increasing for the household. However, their
influence on future equity is less clear.

                                                               14 
 
presumably positive, it is likely small since the per capita transfer covering a larger number of
households would be smaller than in the CCT. Thus ignoring the schooling impact of a UCT—
and thus presenting a lower bound—we estimate that, at a 3% discount, the total social welfare
value of the CCT would dominate the UCT at all values of ε. In contrast, when ε =0.7 and a 5%
discount rate the two programs make more or less the same contribution. Thus, at this discount
rate ε = 0.7 is a switching point; when the parameter is larger UCTs make a greater contribution
to social welfare, and when the parameter is smaller the calculations favor a CCT.
    We can also illustrate another switching point of potential interest. BPT estimate that the
NPV for human capital investment is negative when the discount rate is 10% in their approach
which tacitly assumes ε = 0.0. However, when ε > 0.24, the distribution benefits offset this
negative NPV and the total social value of the program is positive.
    Researchers apply substantial creativity and effort to minimizing biased assessments of the
impact of transfers on human capital accumulation, employing a wide array of tools for impact
evaluation that control for self-selection into a program or non-random placement of the program
itself. The biases avoided, however, may be small in comparison to the error of implicitly
limiting the value of the program to a single outcome. As indicated in this paper, under a range
of plausible assumptions about Mexico’s policy goals, the social value of redistribution can be as
great, or greater, than the measured value of the increased productivity attributed to the program.
    It is unlikely, however, that any consensus will be achieved on the precise value for this
parameter. In addition, major policy choices may be sensitive to the value of the social discount
rate. However, the fact that these parameters are hard to specify should not be a justification for
avoiding sensitivity analysis on their implications for program design or policy choice. There
may be major implications for public policy with regard, for example, to the choice between
transfer   programs     and   other    programs       directed   towards   increasing    education.




                                                15 
 
                                        REFERENCES

Alderman, H., and R. Yemtsov. 2014. “How Can Safety Nets Contribute to Economic Growth?”
   World Bank Economic Review 28 (1): 1–20.
Alderman, H., and E. King. 1998. “Gender Differences in Parental Investment in Education.”
   Structural Change and Economic Dynamics 9 (4): 453–68.
Alderman, H., J.R. Behrman, and C. Puett. 2017. “Big Numbers about Small Children:
   Estimating the Economic Benefits of Addressing Undernutrition.” World Bank Research
   Observer 32(1):107-125
Alesina, A., R. Di Tella, and R. MacCulloch. 2004. “Inequality and Happiness: Are Europeans
   and Americans Different?” Journal of Public Economics 88 (9): 2009–42.
Atkinson, A. 1970. “On the Measurement of Inequality.” Journal of Economic Theory 2: 244–
   63.
Atkinson, A., and A. Brandolini. 2010. “On Analyzing World Distribution of Income.” World
   Bank Economic Review. 24 (1): 12–37.
Auriol, E., and M. Warlters. 2012. “The Marginal Cost of Public Funds and Tax Reform in
   Africa.” Journal of Development Economics 97: 58–72.
Baird, S.F., H.G. Ferreira, B. Özler, and M. Woolcock. 2014. “Conditional, Unconditional and
   Everything in Between: A Systematic Review of the Effects of Cash Transfer Programmes
   on Schooling Outcomes.” Journal of Development Effectiveness 6 (1): 1–43.
Behrman, J. 2009. “Investment in Education-Inputs and Incentives.” In D. Rodrik and M.R.
   Rosenzweig ed. Handbook of Development Economics: The Economics of Development
   Policy Vol. 5 . Amsterdam: North-Holland Publishing Company, 4883–975
Behrman, J. and N. Birdsall. 1988. “The Equity-Productivity Tradeoff: Public School Resources
   in Brazil.” European Economic Review 32: 1585–1601.
Behrman, J., S. Parker, and P. Todd. 2011. “Do Conditional Cash Transfers for Schooling
   Generate Lasting Benefits? A Five-Year Followup of PROGRESA/Oportunidades.” Journal
   of Human Resources 46 (1): 93–122.
———. 2013. ”Incentives for Students and Parents.” P. Glewwe, Education Policy in Developing
   Countries. Chicago: University of Chicago.
Behrman, J.R., R.A. Pollak, and P. Taubman. 1982. “Parental Preferences and Provision for
   Progeny.” Journal of Political Economy 90, 1: 52–73.
Behrman, J.R., and E. Skoufias. 2010. ”The Economics of Conditional Cash Transfers.” In M.
   Adato and J. Hoddinott eds. Conditional Cash Transfers Programs in Latin America: A
   Synthesis of Their Impacts on Education, Health and Nutrition. Baltimore, MD: Johns
   Hopkins Press for the International Food Policy Research Institute, 127–58.
Behrman, J.R., and J. Hoddinott. 2005. “Programme Evaluation with Unobserved Heterogeneity
   and Selective Implementation: The Mexican PROGRESA Impact on Child Nutrition.” Oxford
   Bulletin of Economics and Statistics 67 (4): 547–69.
Blank, R.M. 2002. “Can Equity and Efficiency Complement Each Other?” Labour Economics 9
   (4): 451-68.
Brent, R. 2013. “A Cost-Benefit Framework for Evaluating Conditional Cash-Transfer
   Programs.” Journal of Benefit-Cost Analysis 4 (2): 159–80.
Brent, R. (ed). Handbook on Research in Cost-Benefit Analysis. 2010. Cheltenham UK: Edward
   Elgar.

                                             16 
 
Caldés, N., D. Coady, and J.A. Maluccio. 2006. “The Cost of Poverty Alleviation Transfer
    Programs: A Comparative Analysis of Three Programs in Latin America.” World
    Development 34 (5): 818–37.
Coady, D., and E, Skoufias. 2004. “On the Targeting and Redistributive Efficiencies of
    Alternative Transfer Instruments.” Review of Income and Wealth 50 (1): 11–27.
Coady, D., and R. Harris. 2004. “Evaluating Transfer Programmes within a General Equilibrium
    Framework.” Economic Journal 114: 778–99.
Das, J., Q.T. Do, and B. Özler. 2005. “Reassessing Conditional Cash Transfer Programs.” World
    Bank Research Observer 20 (1): 57–80.
Davila, E., and S. Levy. 2010. “Taxing for Equity. A Proposal to Reform Mexico’s Value Added
    Tax.” In J.A. González, V. Corbo, A. Krueger, and A. Tornell eds. Latin American
    Macroeconomic Reforms. The Second Stage. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Deaton, A. 1997. The Analysis of Household Surveys. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University
    Press.
DFID. 2011. “Cash Transfer Evidence Paper.” London, Department for International
    Development (DFID) Policy Division.
Dhaliwal, I., E. Duflo, R.Glennerster, C. Tulloch. 2013. In Paul Glewwe ed. Education Policy in
    Developing Countries. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 285–338.  
Fiszbein, A., and N. Schady. 2009. Conditional Cash Transfers: Reducing Present and Future
    Poverty. Washington, DC: The World Bank. Policy Research Report.
Gertler, P.J., S.W. Martinez, and M. Rubio-Codina. 2012. “Investing Cash Transfers to Raise
    Long-term Living Standards.” American Economic Journal: Applied Economics 4 (1): 164–
    92.
Harberger, A.C. 1997. “New Frontiers in Project Evaluation? A Comment on Devarajan, Squire,
    and Suthiwart-Narueput.” The World Bank Research Observer 12 (1), 73–9.
Levy, S. 2006. Progress Against Poverty. Washington DC: Brookings Institute.
Little, I.M.D., and J.A. Mirrlees. 1974. Project Appraisal and Planning for Developing
    Countries. New York: Basic Books.
———. 1994. “The Costs and Benefits of Analysis: Project Appraisal and Planning 20 Years On.”
    In R. Layard and S. Glaister eds. Cost-Benefit Analysis. Cambridge: Cambridge University
    Press.
Mani, S., J.R. Behrman, S. Galab, and P. P. Reddy. 2014. ”Impact of the Nregs on Schooling
    and Intellectual Human Capital.” Oxford, UK: Oxford University Young Lives Working
    Paper 122.
Olken, B. 2007. “Monitoring Corruption: Evidence from a Field Experiment in Indonesia.”
    Journal of Political Economy 115 (2): 200-49.
Orazem, P., and E. King 2008. “Schooling in Developing Countries: The Roles of Supply,
    Demand and Government Policy.” In Handbook of Development Economics, Vol. 4, T.P.
    Schultz, and J. Strauss eds. 3475–560. Amsterdam: North-Holland Publishing Co.
Schultz, T.P. 2002. “Why Governments Should Invest More to Educate Girls.” World
    Development 30 (2), 207–25.
Squire, L., and H. van der Tak. 1975. Economic Analysis of Projects. Johns Hopkins Press.
Wodon, Q., B. de la Briere, C. Siaens, and S. Yitzhaki. 2003. “The Impact of Public Transfers on
    Inequality and Social Welfare: Comparing Mexico’s PROGRESA to Other Government
    Programs.” Research on Economic Inequality 10: 147–71.



                                              17 
 
Figure 1. Two Isowelfare Curves for Wellbeing between Individual i and Individual j: Rawlsian
L-shaped (ε → ∞) and Utilitarian Linear Case (ε = 0)




                                             18 
 
Figure 2a. Total Annual Benefits from Redistribution




Source: Authors’ calculation from the 2002 Mexican Family Life Survey using equation 3 discussed in the text.



Figure 2b. Total Estimated Present Discounted Value of Benefits from PROGRESA Lower and
Upper Secondary Schooling Support Inclusive of Redistributional Benefits




Note: Benefits include increase in expected earnings due to lower and upper secondary schooling support calculated
in table 2 as well as total annual redistributional benefits shown in figure 2a.




                                                        19 
 
Figure 2c. Relative Shares from Human Capital Increases Compared to the Total Including
Redistribution




Note: Relative shares calculated using the “total PDV of benefits per grade of schooling” in table 2 and the total
PDV of benefits including redistribution shown in figure 2b.




                                                          20 
 
 



Figure 3. Total Annual Benefits from Redistribution Inclusive of Deadweight Loss from
Taxation




Source: Authors’ calculation from 2002 Mexican Family Life Survey using equation 3, assuming aggregate
deadweight loss is 25% of tax revenue and household shares are proportional to their earnings, proxied by
consumption. See text for details.




                                                       21 
 
 




Table 1. Monthly Schooling Grants (pesos) in the Second Semester of 2003

                      Grade                                Boys        Girls
                      Primary
                          3rd year                          105         105
                          4th year                          120         120
                          5th year                          155         155
                          6th year                          210         210
                      Lower secondary
                          1st year                          305         320
                          2nd year                          320         355
                          3rd year                          335         390
                      Upper secondary (high school)
                          1st year                          510         585
                          2nd year                          545         625
                          3rd year                          580         660
                     Source: Table 1 from Behrman, Parker, Todd (2011),
                     originally obtained from http:/oportunidades.gob.mx. This
                     study only uses the grants to students attending lower and
                     upper secondary schooling.




                                                  22 
 
Table 2. Present Discounted Values of Benefits in Terms of Increase in Expected Earnings
Attributable to PROGRESA

            Discount rate                                     3%           5%

            PDV of benefits per person for 6
            grades of schooling (USD)                       3,557        1,499
            Exchange rate (pesos to USD)                       11           11

            PDV of benefits per person for 6
            grades of schooling (pesos)                   39,127        16,489
            PDV of benefits per person per grade
            of schooling (pesos)                            6,521        2,748
            Sample Size                                       532          532
            Total PDV of benefits per grade of
            schooling (million pesos)                       3.469        1.462
           Source: Computed from Behrman, Parker, Todd (2011) based on an assumed
           additional grade of schooling and a return to schooling of 10% of earnings
           per additional grade of schooling.




                                                   23 
 
Table 3: Redistribution Benefits for Different Expenditure Groups when ε=0.7

                                                                                                       Redistribution
                                                                                                        benefits to
                                       Number of         Number of       Value of    Redistribution    PROGRESA
                                       individuals       households      transfer      benefits         households
                          Number of     receiving         receiving      (million      (million          (million
                          individuals PROGRESA          PROGRESA          pesos)        pesos)            pesos)
    Households in 1st
                               8,286        290              225             1.070        1.613               1.845
    quartile
    Households between
    25th percentile and       14,021        184              138             0.694       -0.213               0.480
    mean
    Households above
                              10,826         58              50              0.228       -0.741               0.094
    mean
Source: Authors’ calculations based on redistribution parameter, ε=0.7. Households receiving PROGRESA refer
only to the grants for post-primary education.




                                                      24 
 
 

Annex. Estimates Using Median Per Capita Consumption

Figure A1. Total Annual Benefits from Redistribution




Source: Authors’ calculation from the 2002 Mexican Family Life Survey using equation 3 discussed in the text.




                                                       25 
 
Figure A2. Total Estimated Present Discounted Value of Benefits from PROGRESA Lower and
Upper Secondary Schooling Support Inclusive of Distributional Benefits




Note: Benefits include increase in expected earnings due to lower and upper secondary schooling support calculated
in table 2 as well as total annual redistributional benefits shown in figure A1.




                                                        26 
 
Table A3. Relative Shares from Human Capital Increases Compared to the Total Including
Redistribution




Note: Relative shares calculated using the “PDV of benefits per grade of schooling” in table 2 and the total PDV of
benefits including redistribution shown in figure A2.  




                                                        27 
 
