                                                          WPS8196


Policy Research Working Paper                            8196




                Export Quality in Advanced
                and Developing Economies
                    Evidence from a New Data Set

                                     Christian Henn
                                    Chris Papageorgiou
                                   Jose Manuel Romero
                                     Nikola Spatafora




Jobs Cross Cutting Solution Area
September 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 8196


  Abstract
 This paper develops new estimates of export quality, based                         given product line, quality converges over time to the
 on bilateral data, which are far more extensive than pre-                          world frontier. Institutional quality, liberal trade policies,
 vious efforts. The data cover 166 countries and hundreds                           foreign direct investment inflows, and human capital
 of products over 1962–2014. The analysis finds that                                all promote quality upgrading, although their impacts
 quality upgrading is particularly rapid during the early                           vary across sectors. The results suggest that reducing
 stages of development. There is significant cross-country                          barriers to entry into new sectors can allow economies
 heterogeneity in the growth rate of quality. Within any                            to benefit from rapid quality convergence over time.




  This paper is a product of the Jobs Cross Cutting Solution Area. It is part of a larger effort by the World Bank to provide
  open access to its research and make a contribution to development policy discussions around the world. Policy Research
  Working Papers are also posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The authors may be contacted at jromero1@
  worldbank.org.




         The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
         issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
         names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
         of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
         its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                       Produced by the Research Support Team
      Export Quality in Advanced and Developing Economies:
                 Evidence from a New Data Set*                                        *




Christian Henn†            Chris Papageorgiou†              Jose Manuel Romero‡                  Nikola Spatafora†




JEL Classification Numbers:        F14, L15, O11, O14.
Keywords: Export quality; Export prices; Unit values; Quality ladders; Upgrading
Sector Board: Economic Policy (EPOL)




*
  All data and estimates referenced in the paper may be downloaded at http://data.imf.org/exportquality. We thank
Ricardo Hausmann for particularly enlightening discussions. We are also grateful to Irena Asmundson, Andrew Berg,
Hugh Bredenkamp, Amit Khandelwal, Aaditya Mattoo, Camelia Minoiu, Cathy Pattillo, Fidel Perez-Sebastian,
Michele Ruta, Romain Wacziarg, and participants in seminars at Clemson University, EBRD, Florida International
University, Harvard University, IMF, National University of Singapore, Oxford University, University of Washington,
World Bank, and WTO for useful comments. Lisa Kolovich, Freddy Rojas, and Ke Wang provided outstanding
research assistance. This work benefited from the financial support of the U.K.’s Department for International
Development (DFID). The paper should not be reported as representing the views of the IMF, WTO, World Bank, or
DFID.
†
    International Monetary Fund. Author e-mails: chenn@imf.org, cpapageorgiou@imf.org, nspatafora@imf.org
‡
    The World Bank. Author e-mail: jromero1@worldbank.org

                                                        1
                                                             2


1.         INTRODUCTION
Economic development requires the transformation of a country’s economic structure. This involves
diversifying into new sectors; reallocating resources towards more productive firms; and, critically,
improving the quality of goods produced. Producing higher-quality varieties of existing products helps
build on existing comparative advantages to boost export revenues and productivity. Yet the potential for
quality upgrading varies by product (Khandelwal, 2010), and has been found to be higher in manufactures
than in agriculture and natural resources. For countries at an early stage of development, diversification
into new products may therefore be a precondition to reaping large gains from quality improvement.

This paper makes three contributions to the debate on quality upgrading. First, we develop new estimates,
based on bilateral data, which are far more extensive than previous efforts, covering 166 countries and
hundreds of products over the period 1962–2014. Second, we present a series of stylized facts about export
quality and how it varies along the development path. In particular, we illustrate changes in quality over
time, both for the entire sample and for selected countries of interest, and we discuss the relationship
between quality and income. Throughout, we examine separately the quality of primary goods and of
manufactures, and we disaggregate manufacturing into several sub-sectors. Finally, we begin the task of
harvesting this data set to analyze the determinants of quality upgrading.

The paper is related to a rapidly expanding literature on diversification and quality upgrading. Schott (2004)
finds significant country within-product quality differences, based on shipment-level U.S. customs data.4
In particular, quality varies systematically with exporters’ relative factor endowments and production
techniques. He argues that intra-industry trade is largely trade in goods of different quality. Sutton and
Trefler (2011), elaborating on Hausmann et al. (2007), find that between 1980 and 2005 low-income
countries moved into more “sophisticated” products5, but produced them at low quality levels. As a result,
diversification has not led to a significant boost in GDP per capita. Put differently, diversification and
quality upgrading should be viewed as complementary in the development process. Hwang (2007) argues
that countries need to enter sectors with long “quality ladders” that they can climb.6 Relatedly, Hausmann
and Hidalgo (2010) demonstrate that, if production of any given good requires a combination of capabilities,
then the returns to acquiring new production capabilities can increase with the number of a country’s
existing capabilities. Thus, quality upgrading underpins the growth process to the extent that it implies new
capabilities. In addition, the proximity in “capabilities space” between goods already being produced and
higher value-added goods is also important (Hausmann and Klinger, 2006).7

This literature, however, faces a key challenge: export quality cannot be directly observed and needs to be
estimated. Unit values, deﬁned as the ratio of export values to quantity for any given product category, are
observable. Schott (2004) and Hummels and Klenow (2005) showed that these unit values increase with

4
    For instance, unit values for cotton shirts imported from Japan are 30 times higher than those from the Philippines.
5
  Defined as those products predominantly produced by high-income economies. While higher-income countries also
tend to produce higher-quality varieties, the concepts of quality and sophistication are quite different. Quality refers
to the relative price of a country’s varieties within their respective product lines. Product sophistication, as in
Hausmann et al. (2007), assesses the composition of the aggregate export basket.
6
  Starting production of higher-quality varieties need not imply abandoning production of lower-quality varieties,
particularly if the latter are better suited to some destination. Mukerji and Panagariya (2009) note that the United
States produces goods at a large variety of quality levels. Nonetheless, the average quality within 4-digit product
categories, which is the focus of our study, tends to be higher in higher-income economies.
7
 Regarding proximity, Bahar, Hausmann, and Hidalgo (2014) documents that the probability of a country exporting
a new type of good is significantly (over 50 percent) larger if a neighboring country is a successful exporter of the
same good.
                                                           3


GDP per capita. However, unit values are at best a noisy proxy for export quality, because they are also
driven by other factors, including production cost differences. The strategies recently developed for quality
estimation (including Khandelwal, 2010; Hallak and Schott, 2011; and Feenstra and Romalis, 2014)
typically model demand, and in some cases also supply, using explicit microeconomic foundations.
However, these methodologies do not allow calculation of a set of quality estimates with large country and
time coverage, owing to their significant data requirements.

As a result, much work remains to be done in establishing stylized facts about product quality and, in
particular, in linking growth in quality to economic development. Existing work has focused mainly on
other questions. For instance, Khandelwal’s (2010) primary aim in calculating quality ladders is to show
that U.S. sectors with short quality ladders are exposed to larger employment and output declines resulting
from low-wage competition. Hallak (2006) focuses on showing that higher-income economies import more
from countries producing high-quality goods. Hallak and Schott (2011) and Feenstra and Romalis (2014)
are mainly concerned with decomposing changes in unit values into changes in quality and pure trade-price
changes.

This paper yields a series of notable findings, many of them worthy of further research. Quality upgrading
is particularly rapid during the early stages of development. There is significant cross-country heterogeneity
in the growth rate of quality. Within any given product line, quality converges over time to the world
frontier. Institutional quality, liberal trade policies, FDI inflows, and human capital all promote quality
upgrading, although their impact varies across sectors. The results suggest that reducing barriers to entry
into new sectors can allow economies to benefit from rapid quality convergence over time.
2.       ESTIMATING PRODUCT QUALITY: METHODOLOGY AND DATA
Unit values are used by much of the literature to measure product quality because they are readily
observable, but suffer from three shortcomings. First, unit values may reflect production costs, or pricing
strategies (that is, firms’ choice of mark-up) rather than quality. Second, changes over time in unit values
may reflect changes in quality-adjusted prices, in response to supply or demand shocks, rather than changes
in quality.8 Third, if the composition of goods within a product category varies across exporters, the cross-
country differences in unit values among the exporters may reflect these differences in composition, rather
than differences in quality.9 The quality estimates presented here address the first two shortcomings; the
last one cannot be addressed if one is to maintain broad country and time coverage.10

The literature that goes beyond unit values does not provide a set of quality estimates that are well suited
for analyzing developments in developing countries. Khandelwal (2010) requires data on market shares of
imports relative to corresponding domestic varieties. These are only available for few countries and for
limited time periods. Hallak and Schott (2011) require extensive data on tariffs, which are unavailable even
for many relatively large countries before 1989.11 Feenstra and Romalis (2014) require for each product
two different unit-value observations, one derived from importer-reported (CIF) and one from exporter-
reported (FOB) data. However, exporter-reported data are not available for many developing-country

8
 Hallak and Schott’s (2011) results suggest for instance that Malaysia continually upgrades quality, but this does not
show in unit values because of falling world prices for electronics, the country’s main export.
9
  Similarly, quality measures will be affected by introduction of new products, if the initial quality level produced in
these new products varies substantially from the average quality of existing products in the category.
10
  Other papers that focus exclusively on U.S. data (such as Khandelwal, 2012) can address this last issue by using HS
10-digit data. However, data at such a high level of disaggregation are not widely available for developing countries.
11
  Also, data on tariffs in the Long Time Series TRAINS database, which goes back to the 1970s, do not cover low-
income countries well.
                                                                                                        (continued…)
                                                           4


exports, especially for early years, limiting their analysis to the 1984–2008 period. Consequently, a
reduced-form approach, which circumvents data constraints, is more suitable for our purposes.

Our methodology estimates quality based on unit values, but with important adjustments to capture the
impact of production costs and pricing strategies. The methodology is a modified version of Hallak (2006),
which sidesteps data limitations to achieve maximum country and time coverage.12 First, for any given
product, the trade price (equivalently, unit value) pmxt is assumed to be determined as follows:

         ln	       =       +   	ln     +    	ln     +    	ln         +       ,                                        (1)

where the subscripts m, x, and t denote, respectively, importer, exporter, and time period. Prices reflect
three factors. First, unobservable quality θmxt. Second, exporter income per capita yxt; this is meant to capture
cross-country variations in production costs systematically related to income. With high-income countries
typically being capital-abundant, we expect          < 0 for capital-intensive sectors and        > 0 for labor-
intensive sectors.13 Third, the (great circle) distance between importer and exporter, Distmx. This accounts
for selection bias: typically, the composition of exports to more distant destinations is tilted towards higher-
priced goods, because of higher shipping costs.14

Next, we specify a quality-augmented gravity equation:

         Ln             )      =       +       +    ln          +         + 	ln           ln       +                  (2)

Here, FEm and FEx denote, respectively, importer and exporter fixed effects. Distmx is as defined above. The
matrix       is a set of standard trade determinants from the gravity literature.15 The exporter-importer-
specific quality parameter       enters interacted with the importer’s income per capita      . If > 0, then
greater income increases the “demand for quality”. This equation is estimated separately for each product,
because preference for quality and trade costs may vary across products.

The estimation equation is obtained by rearranging (1) to express the unobservable quality parameter
(ln     ) in terms of observables, and substituting this into (2), yielding:

         ln            )       =      +       +    ln          +         +       ln       ln       +   ln   ln    +
                                       ln          ln     +                                                           (3)

where     =    ,       =−      ,     =−     , and ′       =−               ln         +        .



12
   The key difference is that we directly use unit values at the SITC 4-digit level, whereas Hallak gathers unit values
at the 10-digit level and then normalizes them into a price index for each 2-digit “sector”.
13
  This approach builds on Schott (2004), who showed that unit values for any given product vary systematically with
exporter relative factor endowments, as proxied by GDP per capita.
14
  Hallak (2006) uses distance to the United States instead of distance to the importer, because it only focuses on prices
of exports to the United States. Harrigan, Ma, and Shlychkov (2011) find that the correlation between export prices
and distance is due to a composition, or “Washington apples”, effect. They also find that U.S. firms charge higher
prices to larger and richer markets.
15
  It includes indicator variables for a common border, a common language, the existence of a preferential trade
agreement, a colonial relationship, and a common colonizer.
                                                                                                            (continued…)
                                                            5


This equation is estimated separately for each of the 835 product categories in the data set, yielding 835
sets of coefficients. The equation is estimated using two-stage least squares.    is a component of      ,
so that the regressor ln        ln      is correlated with the disturbance term ′ . We therefore use
ln        ln     as an instrument for ln      ln    .16

The results are used to calculate a set of bilateral quality estimates for each country’s exports. Rearranging
(1), and using the estimated coefficients, quality is calculated as the unit value adjusted for differences in
production costs and for the selection bias stemming from relative distance:17

           	         	              = 	 	ln	        +	      =    ′	ln	      +     ′	ln	    +    ′	ln                    (4)

As is standard, quality         and importers’ preference for quality δ are not separately identified.18

This estimation yields quality estimates for more than 20 million product-exporter-importer-year
combinations.19 To enable cross-product comparisons and aggregation into a multi-level database, all
quality estimates are first normalized by the “world frontier”, defined as the 90th percentile in the relevant
product-year combination. As a corollary, changes in quality over time are all defined relative to the world
frontier. After normalization, the quality estimates are aggregated across all importers for each country,
using current trade values as weights. The estimates are then aggregated to higher SITC levels (SITC 4-, 3-
, 2-, and 1-digit, as well as country-level totals); aggregations are also produced based on the BEC
classification, as well as for the 3 broad sectors of agriculture, non-agricultural commodities, and
manufactures.20 At each aggregation step, the normalization to the 90th percentile is repeated, and trade
values are used as weights.

The data set is a significantly extended version of the UN–NBER data set. Starting with the COMTRADE
database, we construct a trade data set for 1962–2014 by supplementing importer-reported data, generally
considered more reliable, with exporter-reported data where the former do not exist.21 We ensure
consistency over time and in aggregating to broader categories by using the methodology of Asmundson

16
  Where a unit value for the preceding year is not available (for instance, because the good was not traded), we use
the unit value in the closest available preceding year, going back up to 5 years. If unit values are not available in any
of the preceding 5 years, the observation is excluded from the estimation.
17
     In (4), the term −     is set to its expectation of zero: it cannot be separately identified, as it constitutes part of
 ′ . As pointed out in Hallak (2006),        may reflect omitted factors affecting export prices in (1), such as sector-
specific technological advantages not well proxied by GDP per capita, and could persist over time. This should be
borne in mind when interpreting the results.
18
  The preference for quality parameter δ will vary across sectors. Therefore, when quality estimates are later
aggregated across sectors, the procedures necessarily also aggregate across these heterogeneous preferences for
quality. The level term −   is of no significance, given our subsequent normalization of the quality estimates.
19
  This number is smaller than the 45.3 million potential combinations in the data set because of: (i) missing
observations for other regressors, primarily per capita income; and (ii) elimination of outliers (see fn. 22).
20
   Changes in the higher-level (including country-level) quality estimates will in general reflect both quality changes
within disaggregated sectors, and reallocation across sectors with different quality levels. If the composition of exports
is shifting toward product lines characterized by low quality levels, it is possible for the quality of any given product
to be rising sharply, but country-level quality to rise slowly (or indeed decline).
21
  The only exceptions to this methodology are export flows as reported by the United States, which take precedence
over importer-reported flows.
                                                                                                           (continued…)
                                                             6


(forthcoming). This data set is analogous to the UN–NBER data set, but provides longer time coverage.
The data set contains 45.3 million observations on bilateral trade values and quantities at the SITC 4-digit
(Revision 1) level. Any given importer-exporter-product-year combination will have more than one
observation for the same 4-digit category whenever import quantities are reported using more than one set
of units. In this case, the multiple sets of import quantities are considered distinct “SITC 4-digit-plus”
products, so that comparable unit values may be obtained within each product category. The total number
of “SITC 4-digit-plus” products is 835, based on 625 underlying SITC 4-digit categories.22 Information on
preferential trade agreements is drawn from the World Trade Organization’s Regional Trade Agreements
database, and other gravity variables are drawn from CEPII (Head and Mayer, 2013). Data on income per
capita are drawn from the Penn World Tables version 9.0 (Feenstra et al., 2015).

Reassuringly, the estimation results mirror closely those of Hallak (2006). All coefficients have the
expected sign, and are statistically significant in the majority of specifications (Table 1). Moreover, the
coefficients are closely comparable to those in Hallak (2006), except for those on the price-importer income
interaction, which is as expected because our trade price vector is defined differently.23
3.       EXPORT QUALITY ACROSS PRODUCTS, COUNTRIES, AND TIME
This section illustrates some stylized facts about export quality and provides a flavor of the richness of the
data set. First, we compare our quality estimates with standard unit value measures. Second, we focus on a
couple of specific sectors to highlight how informative it is to examine jointly developments in quality, unit
values, and market share. Third, we show how a country’s position on “quality ladders” may indicate large
quality upgrading potential or, conversely, an increased need for horizontal diversification. Fourth, we
discuss how our measure of quality varies along the development path, again establishing a comparison
with unit values. Fifth, we analyze changes in product quality over time, highlighting the significant
heterogeneity across regions and countries.
     A. Comparison of Quality Estimates with Unit Values
Unit values are much more dispersed than quality. This is the case even after eliminating extreme values
(Figure 1). Quality and unit values are correlated, but only at lower quality levels. Once a country’s quality
level reaches about 80–85 percent of the world frontier value, quality and unit values are no longer
correlated. Thus, quality increases beyond that level do not tend to be associated with price increases,
possibly because higher efficiency in production reduces costs. Quality increases are particularly strongly
correlated with price increases in agricultural goods.

Quality evolves gradually. Focusing on the early (1962–80), middle (1980–95), and most recent (1995–
2014) periods, changes in quality within each period of more than 20 percent relative to other countries are
rare (Figure 2). Changes in quality also tend to be much smaller than changes in unit values. Moreover, for
all sectors as well as manufacturing alone, increases in quality are in many cases not accompanied by
increases in unit values. Some countries have seen considerable increases in quality accompanied by stable
unit values: here, quality increases offset price declines on constant-quality products, for instance in the
computer and electronics sectors.

22
  SITC 4-digit-plus products were dropped if they met either of two criteria for smallness. First, the product comprised
less than 1 percent of total observations or trade value of the corresponding SITC 4-digit product. Second, the product
had less than 1,000 observations, and comprised less than 25 percent of total observations or trade value of the
corresponding SITC 4-digit product. In addition, outliers were eliminated by excluding any observation with: (i) a
quantity of 1; or (ii) a total trade value of less than $7,500 at 1989 prices; or (iii) a unit value above the 95th or below
the 5th percentile in 1989 prices within any given product.
23
  Hallak (2006), using U.S. data only, computes Fisher price indexes for each SITC 2-digit sector starting from 10-
digit sectors. In this paper, we use directly unit values of SITC 4-digit-plus products.
                                                                                                           (continued…)
                                                            7


       B. Export Quality over Time: Examples from Specific Sectors
We now illustrate our export quality estimates using examples drawn from the car and apparel sectors. We
focus on cars because most readers are likely to recognize the brands and have some intuition as to their
relative quality. We consider apparel because it is a key export for many developing countries, particularly
during the early stages of development, and typically constitutes one of the first beachheads in the
manufacturing sector.

Estimates of quality in the passenger motor cars sector (SITC 7321) are intuitive and, combined with price
movements, help explain developments in market shares.24 The quality of U.S. exports has on average been
at the world frontier, but has displayed some slight fluctuations over time (Figure 3). Meanwhile, prices
oscillated around 90 percent of the world frontier, and the U.S. world export market share has been stable
since the early 1990s after a long-term decline up to this point. German car exports have featured high
quality and high prices throughout since the late 1970s. During the 2000s, German car exports regained
much of the market share that they lost during the 1980s. Some countries boosted the quality of their car
exports as they developed. For instance, Japanese cars experienced strong quality upgrading through 1990,
reaching world frontier levels. Meanwhile, prices rose only moderately during this period, allowing for
increases in market share. Since then prices have risen slightly higher with constant quality, possibly
explaining some loss of market share to competitors. Quality of Korean cars was low until the early 1980s.
Since then Korean autos have experienced ongoing and substantial quality upgrading. As Korean prices
remained relatively low, their market share increased.

Analysis of the apparel sector (SITC 84) also shows how the relationship between quality and prices
influences market shares. China increased its relative quality of apparel exports substantially since 1980,
from 75 percent to 95 percent of the world frontier (Figure 4). This was accompanied by a similarly drastic
increase in export market share, and enabled prices to rise slightly, although they remain low at 40 percent
of the world frontier value. Bangladesh also recorded a strong increase in its market share, but given that
quality increases were much less than in China, no price increases could be realized. India mirrors
Bangladesh closely. Italy maintained world frontier quality throughout the sample period, but its market
share declined as prices rose. Finally, the Republic of Korea and Thailand are examples of countries which
in the past increased their market shares against a backdrop of rising quality and mostly stable prices.
Subsequently, however, these countries have been diversifying away from the textile sector. They now
retain higher-quality segments of the apparel market, as quality remains stable or continues to increase, but
record falling market shares.
       C. Export Quality along the Development Path
Overall, export quality is correlated with income per capita. This holds both at the aggregate level, and for
manufacturing, agriculture, and non-agricultural commodities separately (Figure 5).25 These findings are
consistent with Hummels and Klenow (2005) and Sutton and Trefler (2011). They hold also when
controlling for country fixed effects, so as to focus purely on within-country changes over time; in other
words, export quality increases as countries grow richer. Quality increases with income particularly sharply
during the early stages of development, until GDP per capita reaches $10,000. Quality convergence then
continues at a diminishing rate. In contrast, unit values increase with income at a relatively constant rate:
the slope of the non-parametric best-fit curve linking unit values and income is quite constant across
different income levels, particularly for manufacturing (Figure 5 and Figure 6).

Among high income countries, average export quality levels only vary within a narrow band. In contrast,
among and within developing countries, and in particular low-income countries, average quality levels vary
24
     Market share is measured as a country’s exports as a percentage of total world exports of that product.
25
     The correlation between income and unit values for non-agricultural commodities is relatively weak.
                                                           8


widely, even when controlling for income. This suggests that some economies could reap particularly large
gains from quality upgrading, while for others diversification may be a priority. Those countries with low
average quality have considerable scope to upgrade quality even within existing export sectors. Other
developing countries may already enjoy relatively high export quality, but consistent with their low incomes
this is in sectors with short quality ladders or low productivity. These economies could benefit from
diversification into sectors with new opportunities for quality upgrading.

These broad facts hold also when focusing on two subsamples: small states, and commodity exporters
(Figure 6).26 Small states follow patterns similar to those in other countries: quality rises with income, and
particularly sharply at income levels below $10,000. In commodity exporters, there also is potential for
quality upgrading during the development process, as countries shift toward more processed products
within each commodity category. However, the process may be more constrained by exogenous factors
(such as the grade of available minerals) than in manufacturing.

The results indicate significant scope for quality upgrading in not just manufacturing, but also agriculture.
As countries develop, the quality of agricultural products on average increases substantially. Further, the
length of quality ladders varies substantially across subsectors in both agriculture and manufacturing
(Figure 7).27 All this suggests that early development need not be driven by the establishment of a
manufacturing base. Although soil and climate may impose some limitations, the finding that sharp
increases in quality can be registered in agricultural and commodity exports is particularly important since
in many developing countries a large share of the labor force remains concentrated in agriculture.
     D. Quality Ladders: Potential for Quality Upgrading
A country’s position on sectoral world quality ladders indicates the potential for further quality upgrading
in its existing product basket. To illustrate, we analyze the position of China, Malaysia, Tanzania, and
Vietnam on these quality ladders, alongside the composition of their current export baskets (Figure 8).
Overall, both the length of the quality ladder, and a country’s relative position on the ladder, can vary
considerably across sectors.

Tanzania and Vietnam are examples of countries with considerable quality upgrading potential within
existing export sectors. Tanzania has experienced strong growth during the last decade. Yet, Tanzania’s
exports are concentrated in primary and agricultural exports, and within those sectors the country is
generally in the bottom half of the quality ladder, suggesting large potential for quality upgrading.
Horizontal diversification, for instance towards manufactures, may create additional opportunities for
quality upgrading. Vietnam’s exports, on the other hand, are already heavily tilted towards manufactures,
particularly the miscellaneous manufactures sector, which includes apparel and footwear. However, as in
Tanzania, there is still much potential for further quality upgrading in these sectors.

Some of the more mature Asian countries may require horizontal diversification to enable further quality
upgrading. Malaysia is heavily specialized in exports of electronics, a subcategory of the machinery and
transport equipment sector, but is already coming close to the world frontier in this sector. To enable further
quality upgrading, it may first need to diversify. This diversification could occur across SITC 1-digit


26
   Countries are classified as small states if their population is smaller than 1.5 million in either 2010 or 2011, using
Penn World Tables (2010) and World Development Indicators (2011) data. This classification does not include fuel
exporters that are high income (as per World Bank definition), including in particular Bahrain, Brunei, and Equatorial
Guinea. Countries are classified as commodity exporters, following the IMF World Economic Outlook classification,
if commodities on average exceed 50 percent of total exports.
27
   For instance, red wine, Arabica coffee, and shrimp and prawns constitute examples of agricultural products with
particularly long quality ladders (cf. Lederman and Maloney, 2012, Box. 5.1).
                                                           9


sectors, as well as within the machinery and transport equipment sector. China’s position in most sectors
lies between Vietnam and Malaysia. Some quality upgrading potential has already been realized, but more
remains.
     E. Quality Upgrading by Income Group and Region
In middle-income countries, export quality in manufacturing has been gradually increasing for several
decades; these countries have converged toward the world quality frontier since the 1980s (Figure 9).
Quality convergence in agriculture only commenced later, in the 2000s, after a prolonged period of
divergence.

In low-income countries as a whole, export quality in manufacturing has stagnated during the last three
decades. In agriculture, there have been signs of quality upgrading during the last decade, after a prolonged
gradual decline. In non-agricultural commodities, average quality has deteriorated substantially relative to
the world frontier since the 1980s. This suggests that low-income countries have increasingly focused on
raw material exports, as opposed to developing processing activities in the context of vertically integrated
industries. In contrast, in high-income countries, export quality increased further from already high levels,
both for all products and for commodities.

At the regional level, East Asia has exhibited particularly fast quality upgrading (Figure 10). The quality
convergence was particularly impressive in manufactures. Quality of commodities also increased,
particularly in the 1970s and 1980s, as a result of the development of vertically integrated industries
engaged in elementary processing. Again, agriculture only followed with a substantial lag, with quality
starting to increase only since 2000.

Sub-Saharan Africa is still lagging behind, but there are now tentative signs of quality convergence.
Manufacturing export quality has increased sharply since the late 1990s, and prolonged quality divergence
in agriculture has seemingly halted. In contrast, in South Asia, there are no strong signs of quality
convergence in any large sector. In the Middle East and North Africa, manufacturing quality increased from
the 1960s through the 1980s, but stagnated thereafter; in agriculture, no sustained quality increases have
occurred, although there are signs of some upgrading since 2000. In Latin America, export quality has
stagnated for several decades.28 That said, during the last decade some signs of convergence have appeared
in both manufacturing and agriculture.

Even within regions, there is considerable cross-country heterogeneity in the pace of quality upgrading.
Within Asia, several countries, such as Japan, Korea, China, India, Indonesia, and Vietnam, have converged
or are converging fast towards the world quality frontier (Figure 11).29 Bangladesh, Pakistan, and Sri Lanka
are converging at a slower pace, although with signs of an acceleration during the last decade. Meanwhile,
in countries such as Malaysia and Thailand, quality convergence has slowed since the mid–1990s.

In Africa, the patterns of convergence are even more heterogeneous, with particularly large fluctuations in
quality indexes in countries whose exports are strongly driven by a few products. Upward trends in quality
can be noted since the early 2000s in a series of countries including Senegal, Ghana, Uganda, Nigeria, and
South Africa. In the Arab Republic of Egypt, quality increased over an extended period, but more recently


28
  In a similar vein, Lederman and Maloney (2012) argue that both Latin America and the Middle East & North
Africa are already near the quality frontier for many of their exports, consisting largely of natural-resource based
goods, and thus benefit little from quality upgrading in existing exports.
29
   The “fast convergers” are defined as those countries where average quality converged to the world frontier by at
least 5 percentage points between 1994–96 and 2008–10. Alternative thresholds yield similar results.
                                                       10


stagnated. In many countries, including Morocco, Côte d’Ivoire, and Cameroon, quality has largely
stagnated throughout the sample period.

As an additional observation, developing countries’ potential for quality upgrading does not appear to be
limited by low demand for quality in their destination markets. Data limitations prevent a formal hypothesis
test. That said, while lower-income countries do tend to serve markets that on average import lower-quality
products, the differences do not seem substantial enough to act as a constraint on quality upgrading (Figure
12 and Figure 13). On average, the lower-income the exporter, the greater the gap between its export quality
and the average quality demanded by its trade partners in those products that the exporter sells to them.
Likewise, in countries with slower convergence, export quality is substantially lower than the average
quality of their trade partners’ imports. All this suggests that policy should focus on creating a domestic
environment broadly conducive to quality upgrading; lowering barriers to entry into higher-quality export
markets constitutes a less urgent priority.
       F. Import Quality
For any given product, estimates of the quality of exports from country i to country j may also be interpreted
as estimates of the quality of imports of country j from country i, and aggregated over all exporting countries
to yield estimates of country j’s average quality of imports of this given product. We now present some
such estimates, in a manner analogous to our earlier discussion of export quality.

Focusing first on individual sectors, in passenger cars, Germany and Korea saw marked increases over time
in the quality of their imports (Figure 14). In contrast, Japan and the United States saw more limited changes
over time. In broad terms, this is consistent with relative trends in income growth. In the apparel sector,
country-level changes over time in import quality were more limited (Figure 15). In general, import unit
values fluctuate more sharply than import quality, likely again reflecting problems in using unit values to
measure quality.

Turning to broader product categories, import quality is correlated with income levels, but less strongly
than export quality (Figure 16 and Figure 17). This trend holds for both manufacturing and agricultural
imports, although not for commodities. Further, the gap in import quality between low-income countries
and middle-income or high-income countries is widening over time. Differences in import quality across
regions are likewise correlated with differences in regional income levels; in general, import quality is
lowest in Sub-Saharan Africa and South Asia (Figure 18).
4.         DETERMINANTS OF QUALITY UPGRADING
This section turns to analyzing the determinants of the growth rate of product quality through product-level
cross-country panel regressions.
       A. Estimation Strategy and Data
We estimate separate regressions for manufacturing, agriculture, and other natural resources, since
determinants can be expected to vary by sector. The estimation equation is:

	         ℎ_            = FE +     	ln	       _             +   	                  +      ,                 (5)

where i, p, and t index, respectively, the exporting country, product, and time period.             ℎ_
denotes the annualized growth rate of quality, calculated as the difference between (the logarithms of)
quality levels in the initial and final years of 10-year non-overlapping periods.30 FE relates to different sets
of fixed effects, discussed below.

30
     These 10-year non-overlapping periods are 1962–71, 1972–81, 1982–91, 1992–2001, and 2002–2010.
                                                             11



Other explanatory variables relate to initial conditions and are observed in the first year of any 10-year non-
overlapping period. Initial_Quality denotes the initial product quality level. Determinants denotes the
vector of potential determinants, which includes in our baseline specification initial GDP per capita, initial
FDI inflows, initial institutional quality, initial human capital, and indexes measuring the levels of initial
trade and agricultural liberalization (see Table 2 for all summary statistics).

GDP per capita is drawn from the World Bank’s World Development Indicators. FDI inflows are measured
as a percentage of GDP, and the data are drawn from the IMF’s International Financial Statistics.
Institutional quality is measured using the “Constraints on the Executive” variable from the Polity IV data
set.31 Human capital is measured using the secondary-school completion rate from the World Bank’s World
Development Indicators. The indexes measuring initial trade and agricultural liberalization are de jure
indicators drawn from Prati et al. (2013).32

To contain any omitted variable bias, we include sets of fixed effects to control for any other observables
or unobservables that may drive quality growth. The basic specification includes fixed effects for country,
product, and time. Country fixed effects control for quality growth being faster in some countries, for
instance owing to unobserved institutional circumstances, such as the quality of business organizations or
other mechanisms to exploit knowledge spillovers. Product fixed effects allow for quality improvements
being easier to attain in some products. Time fixed effects detect changes over time in the global average
speed of quality growth, for instance reflecting advances in information and communications technology
or reductions in transportation costs.

The extended specification instead includes country-product and product-time fixed effects.33 Country-
product effects account, for instance, for unobserved institutional circumstances in a specific country
favoring quality upgrading, but only in some types of products. Similarly, product-time fixed effects allow
global developments to have different impacts on average quality growth in different products.
       B. Results
The first key finding is that the quality of individual products converges unconditionally across countries
over time. Specifically, in a bivariate regression, the growth rate of product quality depends negatively on
the initial quality level (Table 3 and Figure 19). This implies that new, low-quality entrants into a sector
see their quality rise over time relative to other countries. The speed of unconditional convergence toward
the world quality frontier equals 3.5 percent per year when fixed effects are not included. The convergence
speed tends to increase as more detailed fixed effects are introduced. This highlights the significant
heterogeneity in the data, and in particular the presence of considerable obstacles to quality upgrading in
specific sectors within specific countries. Evidence of within-product quality convergence also suggests
that managing to enter ‘long quality-ladder’ sectors today could increase a country’s future potential to
climb up the value chain, supporting growth.


31
     Similar results are obtained if the Kaufmann-Kraay-Mastruzzi indicators are used.
32
   Both indexes vary between zero and unity. The trade liberalization measure is based on average tariff rates: zero
means the tariff rates are 60 percent or higher, while unity means the tariff rates are zero. The agricultural liberalization
index measures the extent of public intervention in the market of each country’s main agricultural export commodity;
it includes the presence of export marketing boards and the incidence of administered prices. Both indexes are
available from 1960 onwards.
33
   We do not include country-time fixed effects, because the determinants we are primarily interested in only vary
along the country-time dimension.
                                                                                                            (continued…)
                                                          12


Next, we introduce other potential determinants of quality upgrading. We present results from both the
basic specification (with country, product, and time fixed effects) and the extended, preferred specification
(with country-product and product-time fixed effects), for each of the three broad sectors—agriculture,
manufacturing and commodities (Table 4).34 For all sectors, the basic specification is statistically rejected
at high significance levels in favor of the extended specification, based on both F and Hausman tests.35
Relatedly, the goodness of fit is significantly higher in the extended specification. This confirms the
significant country-product– and product-time–specific heterogeneity in the quality data. The discussion
therefore focuses on the extended specification, unless otherwise stated.

Quality convergence is robust to which set of determinants is included.36 Conditional quality convergence
occurs at a rapid 6–7 percent per year in the basic specification, and an even faster 13–14 percent per year
in the extended specification, with little difference across sectors. The difference across specifications again
suggests the presence of significant, persistent, country-product–specific obstacles to quality upgrading—
obstacles that are neutralized by the country-product fixed effects in the extended specification. In both
specifications, the initial quality level is the single most important observable determinant of quality
growth: since it varies across country-product combinations, it can explain some of the large heterogeneity
across this dimension. That said, quality convergence for individual products need not imply quality
convergence for countries’ overall export baskets, owing to the presence of country or country-product
fixed effects.

Quality upgrading is easier to achieve in higher-income economies, after controlling for their higher initial
quality levels, and when using the fuller controls of the extended specification. This is true in both
manufacturing and agriculture, although not in other natural resources. One interpretation is that advanced
economies, given their more advanced communication technologies and favorable network effects,37 can
reap greater knowledge spillovers and implement quality improvements more easily. However, the
magnitude of this effect, in both manufacturing and agriculture, is small relative to the impact of
convergence: a one standard deviation increase in GDP per capita only increases quality growth by 0.5
percent per year.

For lower-income economies, the (positive) effect on quality upgrading of low initial quality will therefore
generally dominate the (negative) effect of low income. This provides additional intuition for the earlier
finding that quality convergence is particularly rapid at lower levels of development.

Institutional quality, which also tends to be greater in higher-income countries, again matters for quality
upgrading in both manufacturing and agriculture, but not in other natural resources. The impact of
institutions increases in magnitude and statistical significance in the extended specification. Even then, the
magnitude of the impact is quite small: a one standard deviation improvement in institutions leads to a 0.1
percent additional quality convergence per year.



34
  Results vary considerably across sectors, limiting the usefulness of regressions on the full sample covering all three
sectors. We nonetheless present these latter results in Appendix Table A.1.
35
  Appendix Table A.2 introduces country-product and product-time fixed effects separately, and confirms that
country-product heterogeneity is especially important.
36
  This is demonstrated in more detail in an earlier working paper version of this paper (see Henn et al., 2013, Table
3).
37
   For instance, an advanced economy’s size may sustain larger agglomerations of industry, which can bring benefits
including more specialized and deeper labor markets, or cheaper and more direct shipping and air travel options.
                                                                                                        (continued…)
                                                       13


Increasing human capital by one standard deviation also accelerates quality convergence by 0.1 percent per
year, but only in manufacturing. An increase in FDI inflows of 1 percentage point of GDP is associated
with a 0.06 percent per year increase in export quality in the other natural resource sector.38 This effect can
be economically significant in resource-dependent developing countries, where natural-resources FDI is
high relative to GDP. In manufacturing, the effect is also statistically significant but economically
negligible.

Trade liberalization leads to faster quality upgrading, particularly in agriculture but also in manufacturing,
in both the basic and extended specifications. A one standard deviation increase in trade liberalization
accelerates quality convergence by 0.2 percent per year in agriculture and 0.1 percent per year in
manufacturing. Agricultural liberalization leads to faster agricultural quality upgrading only in the basic
specification (a one standard deviation increase boosts quality convergence by 0.1 percent per year).

Fixed effects account for much of the observed sample variation in the pace of quality upgrading. This is
challenging to interpret, but suggests that unobservable dimensions of institutional and policy performance
may have important implications. Relatedly, a country moving into a new product line should not
automatically expect rapid quality growth.
    C. Robustness
We now present two robustness checks. The first varies the time period over which quality growth is
calculated. The second includes financial openness variables as additional determinants of quality
upgrading.

We start by adopting a single cross section from the beginning to the end of the sample (Table 5, left half).
Since this drops the time dimension, only country and product fixed effects can be included. The results are
therefore most appropriately compared with the earlier basic specification. These cross-sectional results
again highlight the importance of unconditional convergence in quality levels. Initial quality levels are the
only determinant that retains statistical significance across all sectors. The speed of convergence toward
the world quality frontier is estimated at 5 percent per year; these estimates incorporate the effect of country-
product specific barriers, which are not separately controlled for. Agricultural liberalization also has an
effect on agricultural quality upgrading; the magnitude of the estimates here is twice as large as in the basic
specification with 10-year periods.

We also use observations on 5-year non-overlapping periods, rather than the earlier 10-year periods (Table
5, right half). Here, both country-product and product-year fixed effects are included, as in the earlier
extended specification. The results broadly confirm those of the extended specification, although with a
lower goodness of fit. The main difference is that the speed of unconditional convergence increases to 20–
23 percent per year. This likely reflects the greater potential for measurement error when using short time
periods. The magnitudes of the other estimated effects change only slightly, with the statistical significance
of the coefficients remaining virtually unchanged from the extended specification. The effects are greater
for initial GDP per capita and education, and smaller for trade liberalization, in those sectors where these
impacts were previously found to be statistically significant. The effect of institutional quality is greater in
agriculture, but lower in manufacturing.

The second robustness check adds to the extended specification two measures of de jure financial openness:
a domestic financial liberalization index, and an external capital account openness index, drawn from Prati


38
   The effects of both human capital and FDI inflows are only observed after country-product heterogeneity is
controlled for.
                                                                                                  (continued…)
                                                              14


et al. (2013).39 These indexes are only available from 1973 onwards, and correspondingly reduce our
estimation sample.40 These financial variables have no effect on quality upgrading in agriculture and other
natural resources (Table 6). They have a statistically significant negative impact on manufacturing,
suggesting that excessively rapid financial liberalization could hamper quality upgrading. However, the
economic magnitude of the impact is small: for instance, a one standard deviation increase in domestic
financial liberalization only reduces quality growth by 0.1 percent per year.

Inclusion of the financial variables only has a minimal effect on the estimated coefficients for other
determinants. The speed of convergence increases marginally, to around 15 percent per year for all sectors.
In addition, human capital and trade liberalization have a slightly greater effect on quality upgrading in
manufacturing.
5.         CONCLUSION
We develop a new data set on export quality. This data set is far more extensive than previous efforts,
covering 166 countries over 1962–2014, and providing breakdowns up to the SITC 4-digit and BEC 3-digit
levels, for a total of more than 20 million quality estimates. Our estimates, based on sector-specific quality-
augmented gravity equations, explicitly recognize that high product prices are not necessarily an indicator
of high quality, but may rather reflect supply-side considerations such as high production costs. The
estimates also control for selection bias, such that only higher-priced items are shipped to far-away
destinations.

Average country-level quality is strongly correlated with income per capita. Further, quality upgrading is
particularly rapid during the early stages of development, until a country reaches a GDP per capita of about
$10,000. Convergence in export quality continues at a slower pace until GDP per capita reaches $20,000,
and levels off thereafter.

Substantial cross-country differences in the pace of quality upgrading suggest that policies may have a
significant impact. At the regional level, product quality in Sub-Saharan Africa and South Asia is lower,
and has been growing more slowly, than in East Asia. But there is considerable heterogeneity within
regions, with quality rising far more rapidly in Ghana or Uganda than in Côte d’Ivoire or Cameroon.

Analysis of countries’ position on sectoral quality ladders shows that some middle-income countries that
have increased quality sharply in the past, such as Malaysia and to a lesser extent China, may now have
less scope left to upgrade quality within existing export sectors. These countries may profit from horizontal
diversification, which would also enable future upgrading. Other countries, such as Tanzania or Vietnam,
still have considerable quality-upgrading potential within existing export sectors.

Diversification and quality upgrading can thus be thought of as complementary. Removing barriers to entry
into new sectors could boost growth in many developing countries by increasing the potential for future
quality upgrading. Sectors with long “quality ladders” may hold particular potential given our finding that,
within any given product line, quality converges across countries over time at a rapid pace. Importantly for

39
  Both indexes are scaled to vary from zero to unity. The domestic financial liberalization index is an average of six
sub-indexes. The first five refer to the banking system and cover: (i) credit controls, such as subsidized lending and
directed credit; (ii) interest rate controls, such as floors or ceilings; (iii) competition restrictions, such as entry barriers
and limits on branches; (iv) the degree of state ownership; and (v) the quality of banking supervision and regulation.
The sixth sub-index relates to securities markets: it captures the extent of legal restrictions on the development of
domestic bonds and equity markets, and the existence of independent regulators. The capital account openness index
measures a broad set of restrictions on financial transactions for residents and non-residents, as well as the use of
multiple exchange rates. See Prati et al. (2013) and Abiad et al. (2010) for details.
40
     In this case the non-overlapping time periods are 1973–81, 1982–91, 1992–2001, and 2002–2010.
                                                    15


low-income countries, there is also substantial potential for quality upgrading in agriculture, where large
parts of their labor force are concentrated.

Both economies’ policies and underlying characteristics affect the speed of quality upgrading, with an
impact that varies across sectors. Institutional quality and trade liberalization are important for quality
upgrading in both manufacturing and agriculture. FDI inflows are associated with quality upgrading in
manufacturing as well as in natural resources, while increased education mainly promotes quality upgrading
in manufacturing. However, the impact of these policies is quantitatively small relative to the impact of
quality convergence. We find no evidence that lack of demand for quality in a country’s existing destination
markets on average constrains quality upgrading.

Finally, there is much country- and product-level heterogeneity in the pace of quality upgrading, even
controlling for a wide range of observables. Future research should focus on identifying more clearly the
drivers of this heterogeneity.
                                                    16


REFERENCES
Abiad, A., E. Detragiache and T. Tressel, 2010, “A New Database of Financial Reforms,” IMF Staff
       Papers, Vol. 57, pp. 281–302.

Asmundson, I., forthcoming, “More World Trade Flows: An Updated Dataset” (Washington: International
      Monetary Fund).

Bahar, D., R. Hausmann, and C. Hidalgo, 2014, “Neighbors and the Evolution of the Comparative
       Advantate of Natios: Evidence of International Knowledge Diffusion,” Journal of International
       Economics, Vol. 92, pp. 111–123.

Baldwin, R., and F. Robert-Nicoud, 2010, “Trade-in-goods and Trade-in-tasks: An Integrating
       Framework,” CEPR Discussion Paper No. 7775.

Cadot, O., C. Carrere, and V. Strauss-Kahn, 2011, “Export Diversification: What‘s Behind the Hump?”
       Review of Economics and Statistic, Vol. 93, pp. 590–605.

Feenstra, R., and J. Romalis, 2014, “International Prices and Endogenous Quality,” Quarterly Journal of
        Economics, May, Vol. 129, pp. 477–527.

Feenstra, R., R. Inklaar, and M. P. Timmer, 2015, “The Next Generation of the Penn World Table”,
        American Economic Review 105(10): 3150–82, available for download at www.ggdc.net/pwt.

Grossman, G., and E. Rossi-Hansberg, 2008, “Trading Tasks: A Simple Theory of Offshoring,” American
      Economic Review, Vol. 98, pp. 1978–97.

Hallak, J. C., 2006, “Product quality and the direction of trade,” Journal of International Economics, Vol.
        68, pp. 238–65.

Hallak, J. C., and P. Schott, 2011, “Estimating Cross-country Differences in Product Quality,” Quarterly
        Journal of Economics, Vol. 126, pp. 417–74.

Harrigan, J., X. Ma, and V. Shlychkov, 2011, “Export Prices of U.S. Firms,” NBER Working Paper No.
       17706.

Hausmann, R., and C. A. Hidalgo, 2010, “Country Diversification, Product Ubiquity, and Economic
      Divergence,” HKS Faculty Research Working Paper Series RWP10-045 (John F. Kennedy School
      of Government, Harvard University).

Hausmann, R., and B. Klinger, 2006, “Structural Transformation and Patterns of Comparative Advantage
      in the Product Space,” HKS Faculty Research Working Paper Series RWP06-041 (John F. Kennedy
      School of Government, Harvard University).

Hausmann, R., J. Hwang, and D. Rodrik, 2007, “What You Export Matters,” Journal of Economic Growth,
      Vol. 12, pp. 1–25.

Head, K., and T. Mayer, 2013, “Gravity Equations: Toolkit, Cookbook, Workhorse,” in: Handbook of
       International Economics, eds. Gopinath, Helpman, and Rogoff.

Henn, C., C. Papageorgiou and N. Spatafora, 2013, “Export Quality in Developing Countries,” IMF
       Working Paper 13/108 (Washington: International Monetary Fund).
                                                   17


Heston, A., R. Summers, and B. Aten, 2012, Penn World Table Version 7.1, Center for International
       Comparisons of Production, Income and Prices at the University of Pennsylvania.

Hummels, D., and P. Klenow, 2005, “The Variety and Quality of a Nation’s Exports,” American Economic
     Review, Vol. 95, pp. 704–723.

Hwang, J., 2007, “Introduction of New Goods, Convergence and Growth,” Job Market Paper, Department
       of Economics, Harvard University.

Imbs, J., and R. Wacziarg, 2003, “Stages of Diversification,” American Economic Review, Vol. 93, pp. 63–
         86.

Khandelwal, A., 2010, “The Long and Short (of) Quality Ladders,” Review of Economic Studies, Vol. 77,
       pp. 1450–1476.

Klinger, B., and D. Lederman, 2004, “Discovery and Development: an Empirical Exploration of “New”
        Products,” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper Series No. 3450.

Klinger, B., and D. Lederman, 2006, “Diversification, Innovation, and Imitation Inside the Global
        Technological Frontier,” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 3872.

Lederman, D., and W. Maloney, 2012, Does What You Export Matter? In Search of Empirical Guidance
      for Industrial Policies (Washington: World Bank).

Mukerji, P., and A. Panagariya, 2009, “Within- and Across-Product Specialization Revisited,” Columbia
       University, New York.

Prati, A., M. Gaetano Onorato and C. Papageorgiou, 2013, “Which Reforms Work and under What
        Institutional Environment: Evidence from a New Dataset on Structural Reforms,” Review of
        Economics and Statistics, Vol. 95, pp. 946–968.

Schott, P., 2004, “Across-product Versus Within-product Specialization in International Trade,” Quarterly
        Journal of Economics, Vol. 119, pp. 646–677.

Sutton, J., and D. Trefler, 2011, “Deductions from the Export Basket: Capabilities, Wealth and Trade,”
        NBER Working Paper No. 16834.

World Development Indicators (Washington: World Bank).

World Trade Organization, Regional Trade Agreements Database (Geneva, Switzerland: WTO).
                                                     18


                         Table 1. Imports: quality-augmented gravity equations

                                           In percent of SITC 4-digit-plus sectors
                                       Positive Coefficients     Negative Coefficients Median coefficient value
                                      Significant Insignificant Significant Insignificant This paper Hallak (2006)
Common preferential trade agreement       82            9            6            3          0.45         0.38
Colonial relationship                     80           11            6           3         0.43         0.79
Common colonizer                          50           20           16          14         0.20         0.29

Common language                           71           14            9           5         0.28         0.53

Common border                             82            9            6           3         0.38         0.33

Ln (distance)                             6             8           10          76         -1.02        -1.04

Ln (distance) *                           61           14           10          16         0.04         -0.02
    Ln (importer GDP per capita)

Ln (exporter GDP per capita)*             90            5            4           2         0.10         0.08
    Ln (importer GDP per capita)

Ln (unit value) *                        238           82          438          93         -0.01        0.19
    Ln (importer GDP per capita)

Note: All equations estimated using two stage least squares.
                                                       19


                            Table 2. Quality growth: summary statistics of data

 Variable                                       Mean           Standard          Minimum           Maximum
                                                              Deviation

 Growth Rate of Quality                     0.001268          0.089368          -5.608547          5.964081

 Ln Initial Quality                        -0.201023          0.280277          -8.454018          1.044727

 Ln Initial GDP per capita                  7.723025          1.585803           3.565800         11.626510

 Initial Institutional Quality              2.080978         14.636410                 -88                  7

 Initial Human Capital                    19.153060          13.310290           0.027734         69.751091

 Initial Trade Lib. Index                   0.715041          0.231503                   0                  1

 Initial Agricultural Lib. Index            0.471090          0.382185                   0                  1

 FDI inflows as % of GDP                    2.362129          4.948364         -34.756802        136.193100

 Initial Domestic Fin. Lib. Index           0.520379          0.298308                   0                  1

 Initial Ext. Capital Account Lib.          0.599943          0.373698                   0                  1

Note: The annualized growth rate of (product) quality is expressed in annualized natural units. The indexes
of liberalization of trade, agriculture, the domestic financial sector, and the external capital account are de
jure indicators that range between 0 and 1, with higher values corresponding to greater liberalization (see
Prati et al., 2013, and Abiad et al., 2010). Institutional quality is proxied by the “Constraints on the
Executive” variable from the Polity IV data set. GDP per capita and human capital, as proxied by the
secondary-school completion rate, are drawn from the World Bank’s World Development Indicators.
Foreign Direct Investment as a percentage of GDP is drawn from the IMF’s International Financial
Statistics.
                                                                 20


            Table 3. Quality growth & unconditional quality convergence: panel regressions

Fixed effects               None              Country    Country, Product Basic Spec. 1/ Country-Prod. Extended Spec. 2/


Ln(Initial Quality)       -3.49***            -4.38***         -6.33***       -6.33***         -14.5***        -13.3***
                           (0.03)              (0.03)           (0.04)         (0.04)           (0.07)          (0.06)
Observations              244,742             244,742          244,742        244,742          244,742         244,742
R-squared                 0.0551               0.0710          0.1046         0.1058           0.5494           0.7609

Notes: All equations estimated using observations averaged of 10-year non-overlapping periods. The dependent
variables is the annualized growth rate of product quality. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10 percent,
5 percent and 1 percent level, respectively. All coefficients and standard errors are multiplied by 100 for presentation
purposes.
1/ Includes country, product and time fixed effects.
2/ Includes country-product and product-time fixed effects.




                          Table 4. Determinants of quality growth: panel regressions

                                          Basic specification 1/                       Preferred specification 2/
                                Manufacturing Agriculture Natural Res.          Manufacturing Agriculture Natural Res.
Ln(Initial Quality)               -7.22***          -6.62***       -5.72***         -13.9***       -13.9***      -13.4***
                                   (0.07)            (0.11)         (0.20)           (0.12)         (0.17)        (0.34)
Ln(Initial GDP p.c.)               0.0508           -0.0059          -0.167        0.319***        0.355***      -0.0626
                                  (0.0400)          (0.0011)        (0.190)        (0.0305)        (0.0877)      (0.1560)
Initial Institutional Quality      0.0018           0.0056*         0.0087         0.0048***      0.0077***       0.0048
                                  (0.0013)          (0.0031)       (0.0058)         (0.0009)       (0.0023)      (0.0046)
Initial Human Capital              0.0000            0.0000        -0.0070         0.0059***        0.0053       -0.0071
                                  (0.0027)          (0.0071)       (0.0127)         (0.0018)       (0.0050)      (0.0094)
Initial FDI inflows               0.0076***         0.0145**       -0.0131         0.0062**         0.0070      0.0596***
                                  (0.0027)          (0.0071)       (0.0134)        (0.0028)        (0.0073)     (0.0152)
Initial Trade Lib.                0.2090**         0.7360***       -0.0351         0.3950***      0.8000***       0.2390
                                  (0.0009)          (0.2490)       (0.4230)         (0.0657)       (0.1890)      (0.3440)
Initial Agric. Lib.                                 0.3220*                                         0.0435
                                                    (0.179)                                        (0.1380)
Observations                       98,746            29,802           8,365         98,746          29,802         8,365
R-squared                           0.115            0.144            0.146         0.838           0.839          0.834

Notes: All equations estimated using observations averaged of 10-year non-overlapping periods. The dependent
variables is the annualized growth rate of product quality. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10
percent, 5 percent and 1 percent level, respectively. All coefficients and standard errors are multiplied by 100 for
presentation purposes.
1/ Includes country, product and time fixed effects.
2/ Includes country-product and product-time fixed effects.
                                                           21


              Table 5. Robustness I: varying the time window for calculating quality growth

                                            Cross-section 1/                  5-year non-overlapping windows 2/
                                Manufacturing Agriculture Natural Res.     Manufacturing Agriculture Natural Res.
Ln(Initial Quality)               -5.04***      -5.02***     -4.67***          -20.3***      -22.6***       -22.2***
                                   (0.12)        (0.16)       (0.47)            (0.11)        (0.19)         (0.35)
Ln(Initial GDP p.c.)               0.0933        -0.0103     0.1640           0.4940***     0.6880***       0.0778
                                  (0.0598)      (0.1610)    (0.3440)           (0.0317)      (0.1070)      (0.1780)
Initial Institutional Quality      0.0012        0.0027      -0.0047          0.0017**      0.0140***      -0.0002
                                  (0.0022)      (0.0055)    (0.0105)          (0.0007)       (0.0025)      (0.0041)
Initial Human Capital              0.0011        0.0215      0.0327           0.0106***       0.0104       -0.0136
                                  (0.0064)      (0.0164)    (0.0375)           (0.0020)      (0.0064)      (0.0113)
Initial FDI inflows                0.0033        -0.0078     -0.0127          -0.0059**       0.0021       -0.0011
                                  (0.0052)      (0.0097)    (0.0249)           (0.0026)      (0.0081)      (0.0140)
Initial Trade Lib.                 0.0458        0.3500     -0.6120           0.2020***     0.7890***      0.6090*
                                   (0.162)      (0.4040)    (0.9080)           (0.0628)      (0.2180)      (0.3640)
Initial Agric. Lib.                            0.7340**                                       0.1830
                                               (0.2850)                                      (0.1610)
Observations                       17,632        4,138          1,479         152,022         46,126        12,798
R-squared                           0.147        0.282          0.292          0.739          0.717          0.724

Notes: The dependent variable is the annualized growth rate of product quality. *, **, and *** denote statistical
significance at the 10 percent, 5 percent and 1 percent level, respectively. All coefficients and standard errors are
multiplied by 100 for presentation purposes.
1/ Includes country and product fixed effects.
2/ Includes country-product and product-time fixed effects.
                                       22


     Table 6. Robustness II: adding financial openness variables

                                   Manufacturing   Agriculture   Natural Res.
Ln(Initial Quality)                   -14.9***      -14.4***       -15.1***
                                       (0.13)        (0.19)         (0.40)
Ln(Initial GDP p.c.)                 0.3400***     0.3540***       -0.1080
                                     (0.0378)       (0.1030)       (0.1940)
Initial Institutional Quality        0.0049***      0.0059**        0.0036
                                     (0.0011)       (0.0028)       (0.0051)
Initial Human Capital                0.0107***       0.0040         0.0033
                                     (0.0021)       (0.0058)       (0.0106)
Initial FDI inflows                  0.0087***      -0.0082       0.1270***
                                     (0.0319)       (0.0079)       (0.0173)
Initial Trade Lib.                   0.6870***     1.0300***        0.5530
                                     (0.0818)       (0.2290)       (0.4240)
Initial Agric. Lib.                                 -0.0479
                                                    (0.1740)
Initial Dom. Financial Lib.          -0.2510**       0.2640        -0.3630
                                      (0.1020)      (0.2960)       (0.5240)
Initial Ext. Capital Account Lib    -0.1270***       0.1230        -0.2030
                                     (0.0489)       (0.1430)       (0.2570)

Observations                          80,076         25,501         6,802
R-squared                              0.858         0.846          0.835

Notes: All equations estimated using observations averaged of 10-year
non-overlapping periods and include country-product and product-time
fixed effects. The dependent variables is the annualized growth rate of
product quality. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10
percent, 5 percent and 1 percent level, respectively. All coefficients and
standard errors are multiplied by 100 for presentation purposes.
                                             23


        Appendix Table A.1. Full sample regressions covering all sectors

Sets of Fixed Effects             Country,                Country-     Country-
                                Product, and Country and Product and Product and
                                   Time      Product-Year   Year     Product-Year
Ln(Initial Quality)               -6.56***        -5.49***   -15.5***       -13.8***
                                   (0.06)          (0.05)     (0.11)         (0.09)
Ln(Initial GDP p.c.)               0.0050     -0.0800**      0.4490***     0.3220***
                                  (0.0471)     (0.0399)       (0.0452)     (0.0354)
Initial Institutional Quality    0.0028**          0.0017    0.0068***     0.0058***
                                 (0.0013)         (0.0011)    (0.0012)     (0.0009)
Initial Human Capital             -0.0015          0.0028     0.0034       0.0064***
                                  (0.0029)        (0.0024)   (0.0027)      (0.0020)
Initial FDI inflows              0.0076**     0.0088***      0.0105***     0.0108***
                                 (0.0030)      (0.0029)       (0.0033)     (0.0031)
Initial Trade Lib.               0.4650***    0.4240***      0.6660***     0.5670***
                                 (0.1040)      (0.0877)       (0.0995)     (0.0768)
Initial Agric. Lib.                0.1000         0.1660**   -0.1080        -0.1090*
                                  (0.0759)        (0.0646)   (0.0740)       (0.0579)
Observations                      112,010         112,010    112,010        112,010
R-squared                          0.123           0.545      0.610          0.847

Notes: All equations estimated using observations averaged of 10-year non-
overlapping periods. The dependent variables is the annualized growth rate of
product quality. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10 percent, 5
percent and 1 percent level, respectively. All coefficients and standard errors are
multiplied by 100 for presentation purposes.
                                                            24


                                Appendix Table A.2. Intermediate sets of fixed effects

                                 Country-Product and Year Fixed Effects      Country and Product-Year Fixed Effects
                                Manufacturing Agriculture Natural Res.      Manufacturing Agriculture Natural Res.
Ln(Initial Quality)                -17.2***     -15.0***     -13.5***          -5.70***      -5.65***       -5.29***
                                    (0.13)       (0.18)       (0.36)            (0.06)        (0.09)         (0.20)
Ln(Initial GDP p.c.)              0.5080***    0.4990***      0.0116          -0.0649*       -0.1170        -0.2210
                                  (0.0399)      (0.1070)     (0.1810)         (0.0337)       (0.1000)       (0.1880)
Initial Institutional Quality     0.0061***    0.0092***     0.0142***          0.0091        0.0037         0.0005
                                  (0.0012)      (0.0028)      (0.0053)         (0.0011)      (0.0027)       (0.0058)
Initial Human Capital             0.0042*        0.0056      -0.0123            0.0017        0.0031        -0.0037
                                  (0.0025)      (0.0064)     (0.0113)          (0.0021)      (0.0060)       (0.0122)
Initial FDI inflows               0.0072**      0.0148*      -0.0129          0.0072***       0.0057        0.0409**
                                  (0.0031)      (0.0077)     (0.0129)          (0.0026)      (0.0070)       (0.0164)
Initial Trade Lib.                0.5530***    0.9320***      0.2080          0.1730**      0.5930***       -0.0378
                                  (0.0884)      (0.2320)     (0.4000)         (0.0741)       (0.2180)       (0.4200)
Initial Agric. Lib.                              0.1970                                      0.3080**
                                                (0.1700)                                     (0.1570)
Observations                       98,746        29,802          8,365         98,746         29,802         8,365
R-squared                           0.577        0.634           0.656         0.540          0.510          0.380

Notes: All equations estimated using observations averaged of 10-year non-overlapping periods. The dependent
variables is the annualized growth rate of product quality. *, **, and *** denote statistical significance at the 10
percent, 5 percent and 1 percent level, respectively. All coefficients and standard errors are multiplied by 100 for
presentation purposes.
                                                     25


                                    Figure 1. Quality and unit values




Note: Each dot depicts an exporter-year combination. The 90th percentile is set to unity for both unit values
and quality observations.
                                                 26


                       Figure 2. Changes in quality, and changes in unit values




Note: Each dot depicts one exporter.
                                     27


Figure 3. Quality and unit values for passenger motor car exports (SITC 7321)
                              28


Figure 4. Quality and unit values for apparel exports (SITC 84)
                       29


Figure 5. Quality, unit values, and GDP per capita
                                          30


Figure 6. Quality, unit values, and GDP per capita: small states and commodity exporters




          Figure 7. Quality in selected agricultural and manufacturing sectors
                               31


Figure 8. Quality ladders: China, Malaysia, Tanzania, and Vietnam




       Figure 9. Export quality by income group over time
                32


Figure 10. Export quality by region
                                                          33


          Figure 11. Country-level heterogeneity in quality upgrading in Asia and Africa




              Figure 12. Quality upgrading and destination markets, by country group


                 Export quality relative to destination markets in 2014
                                   (World Frontier=1)
        Low income exporters                                                   Average quality
Lower middle income exporters                                                  demanded in
Upper middle income exporters                                                  destination
                                                                               markets
        High income exporters
              Non-Fragile LICs                                                 Quality exported
                   Fragile LICs
                    Asian LICs
             West African LICs
              East African LICs
           Central African LICs
                  Small States

                                  0.5   0.6   0.7   0.8        0.9   1   1.1
                                              34


  Figure 13. Quality upgrading and destination markets, for fast and slower quality convergers
                     among low-income and lower middle-income countries


                    Export quality relative to destination markets in 2014
                                      (World Frontier=1)
                                                                             Average
                                                                             Quality
Slower convergers in Africa                                                  demanded in
                                                                             destination
                                                                             markets
 Slower convergers in Asia

                                                                             Quality
                                                                             exported
  Fast Convergers in Africa


    Fast Convergers in Asia


                              0.6   0.7            0.8          0.9            1            1.1
                                     35


Figure 14. Quality and unit values for passenger motor car imports (SITC 7321)
                              36


Figure 15. Quality and unit values for apparel imports (SITC 84)
                           37


Figure 16. Import quality, unit values, and GDP per capita
                        38


Figure 17. Import quality by income group over time
                39


Figure 18. Import quality by region
                    40


Figure 19. Unconditional quality convergence
