                                                     WPS8212


Policy Research Working Paper                       8212




 Municipal Pooled Financing of Infrastructure
            in the United States
                        Experience and Lessons

                                   Lili Liu
                               Michael De Angelis
                                 Sally Torbert




Governance Global Practice Group
October 2017
Policy Research Working Paper 8212


  Abstract
  Despite a world awash with liquidity, large infrastructure                         and stable model for expanding subnational financing for
  supply gaps exist across developing and emerging markets.                          many small municipalities, while maintaining strong credit
  Infrastructure has been largely decentralized to subnational                       ratings with virtually no defaults from sub-borrowers. The
  governments in many countries, and many policymakers                               municipal bond banks have been successful in lowering
  are keenly interested in developing subnational bond mar-                          financing costs for many small, unrated local governments,
  kets to give subnational governments access to private                             with loan sizes as low as less than $50,000. This paper
  financing for infrastructure. Despite this, the transaction                        examines the policies and structures that have made pooled
  costs of bond issuance are still prohibitive for many subna-                       financing successful in the United States, including regula-
  tional governments to access financing. Pooled financing,                          tory frameworks, governance and managerial systems, the
  through regional infrastructure funds, municipal funds, or                         role of project appraisal, operations and pricing, and man-
  bond banks, has become a sought-after solution for helping                         aging the default risks of borrowers. The paper also explores
  subnational governments access private financing for infra-                        broader lessons for developing countries that are interested in
  structure. In the United States, municipal bond banks that                         establishing pooled financing for subnational infrastructure.
  were established since the 1970s have become a cost-effective



  This paper is a product of the Governance Global Practice Group in collaboration with, and supported by, the Public
  Private Infrastructure Advisory Facility. It is part of a larger effort by the World Bank to provide open access to its research
  and make a contribution to development policy discussions around the world. Policy Research Working Papers are also
  posted on the Web at http://econ.worldbank.org. The authors may be contacted at lililiu8@verizon.net.




          The Policy Research Working Paper Series disseminates the findings of work in progress to encourage the exchange of ideas about development
          issues. An objective of the series is to get the findings out quickly, even if the presentations are less than fully polished. The papers carry the
          names of the authors and should be cited accordingly. The findings, interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those
          of the authors. They do not necessarily represent the views of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development/World Bank and
          its affiliated organizations, or those of the Executive Directors of the World Bank or the governments they represent.


                                                        Produced by the Research Support Team
           Municipal Pooled Financing of Infrastructure in the United States:
                               Experience and Lessons

                          Lili Liu, Michael De Angelis and Sally Torbert1




JEL classification: G12, G18, G24, H54, H73, H74, H77, H81, N92, O18



Keywords:    Infrastructure Financing; Public Investment; State and Local Borrowing;
Intergovernmental Relations; Intergovernmental Fiscal Systems; Decentralization; Pooled
Financing




1
  This work was jointly financed by the Public Private Infrastructure Advisory Facility (PPIAF), managed by the
World Bank on behalf of participating donors, and the Governance Global Practice of the World Bank. The paper
has incorporated comments from Francois Bergere, Manager of PPIAF, Kirti Devi, Municipal Finance Specialist
of PPIAF, Catiana Garcia-Kilroy, Lead Financial Sector Specialist of the Finance and Markets Global Practice of
the World Bank, and Alessandra Campanaro, Senior Urban Specialist in the Social, Urban, Rural and Resilience
Global Practice of the World Bank. The paper has also incorporated comments from participants at a World Bank
seminar in May 2017 that presented findings of the paper, in particular comments from Guangzhe Chen, Senior
Director, Water Global Practice, and Binyam Reja, Practice Manager, Transport and ICT. The paper has also
benefitted from discussions with senior officials of the Maine Municipal Bond Bank and the New Hampshire
Municipal Bond Bank in January 2017, as well as with managers and analysts at Fitch Ratings, Moody’s, and S&P
Global in February 2017. The team would like to express their appreciation to these municipal bond banks and
ratings agencies.
Table of Contents

I.        Introduction ............................................................................................................................. 1
II. Pooled Finance: Rationale, Origin, and Regulatory Context .................................................. 3
     A.      Rationale ........................................................................................................................................... 3
     B.      Origin and Types............................................................................................................................... 3
     C.      Regulatory Context ........................................................................................................................... 4
III. Legal Structure, Management, Financing and Operation ........................................................ 5
     A.     Legal Framework .............................................................................................................................. 5
     B.     Management ...................................................................................................................................... 8
     C.     Financing and Operations ............................................................................................................... 10
          1. Financial Sustainability ............................................................................................................... 10
          2. Review of borrower credit and legal compliance ....................................................................... 13
          3. Pooling mechanism: maturities, interest rates and yields ........................................................... 13
          4. Surveillance, cash management, and default remedies ............................................................... 16
IV. Lessons for Developing Countries ........................................................................................ 18
V. Conclusions ........................................................................................................................... 21
Annex A: Overview of the Maine and New Hampshire Municipal Bond Banks ......................... 22
Annex B: State Revolving Funds .................................................................................................. 24
References ..................................................................................................................................... 26


Figures and Tables

Figure 1 Municipal Bond Bank Funds Flow Model ................................................................................... 17


Table 1 Credit Ratings of Municipal Bond Bank Bonds ............................................................................ 11

Table 2 Sample Pooled Bond Structure ...................................................................................................... 14
I.      Introduction
    The unprecedented scale of urbanization in developing countries requires large-scale urban
infrastructure financing to help absorb massive influxes of rural populations to urban centers. Developing
countries have increased investment in infrastructure from 3.5 percent of GDP in 1980 to 5.7 percent in
2008. Despite this increase, these numbers fall short of the estimated 6.6 percent of GDP investment needed
for developing countries. Low income countries have even higher infrastructure expenditure needs,
estimated at 12.5 percent of GDP. Of the total $19.2 trillion2 needed to meet infrastructure demand between
2010 and 2030, there will be $15.8 trillion in demand from Asia, $1.3 trillion demand from emerging
Europe, $1.2 trillion from Latin America, $0.7 trillion from Africa, and $0.2 trillion from the Middle East
(World Bank 2014).

     As a result of decentralization in many countries subnational governments have become responsible for
a large share of infrastructure investments. Borrowing enables subnational governments (SNGs)3 to capture
the benefits of major capital investments immediately, rather than waiting until sufficient savings from
current income can be accumulated to finance them. Infrastructure investments benefit both current and
future generations. Subnational borrowing finances the cost of infrastructure more equitably across
multigenerational users of infrastructure services because the debt service can be paid during the economic
life of the assets that the debt is financing. Therefore, infrastructure services can be paid for by the
beneficiaries of the services over the life of the services achieving an intergenerational equity.

     Developing a subnational bond market has been an emerging priority in developing countries. Loans
from commercial banks have been a major source of infrastructure financing for subnational governments
in many countries. However, the asset-liability structure of the commercial banking system generally limits
its capacity for long-term financing. China has been at the forefront of reforms in developing subnational
capital markets for infrastructure financing. The 2014 Budget Law has authorized provinces to issue bonds
within the context of developing a prudent regulatory framework for debt management, medium-term
capital budgeting and fiscal transparency. SNGs and their financing vehicles in other countries have also
issued bond instruments on a smaller scale (for example, Colombia, India, Mexico, Poland, the Russian
Federation, and South Africa). Other countries, such as Indonesia, are considering policy frameworks to
facilitate subnational debt market development, and some others such as Peru are engaging in capacity-
building activities and are allowing selected SNGs to pilot-test transactions (Canuto and Liu 2010).

    A key challenge is to assist smaller municipalities to access capital markets for infrastructure financing.
Available data indicate that in countries where subnational governments have issued bonds only larger
subnational governments have been able to access the capital market.4 In countries where a subnational
capital market has just started, usually only the most creditworthy SNGs such as capital cities issue bonds.
However, even in well-developed capital markets, access to the capital market by small municipalities has
remained elusive.

     Bond financing is inherently complex and requires assembling a team of finance specialists, including,
a financial advisor, bond counsel, trustee, and underwriters. Issuing debt is a process that involves preparing
bond documents prior to the sale of the bonds, selecting the method of sale (competitive or negotiated),
sizing and structuring the bond issue, attracting investors, obtaining credit ratings, providing adequate



2
  All dollar amounts are United States dollars.
3
  The terms subnational governments refer to all tiers of the government that are below the central government.
4
  From Canuto and Liu 2010 and discussions with the World Bank teams working on difference countries on recent
developments.
                                                            2


disclosure to investors, investing the bond proceeds, and complying with various legal requirements for
these activities.

     The complex process of bond issuance poses a special challenge for small SNGs even within a well-
developed capital market. The fixed costs of bond issuance (e.g., legal costs, underwriter fees, and credit
ratings), when spread over a low volume of bonds, can make the total cost of bond financing prohibitive,
thereby limiting this financing option for smaller municipalities issuing a small volume of bonds. For many
small municipalities, the process of raising private financing is complex and costly due a lack of financial
expertise, limited access to financial markets, and the need to borrow relatively small amounts of capital.

     To address this issue, several states in the United States established pooled financing mechanisms in
the 1970s. A state may create a public financing entity (for example a state bond bank) which functions as
a financial intermediary between the capital market and local governments that need financing for capital
projects. The bond bank aggregates several smaller municipal borrowings into one larger bond issue,
structures the terms of the bond issue, and handles the legal, financial, and processing requirements of the
issuance. The proceeds of the bond bank bonds are then lent by the bond bank to the municipal borrowers
to finance their municipal infrastructure projects. The structure of pooled financing has successfully
provided many small municipalities with access to private capital markets and lowered their financing costs.
The state bond banks in the United States have also maintained strong credit ratings without government
guarantees and with virtually no defaults from municipal borrowers.

    The objective of this paper is to review the experience of the pooled financing structures and
mechanisms in the United States, with a focus on municipal bond banks and to draw lessons and
implications for developing countries that might pursue this type of financing mechanism.5 The success of
pooled financing relies primarily on the creditworthiness of the municipal borrowers. The municipal
borrowers’ credit strength is shaped by the state’s intergovernmental fiscal system including tax sharing
and fiscal transfers, a municipality’s own revenue and expenditure flexibility, and financial management,
accounting and reporting systems. The systemic reform of these factors is outside the scope of this paper.
This paper examines these factors only in the context of how they may impact pooled financing.

    The structure of the paper is as follows. Section 2 reviews the rationale, origin and types of pooled
financing in the United States, and how pooled financing relates to the overall regulatory framework for
the subnational bond market in the country. Section 3 provides an overview of legal, governance,
managerial and financial operation of municipal bond banks. Section 4 discusses the potential role of pooled
financing in developing countries and draws lessons from the United States experience. Section 5
concludes.




5
  Pooled financing has also been used in Canada and Europe, both of which are not covered by this paper. The Canadian
municipal bond bank model, started in 1956, differs from the United States model in two significant ways: (i) with the
exception of the Municipal Finance Authority of British Columbia (MFABC), the senior Canadian government directly
guarantees the loans of Municipal Finance Corporations (as municipal bond banks are called in Canada); (ii) with the
exception of a few large cities, municipalities located in MFC jurisdictions are required to finance through MFCs. Our
primary interest is the model of pooled financing where municipal borrowers have the option of going to the market on their
own, and that the government as the owner of the municipal bond bank does not provide guarantees to the pooled financing
facility. For a review of the European experience with pooled financing (Anderson 2014).
                                                             3


II.      Pooled Finance: Rationale, Origin, and Regulatory Context

A.       Rationale
    The United States has a large and diversified subnational bond market.6 Each year, about 44,000 SNGs
issue bonds in an average aggregate amount of $359 billion per annum from 2013 to 2016.7 Total debt
outstanding was $3.069 trillion in the third quarter of 2016 (Congressional Research Service 2016).

    Despite an active and robust municipal finance market, small municipalities face challenges in
accessing capital markets. Many small municipalities need to borrow a relatively small amount of capital.
For example, the median size of borrowing from the Maine Municipal Bond Bank from 2012-2016 is
$854,000, with the smallest amount only $30,000. For the lowest 50% of loans, the average size of a loan
is $425,000. In New Hampshire, the median-size loan from 2008-2016 was $1.3 million, with the smallest
amount $41,000 and the largest $37 million.8 The process of hiring necessary specialized professionals
including an investment bank, a bond counsel, a financial advisor and obtaining a rating is complex and
expensive, relative to the size of the bond issuance. Investors are less willing to finance such a small amount
of what would be an illiquid, and possibly un-rated debt issue. For these reasons, the cost of financing such
small borrowings can be prohibitive.

   Municipal bond banks have been offering a unique and advantageous mechanism for small
communities to finance modest municipal projects by providing:

            Lower transaction costs of issuance due to economies of scale in packaging several municipal
             borrowings into a larger bond issue

            Increased liquidity by packaging smaller issues into a larger issue making the bond issue more
             attractive to buyers

            More favorable interest rates because the pool often has a better credit rating than the
             participating municipal borrowers, and the municipal bond bank is a more frequent issuer of
             debt and better known to the capital market participants

            Technical and professional assistance in the debt issuance process

            Professional and stable management for the issuance of debt as well as for the surveillance and
             monitoring of the municipal credits while the bonds and municipal borrowings are outstanding.

B.       Origin and Types
    Municipal bond banks were established in the United States in the 1970s. The first municipal bond
banks were created in the states of Vermont and Maine in 1969 and 1972, respectively. This soon was
followed in the next several years by the Alaska Municipal Bond Bank Authority (1975), North Dakota


6
  In the United States, the use of “subnational” and “municipal” are exchangeable. The municipal capital market also includes
securities issued by the states or special purpose vehicles of the states.
7
  The Securities and Exchange Commission estimated around 44,000 sub-national issuers of municipal debt in 2011. See
U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission 2012. Average issuance taken from Electronic Municipal Market Access:
http://emma.msrb.org/MarketActivity/ViewStatistics.aspx.
8
   Author’s calculations based on publicly-available documentation in the New Hampshire and Maine bond issues and
websites. The New Hampshire values are based on total outstanding loans as of the 2016 Series A issue.
                                                      4


Municipal Bond Bank (1975), and the New Hampshire Municipal Bond Bank (1977). Municipal bond
banks, which are utilized in various forms by several states, lend the proceeds of their bond issues to a wide
range of government units from very small towns to large cities, school districts, and utility districts.

     Municipal bond banks are financial intermediaries, providing municipal borrowers access to the
subnational bond market by providing professional assistance and lowering transaction and financing costs
for municipal borrowers. Municipal bond banks aggregate several smaller municipal borrowings into one
larger bond bank bond issue that is sold in the capital market. The bond bank approves applications from
municipal borrowers, structures the terms of the bond bank bond issue, prepares the necessary
documentation for the issuance and sale of its bonds complying with legal requirements, prepares the
documentation for the municipal borrowing from the bond bank, and seeks assurance that all legal
requirements for the municipal borrowing have been complied with. The proceeds of the bond bank bonds
are then lent by the bond bank to the municipal borrowers to finance their municipal infrastructure projects.
The repayment by the municipal borrowers to the bond bank is used to pay the debt service on the bond
bank bonds. The bond bank monitors the timely payment by the municipal borrowers to assure the principal
and interest on the bond bank bonds are paid when due.

    A municipality, depending on its needs, can choose whether to issue debt through the municipal bond
bank, other financing authorities, or on its own, depending on the financing options available in the state
and in the capital market. Larger municipalities with good credit ratings and more frequent issuances may
prefer to issue their own bonds rather than issue through a municipal bond bank. A municipality will
evaluate its financing options based on several factors:

          Interest cost

          Administrative review, monitoring and control by third parties

          Transaction costs

          Available principal maturities related to the useful life of the project to be financed

          The municipality’s credit rating relative to that of the municipal bond bank.

    Another major form of pooled financing is State Revolving Funds (SRFs). SRFs were developed under
the 1987 federal Clean Water Act, to leverage federal grants for revolving loans for local environmental
water projects. Although the primary focus of this paper is on municipal bond banks, SRFs provide another
model for pooled financing of sub-national government infrastructure projects. A short review of the history
and structure of SRFs is provided as Annex B.

C.      Regulatory Context
     Pooled financing in the United States emerged in the 1970s within a well-developed regulatory
framework for municipal borrowing. At the time, the first municipal bond bank was created by the state of
Vermont in 1969, the regulatory frameworks for subnational capital market were established. Since the late
18th century, subnational capital market development in the United States was based on a series of reforms
that were often carried out in response to various crises that occurred in the market. As a result, when the
first municipal bond bank was created in 1969, a set of market institutions had been developed and operated
                                                              5


within a robust legal framework, resulting in a very low rate of defaults on subnational debt that created a
perception of safety for the subnational debt market.9 Market reforms included:

        The establishment of various state constitutional public debt limits as the result of the debt crisis in
         the early 1840s

        The innovative development of revenue bonds in the late 19th century

        The requirement of a legal opinion of independent bond counsel10 in the late 19th century to
         strengthen market participation, giving investors confidence as to the legality of the debt

        The enactment of Chapter 9 of the United States Bankruptcy Code to address municipal defaults
         during the Great Depression

        The securities laws enacted in the 1930s, with anti-fraud provisions applicable to subnational
         borrowers.

    Municipal bond banks and their municipal borrowers are each governed by an established legal
framework that govern their respective borrowings. The creation, mandate, and function of the municipal
bond banks are governed by state legislation relating specifically to the municipal bond bank. These legal
requirements provide that municipal bond banks have the authority to finance public purpose capital
projects on behalf of municipalities. Municipal borrowers financing through a municipal bond bank or
independently are subject to the legal framework for municipal borrowing, including municipal borrowers’
compliance with any state or local limitations on the purpose or amount of municipal debt.

      A municipality is not limited to borrowing only from a municipal bond bank and may have financing
alternatives. The subnational capital market in the United States emphasizes competition and financing
options. As noted earlier, a municipality evaluates its financing options by considering several factors
including the cost of capital. Debt outstanding from pooled financing is about $100 billion comparing to $3
trillion total subnational debt outstanding.11 Pooled financing is one of several financing options available,
however it helps to provide smaller municipalities with access to the capital market by lowering the cost of
transaction, issuance and capital.


III.     Legal Structure, Management, Financing and Operation

A.       Legal Framework
    Although municipal bond banks are created and operated pursuant to their respective state laws, the
precise structure of each municipal bond bank is tailored to the legal framework of the state and is governed
by the legislation creating the municipal bond bank. As a result, municipal bond banks are administered
and financed differently across states. However, they share many common elements, for example,


9
  For a detailed review of the development of regulatory frameworks for subnational capital market, see Liu, Tian and Wallis
2013.
10
   An independent bond counsel is an attorney or firm of attorneys with specialized expertise in the field of municipal finance
and is not an employee of the municipal bond bank, subnational government (e.g. state, district, or municipality), or the
financing vehicle of a subnational government.
11
   The estimate is based on authors’ meeting discussion with rating agencies in New York City, February 23-24, 2017.
                                                             6


municipal bond banks operate as independent and self-supporting authorities12 and are not backed by the
credit of the state.

    A municipal bond bank does not have any taxing power. This is a crucial difference in the legal
framework governing municipal borrowers and the legal framework governing the municipal bond bank
that lends to municipal borrowers. The difference stems from the limited nature of a legislatively created
municipal bond bank as a special purpose vehicle without any taxing authority and the role of the
municipality as a local governing body and as a borrower. While the municipality typically has its own
taxation power and ability to generate revenues, the municipal bond banks do not have taxation power.
Thus, the municipality’s credit is supported by the full faith and of the municipality backed by the taxation
power or by a pledge of other legally available funds generated by the municipality. The municipal bond
bank’s credit is based primarily on the repayment of the loans made to its municipal borrowers.

    Municipal bond banks are created by the state as special financing vehicles and operate independently.
There are several reasons for this. First, being a financing vehicle of the state allows the municipal bond
bank to issue bonds for public purpose capital projects of the borrowing municipalities, the interest on
which is tax-exempt. This is a unique feature of the United States subnational government finance system.
Second, publicly owned and managed municipal bond banks lower the costs of financing to municipalities.
Public institutions do not pay dividends, seek rates of return to satisfy equity investors, or pay taxes. If these
costs were added to the operation of the municipal bond banks, they would be charged to the municipal
borrowers and conflict with the objective of mobilizing private capital to finance public infrastructure
projects at a low cost. The overall effect of municipal bond banks as government instrumentalities therefore
reduces the costs of financing public-purpose capital projects.

    Municipal bond banks provide either general purpose or special purpose structures, or a combination
of both, to finance local infrastructure projects. Some municipal bond banks, for example the New
Hampshire Municipal Bond Bank, have general-purpose programs, which finance a variety of local
infrastructure projects from school construction to water supply without sector limitation. Other municipal
bond banks, such as the Maine Municipal Bond Bank, have both general-purpose programs and sector-
specific programs such as clean water and school facilities.

      Municipal bond bank legislation varies from state to state but typically provides the common elements
of:

            The authorization of the municipal bond bank to make loans to municipalities to finance only
             public-purpose capital projects

            The scope and limitations of municipal bond bank programs, such as general purpose
             infrastructure or special purposes, or both

            The exemption of the municipal bond bank as a financially-independent agency from the state’s
             constitutional limits on state and municipal debt13




12
   Some municipal bond banks, such as Maryland, have the state cover operational costs for program staff issuing pooled
bonds on behalf of municipalities when they are embedded in a larger state department.
13
   However, any state guarantee of municipal bond bank debt, or municipal debt, would be subject to state debt legal limits.
Limitations on the amount of debt that can be issued by municipal bond banks may be limited by state budgetary or other
legislation.
                                                           7


           The legal requirements for loans to municipal borrowers, including municipal borrower’s
            compliance with any state or local limitations on municipal debt and authorization procedures

           The legal requirements for the issuance of municipal bond bank bonds, such as requirements for
            bond resolutions, municipal bond bank board approval, methods of sale, and types of debt
            instruments that may be issued

           The scope and limitation of any state participation or responsibility in connection with municipal
            bond bank bonds, including the lack of any state guarantee of the municipal bond bank bonds,
            the ability of the municipal bond bank to intercept state aid payable to a municipality that has
            defaulted on its loan to the municipal bond bank, a permitted moral obligation of the state to
            make up any shortfall in municipal payments, and other methods of securing the bonds available
            in the event of default (e.g. state intervention in the management of a financially-stressed
            municipality).14

    Additionally, a state typically has laws governing municipal borrowing. Each municipal borrower,
whether financing through the municipal bond bank or independently, must comply with the requirements
of such laws when borrowing including borrowing from a municipal bond bank. Such legal frameworks
usually include:

           Special procedures for debt authorization, such as a voter referendum approving the
            infrastructure project and the borrowing, and/or public hearings and local council approval of
            the project and the borrowing. The approval must be obtained as a condition to the issuance of
            any municipal borrowing.15

           Limitations on the amount of total debt that a municipality may have outstanding.16

           The permissible sources of payment for any municipal borrowing. The municipal obligation
            may be a general obligation of the municipality secured by the full faith and credit of the
            municipality or a revenue obligation payable for certain specified revenues of the municipality.

           Requirements that debt must finance public capital investment, and the term of maturity cannot
            exceed the useful life of assets.17

   Furthermore, all municipal bonds, including municipal bond bank bonds, must meet the following
market requirements or expectations:

           A legal opinion from an independent bond counsel, as to the due authorization, validity and
            enforceability of the municipal obligation. This is a requirement from capital market purchasers
            to assure that the bond has been duly authorized, is valid and is enforceable under state law.

           Standards for all municipal borrowers on financial transparency including audit and disclosure
            of financial statements. This is expected by capital market participants.



14
   Section III.C.1 will discuss state guarantee and moral obligation. Section III.C.4 will discuss default remedies.
15
   For example, in New Hampshire, municipal borrowing must be approved by a town council vote. In Maine, while there
is no general debt limit, almost all municipal borrowers are required to have their debt approved by a voter referendum.
16
   For example, in New Hampshire the municipal obligation must be within the debt limits established by law for that
category of municipality.
17
   These requirements may be in the United States tax codes and a state’s municipal borrowing legislation.
                                                           8


     Municipal bond banks must comply with the federal tax-code to qualify for tax-exemption of interest
on its bonds and the anti-fraud rules in federal security laws. First, to qualify the interest on the municipal
bond bank bonds to be tax-exempt, the federal United States tax code requires the public purpose nature of
the facilities being financed and other requirements. Second, the disclosure to bondholders in the prospectus
that offers the bonds for sale must comply with the standards set forth for municipal obligations under
federal securities laws with respect to the accurate nature of the information and the inclusion of all relevant
information necessary for a potential buyer to make an informed decision.

     Finally, the municipal bond bank must complete a set of documents that would typically be required to
complete any municipal financing transaction. This set of documents, which is publicly available, will
reflect compliance with all legal requirements. The typical set of documents to carry out such financing
transactions include the following:

           Offering memorandum, prospectus or official statement pursuant to which the municipal bond
            bank bonds are offered for sale

           Trust agreement, resolution or indenture setting forth the legal provisions relating to the issuance
            of the municipal bond bank bonds, their terms and payment

           Loan agreements between the municipal bond bank and each municipal borrower providing for
            the loan of funds from the municipal bond bank to the municipal borrower and the repayment
            by the municipality to the municipal bond bank

           Authorizing resolutions of the municipal borrowers and other documentation evidencing
            compliance with the legal requirements for the issuance of municipal debt

           Various legal opinions by an independent bond counsel of the municipal bond bank relating to
            the due authorization, validity and enforceability of the municipal bond bank bonds and by an
            independent bond counsel of the municipal borrower relating to the due authorization, validity
            and enforceability of the municipal obligation pursuant to the loan agreement between the
            municipal borrower and the municipal bond bank.18

B.       Management
    Municipal bond banks are managed by a board of directors, who are appointed by Governors for fixed-
term renewable periods. Board membership is structured to maintain independence from state politics and
focus on the successful operation of the municipal bond bank.19 Municipal bond bank boards share many
of the following elements. Board member compensation is limited, with most members serving from a
sense of civic duty or for the status associated with board membership.20 The State Treasurer is an automatic
member of the board, as is a representative from the state’s municipal association. In addition, several board
members are required to have backgrounds in public finance, which makes them more likely to evaluate


18
   Both the New Hampshire and Maine Municipal Bond Banks require the borrowing municipalities to retain independent
bond counsel to opine on such matters.
19
   For example, in New Hampshire, the board of directors has five members appointed for five-year terms, while in Maine
appointments are for three years.
20
   For example, in New Hampshire, the Bank’s directors serving on the board receive no compensation for their roles, and
are only reimbursed any expenses incurred, while in Maine board members receive a modest per diem for board-related
duties.
                                                              9


the fiscal risks of municipal borrowing rather than political incentives for lending.21 Finally, a surety bond
ensures the fulfillment of the board members’ responsibilities.22

     Municipal bond banks are managed by a relatively small, highly professional staff, whose low turn-
over rates contribute to the institution’s stability.23 The Maine Municipal Bond Bank is managed by 11 full-
time equivalent staff, who oversee eight separate loan programs. The New Hampshire Municipal Bond
Bank, which has a more limited lending portfolio, is managed by an Executive Director, who is selected by
the board, with the support of two additional full-time staff. Staff hired at municipal bond banks have
financial backgrounds, with degrees in accounting or business administration. On-the-job professional
development is a critical part of municipal bond bank operations – as municipal bond banks may only issue
pooled bonds once or twice per year, this training process may take longer than in other private sector
institutions. Thus, the pay scale and benefits offered to municipal bond bank staff, which are set by the
board, are on par with civil service salaries to encourage staff retention.

    Municipal bond banks function effectively with a limited staff by relying on the advice and services of
a highly-developed private sector network of professional experts. These services include bond counsel,
financial advisors, a bond trustee, underwriters and auditors. In Maine and New Hampshire, the municipal
bond banks have developed long-term relationships with their advisors that provide reliable and accurate
professional advice.24

     The professionalism of municipal bond bank staff, along with strong policies and mechanisms to ensure
bond repayment, has been essential to building credibility with private sector institutions. Responsibilities
of the municipal bond bank management include:

            Assisting municipalities with the loan application process

            Reviewing the creditworthiness of municipal borrowers

            Assuring compliance with legal requirements for municipal borrowing through the
             municipality’s independent bond counsel review

            Aggregating the principal installments of the municipal loans into the principal installments of
             the municipal bond bank bonds

            Marketing the municipal bond bank bonds to investors with advice from financial advisors and
             underwriters, and a rating issued by ratings agencies

            Calculating the borrower’s loan interest rates based on municipal bond bank bond interest rates




21
   In both New Hampshire and Maine, for example, two members of the board are mandated, by law, to have a public finance
background, and the remaining members often have experience with the financial sector. Board members with backgrounds
in finance provide a layer of protection against political pressure, as they are more likely to be concerned with the viability
of municipal loans rather than political connections.
22
   In New Hampshire directors sign a surety bond in the penal sum of $50,000, conditioned on their faithful performance of
their duties, where the issuing costs are borne by the municipal bond bank. In Maine, each commissioner signs a $25,000
surety bond and the executive director signs a $50,000 surety bond.
23
   This is based on our interview of municipal bond bank management in Maine and New Hampshire in January 2017. The
strong credit ratings of municipal bond banks (Table 1) is a testimonial to the sound management of municipal bond banks.
24
   For more details on the types of professional services required for municipal bond issues, see the Municipal Securities
Rulemaking Board’s Overview: http://msrb.org/msrb1/pdfs/Financing-Team.pdf.
                                                             10


              Setting terms and timing for borrower repayment

              Monitoring and enforcing timely borrower repayments

              Managing cash flows, bond repayments, and reserve fund investments through the services of
               the bond trustee

              Conducting an annual review or audit of the municipal bond bank’s financial positions for the
               board and state government.

    Municipal bond bank management does not select or assess the feasibility of municipal projects to be
financed by the municipal bond bank; municipal governments have primary responsibility for project
selection and appraisal. Municipal bond banks are not involved in the project selection and appraisal process
at the local level other than to assure the projects comply with legal requirements for municipal
infrastructure projects. In New Hampshire, a municipality must conduct public town hall meetings and have
public voting (referendum) on projects to be financed by debt. The decision of what types of revenues
would be used to provide for the payment of debt services is made at the same time as the project is selected
and method of financing is determined. The public commitment to raise taxes or fees for debt is an important
process of project selection and debt issuance to ensure that the project has the support of voters.

     Management policies, procedures and qualities are important elements of municipal bond bank credit
ratings. For example, Moody’s methodology for United States Municipal Program Debt assigned a 15%
weight to management quality. Management is rated on five-point scale based on the agency’s assessment
of management’s ability to swiftly address program challenges. This includes the number of staff and
resources in a municipal bond bank and their track record in ensuring payments, even during times of fiscal
crisis. Standard and Poor’s methodology also has a three-point scale on financial policies and practices, that
evaluate the municipal bond bank’s governing policies on loan applications, loan monitoring, default and
delinquency policies, and long-term planning. Both rating methodologies aim to assess the strength of the
management systems to recognize and respond to challenges and ensure investor repayment in the event of
a potential borrower delinquency (Moody’s 2013; Standard and Poor 2012).

C.          Financing and Operations

1.          Financial sustainability
     Municipal bond banks in the United States have maintained financial sustainability with strong credit
ratings and virtually no defaults. Municipal bond banks have maintained financial strength even during and
after the 2008 subprime crisis.25 Table 1 below summarizes the current credit ratings of municipal bond
banks.




25
     Based on authors’ interviews with rating agencies, Moody’s, S&P Global, and Fitch Ratings, in February 2017.
                                                                   11


                                  Table 1 Credit Ratings of Municipal Bond Bank Bonds

 State Bond Bank26                                   Outstanding                Moody’s            S&P             Fitch
                                                    Loans as of 2016
 Alaska Municipal Bond Bank
 Authority
                                                        $1.07 billion                               AA              AA

 Indiana Bond Bank                                      $419 million                                AA

 Maine Municipal Bond Bank                              $910 million               AA2             AA+
 Maryland Local Government                                                        AA2 /
                                                        $120 million
 Infrastructure Financing Program                                                 AA3
 Michigan Finance Authority27                            $4.6 billion              AA1
 New Hampshire Municipal Bond
                                                        $942 million               AA2             AA+
 Bank
 North Dakota Public Financing
                                                        $132 million                                AA
 Authority
 Vermont Municipal Bond Bank                            $534 million               AA2             AA+

 Virginia Resources Authority28                         $1.66 billion              AA2              AA

Source: Author’s compilation based on municipal bond bank websites and publicly-available bond documents from EMMA (http://emma.msrb.org/)


    The primary security for the payment of the municipal bond bank bonds is the obligation of municipal
borrowers to make timely debt service payments to the municipal bond bank. The payment obligations of
the municipal borrower are payable as a general obligation of the municipality which reflects the full faith
and credit of the municipality, or secured by certain pledged revenues, taxes or other pledged assets.

     Municipal bond banks may pursue legally enforceable remedies against a defaulting municipal
borrower based on the terms of the loan agreement and the state’s legal framework. Many municipal bond
banks have statutory authority to intercept state aid transfers payable to municipal governments if the latter
should default on obligations to repay their loans.29 Some states go further. For example, the Maine
Municipal Bond Bank can seize the property of residents for debt payments. Additionally, the Maine
Municipal Finance Board, a state agency, has the legal authority to exercise control over any municipality
that experiences financial difficulty (Maine Municipal Bond Bank 2015).

   Municipal bond banks are financially independent, as states generally do not provide guarantees of
municipal bond bank debt, nor budget support for municipal bond bank operations. Most states do not



26
   Ratings shown are for the most recent bond issue under the pooled financing program within the municipal bond bank, in
the case that the municipal bond bank manages multiple programs such as SRFs.
27
   Local Government Loan Program – offers low-interest loans based on the pooled sale of loans from the Michigan Finance
Authority. Borrowers can pledge state aid, investment credit or bond insurance as security. The rating here is for the
unlimited tax general obligation local project bonds.
28
   Figures are for the state’s municipal pooled program, the Virginia Pooled Financing Program.
29
   For example, municipal bond banks in the following states can intercept any state aid to municipalities in the event of
municipal default on its loan to the municipal bond bank: Alaska, Maine, Maryland, New Hampshire, and Vermont.
Municipal bond banks in the following states may intercept a certain portion of aid, or the aid relating to certain program:
Indiana, Michigan, and Virginia. See Peterson 1997:9, updated based on the author’s research.
                                                               12


appropriate annual budget subsidies for municipal bond bank operations.30 Some municipal bond banks
may have received initial loans to cover start-up costs, while others issued their initial pooled bonds without
start-up funding.31

    Most states provide some form of credit enhancement or financial commitment to pooled financing
issues. The credit ratings of pooled financing facilities are thus generally higher than those of most
municipalities included in the pool, resulting in interest rate savings to municipal borrowers. Credit
enhancement primarily includes the interception of state aid and a state’s moral obligation to replenish the
debt reserve fund under certain circumstances. A moral obligation of a state is a non-binding agreement to
appropriate funds to make up any shortfalls in funds needed for debt services on municipal bond bank bonds
by replenishing the municipal bond bank reserve fund.32 Although such an agreement is not legally
enforceable, if a state fails to honor the moral obligation, the state could face the threat of its credit being
downgraded by the rating agencies.33

    Several operational factors also contribute to strong credit ratings for municipal bond bank bond issues,
as discussed below. Municipal bond bank management must be diligent in:

        Analyzing a borrower’s creditworthiness and compliance with legal requirements, such as debt
         limits and due authorization of the borrowing to reduce the risk of borrower default, and establish
         evidence of political commitment to the borrowing and the project to be financed

        Maintaining a diverse mix of borrowers in the pool as well as controlling any individual borrower’s
         share of the total pool obligation

        Monitoring borrower loan payments to provide for the timely payment of the municipal bond bank
         bonds

        Pursuing legal remedies upon a borrower default such as intercepting state aid payable to the
         defaulting borrower




30
   A few municipal bond banks may receive state funding to cover operational costs. In Maryland, for example, the pooled
loan program is administered by the Community Development Administration, which is part of the Department of Housing
and Community Development, and the operations of the department are financed by the state government. The
administration also subsidizes part of the bond issuance costs (Peterson 1997; State of Maryland 2017).
31
   The Maine Municipal Bond Bank, for example, received an initial loan of $50,000 from the state government, which was
then repaid within three years. The New Hampshire Municipal Bond Bank issued initial bonds without any initial capital
allocation (Oliver and Mauro Undated Draft).
32
   In case of a default, the municipal bond bank covenants that it will “request” the state legislature to appropriate and
provide the needed funds. This pledge is factored into the overall rating of the resulting pooled program by the ratings
agencies; and each agency maintains a methodology for assessing the strength of the pledge, based on the clarify of the legal
framework, how essential the projects are to government functions, and the timeframe for replenishing the debt reserve.
Fitch Ratings, for example, usually place the value of the moral obligation at two notices below the state’s rating, however
if the pool is only one notch below the state’s general obligation rating, then there is no enhancement. Moody’s also has a
notching range for moral obligation at two to three notches below the general obligation rating for the state. S&P allows for
a moral obligation to result in a rating above the traditional full category if there are other security measures present. Source:
Authors’ review of ratings agency criteria.
33
   Based on authors’ discussions with the ratings agencies in February 2017, the moral obligations of the states to municipal
bond banks have never been called up.
                                                         13


        Managing cash flows and the investment of reserve funds to improve the creditworthiness of the
         entire municipal bond bank pool.

2.       Review of borrower credit and legal compliance
    A core municipal bond bank function is to conduct a review of the borrower’s credit and maintain the
credit strength of the bank’s bonds. Higher credit ratings lead to lower costs of borrowing; therefore, the
municipal bond banks actively assess the creditworthiness of a municipal borrower and its impact on the
credit quality of the pool. For those municipal borrowers that do not have an independent credit rating the
municipal bond banks utilize a similar methodology as the rating agencies though the review is not as
extensive as a formal credit rating process. For example, the New Hampshire Municipal Bond Bank
developed a quantitative model for credit analysis, drawing from the rating criteria of a rating agency.34
Key factors include the amount of the requested loan, budget expenditures, revenue sources, annual fiscal
balances, the assets, revenues or taxes are being pledged to pay the debt services on the loan, the
municipality’s current outstanding debt, any previous defaults by the municipality, the local economy, the
largest employers, and population figures.

     Another core municipal bond bank function is to ensure that a municipal borrower meets the state’s
legal requirements for municipal borrowing. A municipal borrower must submit the opinion of its
independent bond counsel as to the due authorization, validity and enforceability of the municipal obligation
and that the municipality has complied with the legal requirements for municipal borrowing as provided in
state law (as summarized in section A). Additionally, an independent bond counsel to the municipal bond
bank conducts a legal review to ensure the due authorization, validity and enforceability of the municipal
bond bank bonds, including the compliance of the municipal bond bank with the state’s legal requirements
for the issuance of the municipal bond bank bonds.

    The legal review relies on the diligence and formal opinions issued by independent bond counsels
retained by the municipal borrower and the municipal bond bank, respectively. Legal opinions give comfort
to prospective bondholders as to the legal enforceability of the municipal bond bank and municipality to
pay their respective obligations.

3.       Pooling mechanism: maturities, interest rates and yields
    Pooled financing aggregates multiple small loans from municipal borrowers into a larger municipal
bond bank bond issue. Municipal bond bank bonds are issued with the primary security of loan repayments
from municipalities to the municipal bond bank, including principal and interest payments. This pooling
mechanism serves two main purposes: 1) building a diversified pool of loans from multiple borrowers,
which enhances the overall credit of the municipal bond bank bonds and lowers the cost of borrowing, and
2) sharing the administrative costs of bond issuance among multiple municipal borrowers.

   The municipal bond banks use a basic pooling mechanism to aggregate loans of different amounts and
maturities into a single bond issue. A simplified example of a pooled financing bond issue is shown in

   Table 2, below. In this example, the annual principal payments from four loans are aggregated into the
annual maturities of a single bond issue. Municipal loans are structured so that principal payments are



34
 The information in this section is based on reviews of municipal systems and discussions with the staff of the Maine
Municipal Bond Bank and New Hampshire Municipal Bond Bank in January 2017.
                                                                          14


spread over the useful life of the proposed project.35 The pooled bond is then issued by the municipal bond
bank with annual maturities that match the principal payments from the different municipal loans.36

                                                Table 2 Sample Pooled Bond Structure

 Year          Principal Loan Repayments (in ‘000 USD)                                                  Pooled Bond
               Town      A:           Town      A:          Town      B:          Town     C:           Maturity          Interest
                $1 million,           $10 million,          $1.75                 $8 million,                             Rate (%)*
               5-year                 10-year               million, 7-           10-year
               Project                Project               year Project          Project
 2017          200                    1,000                 250                   800                   2,250             1.77%
 2018          200                    1,000                 250                   800                   2,250             2.07
 2019          200                    1,000                 250                   800                   2,250             2.18
 2020          200                    1,000                 250                   800                   2,250             2.33
 2021          200                    1,000                 250                   800                   2,250             2.20
 2022                                 1,000                 250                   800                   2,050             2.25
 2023                                 1,000                 250                   800                   2,050             2.58
 2024                                 1,000                                       800                   1,800             2.65
 2025                                 1,000                                       800                   1,800             2.70
 2026                                 1,000                                       800                   1,800             2.74
Source: Authors’ work. *Note: Annual interest rates - In some cases, when bonds are sold at a premium, the interest rates charged will be higher
than the overall yield to amortize the premium. Bonds sell at a premium when the bond issue is sold at a price above its par, or face value, in the
market. This higher value results in a higher coupon, or interest rate, however it also reduces the total yield at bond maturity. The net effect is that
premium bonds have an effective interest rate at prevailing market rates, despite the higher coupon.


     Interest rates and yields for each municipal bond bank bond maturity are priced based on the sale of the
municipal bond bank bonds to the capital market. The pricing of a pooled municipal security is therefore
set by the demand from investors, including individual purchasers and financial institutions, such as mutual
funds and pension funds.37 An important feature of market pricing of municipal bond bank pooled bond
issues is the market transparency and credit strength of the underlying municipalities, and the various
mechanisms utilized to enhance the credit of the municipal bond bank bonds, for example the reserve fund,
state aid intercepts and a moral obligation of the state. Nearly all municipal bond banks bonds are issued
with fixed interest rates, as opposed to variable interest rates.38

    The municipal bond bank does not independently determine the price of each municipal loan; interest
rates on the municipal loan reflect the interest rates set on the municipal bond bank bonds of the same


35
   This example uses a level-principal method of pricing the debt service, which means that the principal payments are evenly
distributed throughout the life of the project resulting in higher overall debt service payments in the earlier years. Both the
Maine Municipal Bond Bank and the New Hampshire Municipal Bond Bank structure most of their loans using level-
principal payouts. This is a more conservative method of calculating debt service, since the debt service payments are greater
in the early years of the loan, however total interest cost is less.
36
   A bond can be structured with varying annual maturities through either a serial structure or a term bond with mandatory
annual redemptions. A serial bond structure has a portion of the bonds maturing at regular intervals. A term bond has a
single maturity but is subject to periodic mandatory redemption of the term bond; thereby providing that all or part of the
term bond is paid before its maturity.
37
   Bond sales on the capital market can be sold on a negotiated basis or by competitive bidding.
38
   Variable interest rate bonds can potentially lower the costs of borrowing in the short-term, and some larger municipalities
will issue variable-rate bonds to try and capture these savings for tax payers. Municipal bond banks, however, usually rely
on fixed-interest rate bonds because their smaller municipal sub-borrowers may not be able to manage the risk of an
increased interest rate over time.
                                                            15


maturity. The municipal bond bank utilizes the interest rates on the municipal bond bank bonds determined
by the market for each maturity to determine the interest rates on each related municipal payment. Each
municipality with the same loan principal payment date will pay the same annual interest rate on the
maturing loan principal.39

    As part of the loan pooling process, municipal bond banks can include additional fees or surcharges to
the borrower’s loan repayment structure to cover the municipal bond bank’s operational costs. The earliest
municipal bond banks used the proceeds from investing their reserve funds to finance operational costs,
however a tax law restriction in 1986 has since eliminated this revenue source.40 Since then, municipal
bond banks have financed operational and bond issuance costs through several revenue sources, including:
borrower application fees, fees on outstanding loans, interest rate surcharges on municipal loans, or interest
earnings on unused cash balances.41 The interest rate surcharges and fees charged by the municipal bond
bank are usually reasonable, given the relatively small staff, large volume of loans in most municipal bond
banks loan portfolios, and their non-profit status. The resulting borrowing costs are usually lower than other
financing alternatives, such as the costs of independently issuing municipal bonds or borrowing from
commercial banks.

    Each municipal bond bank pooled bond is typically rated by one or more rating agency to assess the
credit quality of the municipal bond bank bond. Ratings agencies assess a variety of factors in assigning a
credit rating to a pooled bond issue, including the number and diversity of pool participants, the underlying
credit quality of pool participants, legal arrangements, reserve funds, default remedies, municipal bond
bank management and policies, and the various credit enhancement mechanisms. Ratings agencies will run
financial stress test models on the bonds, based on these criteria, to assign their ratings.

    Since most municipal borrowers in a pooled financing are not independently rated, rating agencies will
examine how municipal bond banks assess the creditworthiness of their borrowers. For larger pools, with
more than 10-50 participants, ratings agencies will determine the average creditworthiness of the borrowers,
recognizing that larger and more diversified pools have lower risks. For smaller pools, however, ratings
agencies will assign the entire pool the rating of the lowest-rated borrower, or the ‘weakest-link’,
recognizing that default of one borrower in a small pool would likely result in a default on the municipal
bond bank bond. Similarly, if one project in a pool represents more than 25% of the total borrowing, the
benefits of risk diversification are mitigated and the rating for that pool of projects may be reduced due to
concerns about concentration of risk. For example, as Moody’s was rating the Maine Municipal Bond
Bank’s Fall 2016 issue, they assigned a high Aa2 rating based on the wide pool of 274 borrowers and only
28% of all loans concentrated in the top five borrowers. The average underlying credit of the borrowing
pool is in the A-range, however the pooled bond issue received a higher rating due to the pool diversity and
other credit enhancements of the debt reserve fund, moral obligation and state aid intercept (Moody’s 2016).




39
   When municipal bond bank bonds are sold competitively, a municipal bond bank will not be able to give exact borrowing
interest rates to their municipal borrowers before the bond is sold. Municipal bond banks can usually provide accurate
estimates based on current market rates and prior bond sales, and the municipalities will agree, as part of their loan
agreements, to pay the final rates as determined at the time of the sale.
40
   Prior to United States tax law restrictions established in 1986, municipal bond banks could arbitrage funds borrowed at a
tax-exempt rate and invest the funds at a higher taxable rate. Such arbitrage earnings were used to fund operations.
41
   In some municipal bond banks, bonds are also sold at a premium, meaning that the price of a bond is higher than its par
value, and investors pay more upfront to buy the bond to then receive higher interest payments throughout the duration of
the maturity. In this case, the municipal bond bank can use some of the premium proceeds to pay for operational costs, and
distribute the remainder back to municipal borrowers by lowering their principal repayment amounts.
                                                        16


4.       Surveillance, cash management, and default remedies
     Municipal bond banks actively monitor municipal borrower loan payments to ensure timely payment
of debt service on the municipal bond bank bonds. In the New Hampshire Municipal Bond Bank, for
example, the staff issues an invoice 60 days before the payment due date on the municipal loan, and then
follows-up with an email two weeks before the due date. If payment is not received a few days before the
due date, staff will call municipal treasurers to ensure the payments are being processed in a timely manner.
The New Hampshire Municipal Bond Bank has also structured borrower payments so that all principal and
interest on the municipal loan payments are required to be made 30 days before payments are due on the
municipal bond bank bonds. These advance payments are structured so that the staff have adequate time to
assist municipalities, utilize reserve funds or initiate the available credit enhancement measures (e.g. state
aid intercept) to ensure the timely payment on the municipal bond bank bonds.

    Municipal bond banks also use independent trustees to manage bond proceeds, debt service payments,
and other funds to assure that the funds are used only for their permitted purposes. Upon the issuance of the
municipal bond bank bonds the proceeds of the sale are deposited with the trustee pending the disbursement
of the loans to the respective municipalities to finance the municipal projects. Additionally, the loan
repayments, received by the municipal bond bank from the municipal borrowers are held by the trustee to
be applied to the payment of the municipal bond bank bonds, as well as the reserve funds securing the
municipal bond bank bonds.

    Municipal bond banks actively manage cash flow and reserve funds to ensure they have liquidity to
make timely debt service payments on their bonds. A debt service reserve fund is typically equal to the
maximum annual debt service in any future year or some higher ratio.42 The debt reserve funds can be
drawn in the event of a payment shortfall from municipal borrowers to make debt service payments. The
amounts on deposit in the reserve fund are invested only in highly rated securities43 that mature at such
times as to assure the availability of funds to make timely debt service payments, if needed.

    Finally, municipal bond banks have multiple, overlapping mechanisms to mitigate the risk of default
on a municipal bond bank bond:

        A robust legal framework preventing excessive borrowing

        Enforcing the defaulting municipality’s obligation to raise taxes and/or revenues

        Intercepting state aid payable to the defaulting municipality

        Using the reserve fund

        Calling upon the state’s moral obligation to replenish the reserve fund when utilized

     In summary, Figure 1, below, presents a simplified model of funds flow and credit enhancement
mechanisms in a municipal bond bank pooled financing mechanism. In this example, bond proceeds are
distributed to local governments (LGs), and then repayments are made via a trustee to investors (in blue).
In the event of default (shown by dotted lines), additional municipal bond bank default remedies include



42
   The Maine Municipal Bond Bank maintains its reserve fund at a level 1.25 X the maximum annual debt service of its
bonds.
43
   Investments in the reserve fund are limited to AAA government securities.
                                                              17


the state aid intercept (in purple) and the state’s moral obligation pledge to replenish the debt reserve fund
in case of SNG default (in orange).

                                Figure 1 Municipal Bond Bank Funds Flow Model




                Source: Adapted by authors from Johnson 2005: Introduction to Pooled Financing.
                                                     18


IV.      Lessons for Developing Countries
    The experience of the United States shows that pooled financing operates within and not separate from
the broader regulatory framework for subnational capital markets. At the time that the first municipal bond
bank was established in 1969, the essential elements of the regulatory framework for municipal finance
were well established having developed from a series of reforms established since the first state debt crises
in the 1840s. Pooled financing operates within the legal and regulatory framework and functions of the
subnational capital markets, including:

           Mature and competitive capital market for securities

           Clear identification of revenue sources that secure the payment of the municipal obligation

           Debt limits for municipal borrowers

           Financial audit and disclosure requirements

           Independent professional management, including staff and board

           Limiting state liability for municipal debt and state guarantees

           Effective and enforceable remedies upon the event of default and insolvency

           Pooled financing as an option among other financing alternatives, and not a requirement for
            municipalities

     Sustained efforts in regulatory reforms are essential in developing countries, and pooled financing is
not a magic bullet to solve or avoid the need for fundamental challenges facing borrowers and investors.
Interest in pooled financing has grown in developing countries, through a variety of instruments, such as a
municipal development fund, regional development fund, infrastructure bank, and bond bank. These
instruments do not operate in a vacuum. These financial intermediaries are participants in the capital
market. A competitive capital market with participation from a variety of private participants, such as
pension funds, mutual funds, and insurance companies, and individual investors, lowers the cost of
financing for municipal borrowers. Pooled financing has proven to be most effective in a competitive capital
market environment where municipalities have financing flexibility and options in addition to pooled
financing. Situations where a municipal development fund becomes the dominant player in the municipal
capital market, or has special privileges granted by the government not available to private players, have
proven to be ineffective.

      Municipal bond banks differ from development banks in important ways. Municipal bond banks:

           Are non-profit

           Are managed by a small number of staff

           Do not screen projects

           Do not price the on-lending loans to municipalities individually; instead, the capital market
            competitively prices individual loans.
                                                      19


     An established legal framework for municipal borrowing is essential, including debt limits for
municipal borrowers. The lack of clarity resulting from conflicting statutory provisions creates potential
confusion and uncertainty for bondholders who may attempt to enforce their legal rights to payment. This
is also the case where contract law is not well defined and the contractual agreements securing the payment
of the bond issue may be subject to political interference or an inexperienced judiciary. This is a concern
especially in project finance, where the contractual obligation to raise tariffs, user fees or tolls may not be
politically popular. This issue can be addressed through the establishment of a comprehensive legal
framework that clearly defines the rights and responsibilities of borrowers and lenders, including voter
approval of projects and the debt used to construct them.

    The success of pooled financing relies on the creditworthiness of the municipal borrowers. While some
borrowers within a pool may have stronger credit than others, the overall portfolio is the aggregate credit
strength of the pooled borrowers. While the municipal bond bank can help lower the cost of financing and
transaction for borrowers, the municipal bond bank does not compensate for the weaknesses of a borrower’s
credit. The creditworthiness of local governments is strongly influenced by the intergovernmental fiscal
system. Deficiencies in the intergovernmental system can weaken the creditworthiness of local government
in a variety of ways: central government fiscal transfers to finance subnational fiscal deficits without
consideration to fiscal discipline, unsteady transfers and frequent changes in transfer formula, instability in
revenue assignment, and lack of incentives for local governments to raise own revenues. Although these
issues are outside the scope of the paper, the importance of intergovernmental fiscal reforms needs to be
emphasized here, as it relates to the basics of the pooled financing.

    Loans must be made only to creditworthy borrowers based on principles of sound, fundamental credit
analysis. This will be a difficult objective to comply with in countries where political pressure to lend to
certain SNGs or to finance particular projects is strong. This could result in crony capitalism, which may
be involved in the granting of concessions to operate privatized municipal operations, or from incentives to
support SNGs with strong political ties to the central or local government. If the lending organization is not
sufficiently insulated from the political process, it is likely to fail.

     Government guarantees of the pooled financing should be discouraged, forcing investors to analyze the
pool risks. Since many municipal borrowers lack credit strength in developing countries, the use of
government guarantees to help a pooled financing facility to access the market can be tempting, however it
adds to the government’s total debt stock. In the United States, states generally do not provide guarantees
to the municipal bond banks. The states often do use their moral obligations to enhance the creditworthiness
of the pool. However, a moral obligation is not legally enforceable and is not the sole credit enhancement
mechanism; revenue intercepts are a more important credit enhancement device. Moreover, a moral
obligation only works in a mature capital market environment. It does reflect the state’s commitment to the
pooled program; although not legally enforceable against the state. The state is aware that if it does not
honor the moral commitment, its own credit rating may be negatively affected. The capital market
punishment of a state that does not honor its moral obligations can be serious and real. Improving fiscal
transfers and revenue flexibility is a more effective method to enhance municipal creditworthiness than
guarantees.

     Local control and accountability are fundamental to the pooling process in a decentralized system.
Municipal bond banks in the United States are not involved in appraising individual projects, although they
do look at the nature of a project to ensure it meets the legal requirements of capital investment financing.
Municipal governments have primary responsibility for project selection and appraisal. The capital
investment plans by municipalities typically follow a transparent process where the public can participate
in the town meetings. When a municipal government chooses an investment project to finance through debt,
it must obtain voter approval and commit revenue sources to provide for the payment of debt service. The
                                                             20


local accountability for project selection and the public commitment to raise taxes or fees for debt service
are among the most important features of the decentralized public finance system in the United States.44

     Broader reforms in public financial management are important to ensure the success of pooled
financing. Many local governments in developing countries do not produce financial reports that are
standardized and transparent, and thus do not give an accurate picture of their financial condition. The
problem can be even more acute in newly decentralizing countries which are creating new tiers of
governments, or consolidating and restructuring existing local government units. In these cases, assets and
liabilities will need to be reclassified and recorded. Private investors require annual audited financial
statements from borrowers. Although the municipal bond bank can help its portfolio borrowers strengthen
reporting and financial management, the development of appropriate, uniform standards of financial
reporting and accounting requires the overall reform of the public sector financial management at all levels
of the government. The municipal bond bank cannot be used as a technique to compensate the systemic
weaknesses in the public financial management and accounting.

    Simple and conservative structuring of pooled loans and bond issuance are preferable to complicated
financing structure. Municipal bond banks have relied on basic, conservative financing structures and
mechanisms. Although various financing strategies, for example variable rates, may have short-term
benefits, they are also associated with additional risk.45

    Notwithstanding the complex requirements for a successful pooled program, the process of establishing
pooled financing mechanisms in developing countries can be a catalyst for reforms. Through establishing
pooled financing mechanisms, the government may establish a legal framework for subnational borrowing,
standardize financial reporting, audits and disclosure for participating municipalities.

    Instead of resorting to government guarantees for the pooled facility, the government may want to
consider broader intergovernmental fiscal reform, including some revenue flexibility for municipalities,
and a transparent rule-based transfer system. The pooled model provides several methods of credit
enhancement without resorting to government guarantees, such as the debt reserve fund, state aid intercept,
surveillance and effective remedies.

    In countries with an active sovereign bond market, the government may assess its capital market
structure to design a reform program to increase competition in the sub-sovereign capital market. As of
now, in many emerging economies, commercial banks or public banks are the dominant players in
subnational capital markets. Reforms should encourage the participation of private market players, such as
mutual funds, insurance companies, pension funds, and other institutional investors.

    In countries where concessional loans from international financial institutions are a main supply of
infrastructure financing in the medium or longer term, government may consider ring-fencing funds
disbursement to intended beneficiaries or projects and strengthen basic capacity in public financial
management, including standardizing reporting, audit and disclosure requirements for fund use.




44
   For more details, please see Liu, Tian, and Wallis 2013.
45
   Jefferson Country in Alabama, which includes the city of Birmingham, filed for bankruptcy in 2011, because of using
structured financial products to resolve the overindebtedness of the county’s sewer system. After the Global Financial Crisis
in 2008-2009, the price of debt service increased substantially, and in 2008 the county defaulted on its sewer payments,
resulting in an acceleration of the debt, which eventually led to the county filing for bankruptcy (Canuto and Liu 2013: 328-
329).
                                                      21


V.      Conclusions
    Large infrastructure supply gaps exist across developing and emerging markets. Infrastructure has been
largely decentralized to SNGs in many countries. Policymakers are keenly interested in developing
subnational bond markets to give SNGs access private financing for infrastructure. Pooled financing –
through a variety of forms such as regional infrastructure funds, municipal funds, infrastructure banks, or
bond banks – has become a sought-after solution to help SNGs access private financing for infrastructure.

    To ensure the success of the pooled financing, a set of issues must be addressed – from governance to
management, from legal requirements to operational guidelines, from project appraisal to loan structure,
from default remedies to moral hazard. And more fundamentally, what is the broader regulatory
environment – from intergovernmental system to capital market structure – under which the pooled
financing facilities operate?

     The experience of the pooled financing, particularly the municipal bond banks, in the United States,
offers powerful and illustrative lessons. Similar to many developing countries, many small municipalities
in the United States lack the knowledge of financial markets and need to borrow relatively small amounts
of capital, the process of raising private financing can be difficult and costly. Since the 1970s, the municipal
bond banks have become a cost-effective and stable model for expanding subnational financing for many
small municipalities, while maintaining strong credit ratings with virtually no defaults from sub-borrowers.

    The success of the municipal bond banks is not an accident. It is rooted in a well-developed and
competitive capital market with sound regulatory frameworks, the result of a series of profound reforms
undertaking over more than 150 years of history. The municipal bond banks also function within a mature,
developed federal structure. Credit culture, professionalism, and a respected judicial system are all parts
of why the pooled financing has worked well.

    In summary, pooled financing is not a magic bullet. It is critical to reform intergovernmental systems,
strengthen public financial management and accounting, and develop regulatory prudence for subnational
borrowers, and oversight and regulations in the securities market. The pooled financing mechanisms cannot
be used as substitute to compensate the lack of reforms in these areas. Nevertheless, credit pooling programs
may be well suited to small municipalities with modest projects that have limited financing opportunities.
With the broad areas of reform proceeding, it is advisable to design pooled financing programs. For
developing countries that are actively pursuing the development of sub-sovereign capital markets, pooled
financing can be used as a catalyst for competitive reforms.
                                                     22


Annex A: Overview of the Maine and New Hampshire Municipal Bond Banks


The Maine Municipal Bond Bank

Maine is the second most rural state in the United States, and many of its smaller municipalities struggled
to independently access capital markets. The state has 850 local governments serving a population of 1.3
million that deliver essential services that require capital investment, including road construction, waste
disposal, water utilities, police, fire protection and public education. The Maine Municipal Bond Bank was
established in 1972 by the Maine State Legislature as an independent agency to provide access to capital
markets and to lower the cost of borrowing for these small local governments. The Maine Municipal Bond
Bank issues loans to cities, towns, school systems, water and sewer districts, and other governmental entities
through the sale of its tax-exempt bonds. The Maine Municipal Bond Bank has been highly successful; as
of 2017 issuing a total of $4.9 billion in bonds and never having a default in its 44-year operating history
(Census 2007; Census 2012; Maine Municipal Bond Bank 2017).

The Maine Municipal Bond Bank is an efficient organization running eight different programs with only
11 full-time equivalent staff, while being financially self-supporting. At its founding, the Maine Municipal
Bond Bank was issued a $50,000 “start-up” loan from the state legislature, that it repaid in three years.
Since then, the Bank entirely funds operations and bond issue costs from interest rate surcharges to
borrowers and investment earnings. The first loan program operated by the Maine Municipal Bond Bank
was the General Bond Resolution Program, which was established in 1973 for general purpose loans and
has since issued 1,815 loans to 517 government units, covering more than half of Maine’s local
governments. The Maine Municipal Bond Bank later added seven additional programs, including a state
revolving loan fund for drinking water and waste treatment backed by federal grants, transportation, and
technology purchases (Maine Municipal Bond Bank 2017).

Maine Municipal Bond Bank bonds maintain high credit ratings through a combination of active
administration, pool diversification, and credit enhancements, which lower the cost of borrowing. The
Maine Municipal Bond Bank’s General Resolution Program has received ratings of AA+ from S&P Global
and Aa2 from Moody’s, which are higher than smaller municipalities could receive independently. The
Maine Municipal Bond Bank manages this credit rating through credit analysis, monitoring and loan
administration. Borrowing municipalities submit a credit application, modeled on the rating agencies’
worksheets, which is reviewed by the Maine Municipal Bond Bank team and approved by the Maine
Municipal Bond Bank’s board. The Maine Municipal Bond Bank also requires annual audited financial
statements from borrowers, and actively monitor loan payments, which are due 30 days before bond
payments. Pooled bonds are also secured by a diversified portfolio, comprised of 87% general obligation
bonds and 13% revenue bonds. The largest borrower in the pool represents only 6% of the total pool and
the top ten borrowers account for 32% of the total pool. Finally, the General Resolution program is set up
with credit enhancement features, including a debt reserve fund equal to the maximum annual debt service,
a supplemental reserve fund currently at $13.3 million, a state aid intercept mechanism, and a moral
obligation pledge from the state (Maine Municipal Bond Bank 2015; Maine Municipal Bond Bank 2017).

The success of the Maine Municipal Bond Bank can be attributed both to the strong regulations and
management of the institution, but also to the overall conservative fiscal management in Maine’s
municipalities. Maine does not have a state debt limit for local government, however bond issues are subject
to public approval through a council vote or referendum. In cases of financial mismanagement of crisis, the
state is authorized to intervene and suspend a town council. Furthermore, general obligation bonds, which
are backed by the full faith and taxing power of the government entity, also include the ability to seize
private property of residents in case of default. Revenue authorities also have the power to cut off service
to non-paying customers, also ensuring a stable revenue base. These regulatory frameworks have
                                                      23


established a highly credible system for debt repayment, making the pooled Maine Municipal Bond Bank
loans an attractive, low-risk investment for potential buyers in the capital market (Oliver and Mauro
Undated Draft).

The New Hampshire Municipal Bond Bank

The New Hampshire Municipal Bond Bank was established in 1977 and is similarly structured as the Maine
Municipal Bond Bank and adapted to fit New Hampshire’s lending needs. New Hampshire is small state
with 1.3 million people, however, it is more urban than Maine with 60% of the population living in urban
areas. The larger municipalities in New Hampshire issue bonds independently and some of the smaller
towns operate capital reserve funds to self-finance projects through savings. Nevertheless, a financing gap
for small and medium towns and municipalities remained, and since its founding until 2016 the New
Hampshire Municipal Bond Bank has issued 1,198 loans to government entities, with a total of $2.4 billion
in municipal bonds. Individual loans range in size from $49 million for a school district to $19,000 for
repairs to a fire truck (New Hampshire Municipal Bond Bank 2016; New Hampshire Municipal Association
2008).

The New Hampshire Municipal Bond Bank only offers general purpose loans to municipal borrowers for
capital projects, operating effectively with minimal operational costs. While New Hampshire also has other
loan programs, such as a state revolving fund, these are managed separately from the New Hampshire
Municipal Bond Bank. The New Hampshire Municipal Bond Bank is staffed by three full-time staff, which
conduct credit analysis and loan administration. At the time of its founding, the New Hampshire Municipal
Bond Bank did not receive a loan from the state but instead directly issued non-asset bonds and funded
operational costs through interest rate surcharges to municipal borrowers. Operational costs continue to be
funded from a combination of interest rate surcharges, application fees from borrowers, and investment
earnings (Interviews with New Hampshire Municipal Bond Bank Staff 2017).

New Hampshire Municipal Bond Bank bonds are issued under three resolutions, which have evolved over
time. Most bonds are issued under the 1978 Resolution, which has an established reserve fund and separate
account groups for general funds, operating costs, principle, interest and reserve funds. In 1979, an
additional resolution was issued for state-guaranteed debt for state priority projects, however this resolution
has been being phased out since the late 1990s. In 2005, a new resolution was created using sureties instead
of a reserve fund, however when the sureties market collapsed in 2008, the New Hampshire Municipal
Bond Bank restructured these bonds to utilize reserve funds. The 1978 Resolution has remained the New
Hampshire Municipal Bond Bank’s largest and most diversified pool, with $636 million in outstanding debt
in 2016 (New Hampshire Municipal Bond Bank 2016).

New Hampshire Municipal Bond Bank staff actively monitor their loan portfolio and loan repayments,
though their surveillance of borrowers is limited. Borrowing municipalities submit an application that
includes audited financial statements, which is reviewed and then approved by the New Hampshire
Municipal Bond Bank’s five-member board. Once a loan has been issued, the New Hampshire Municipal
Bond Bank staff is proactive in ensuring on-time payments by sending invoices 60 days before the due date,
with follow-up emails then two weeks prior and phone calls if payments are not received a few days prior.
The New Hampshire Municipal Bond Bank does not conduct active surveillance of projects or municipal
finances, however, due to the strong regulations around municipal debt, nor are continued annual audits
required. Any municipal bond is required to be approved by 2/3 vote at a town meeting. Once approved,
debt service is required to be included in the town’s annual budgets. The state of New Hampshire also set
debt limits for municipal governments. As of 2015, New Hampshire Municipal Bond Bank bond issues
have credit ratings of AA+ from S&P and Aa2 from Moody’s (Author Interviews, New Hampshire
Municipal Bond Bank 2016).
                                                           24


Annex B: State Revolving Funds
In the United States, state governments have developed additional financing models for critical
infrastructure through State Revolving Funds (SRFs). The SRF model developed following the 1987 federal
Clean Water Act that provided direct federal grants to states for water and wastewater treatment plants with
a 20% matching contribution from the state government, which can then be used by states to make low-
cost or no-interest loans for eligible water infrastructure projects. The revolving funds are set up so that the
money, once repaid, does not go to a general fund, but rather back to the loan fund so it can be re-loaned.
The Act gives the states wide discretion in structuring the, including setting interest rates and loan terms,
and managing administration through bond banks, state financing authorities, other state agencies, or
independent non-profit associations (Kehew, Matsukawa and Peterson 2005; Puentes and Thompson
2016).46

     The United States developed the Clean Water Act to stimulate capital spending on pollution control
and wastewater, however it recognized that grant funding alone would not cover infrastructure demand.
Instead, states can use the funds in various ways, including direct lending or leveraging the initial federal
and state capitation to issue bonds which are secured by project revenues and enhanced by the additional
grant equity. By allowing leveraging of the grant funds, the Environmental Protection Agency has estimated
that each dollar invested in the Clean Water federal grant program results in $2.90 worth of investments in
water infrastructure through the SRFs. All 50 states and Puerto Rico have since established some model of
the SRF and 28 states have used leveraging to expand the reach of their grant funds. Since the program
began until 2016, total federal contributions have reached $41 billion, matched by $7.6 billion in state
grants, which has been multiplied by the SRFs into $120 billion available for project financing (Copeland,
Maguire and Mallett 2016; Environmental Protection Agency 2016a).

    Leveraged SRFs can issue highly-rated bonds by pledging all or part of their capital funding to the
repayment of the bond using either a reserve fund model or cash flow model:

         Reserve Fund Model: Equity from the clean water grants are held in a reserve fund that is used to
          back revenue bonds issued by municipal and local governments. Reserve funds serve as security
          for bonds but can also be used to subsidize interest rates. Often reserves are overcapitalized,
          providing 25 to 50 cents of reserves for every dollar in loans, especially in SRFs where there is
          small number of larger borrowers.

         Cash Flow Model: States initially lend the original equity to projects and then pledge loan
          repayments as security to issue revenue bonds that can be used to make additional loans. Bonds
          are structured with more loan repayments pledged then required for bond debt payments, and the
          principal and interest payments are first used for bond repayment, and then for replenishing the
          SRF. SRFs can also use a hybrid model, using some portion of their equity for a reserve fund and
          the remainder to fund loans to be used as security for revenue bonds.

    In recent years, more SRFs have been using a hybrid or cash-flow model due to low market interest
rates that make reserve fund structures less attractive for investors (Fitch 2016b; Oliver and Mauro Undated
Draft).

    Credit scores for SRF programs are enhanced by the equity enhancements, pool diversity, and other
default remedy provisions put in place by state governments. Of the leveraged SRF programs rated by Fitch,


46
  The Clean Water act allows grant money to be used to issue low-interest rate loans, buy municipal bonds, guarantee local
government loans, serve as revenue or security on bonds sold to make loans, earn interest or pay for administrative costs.
                                                             25


for example, 80% of programs are rated AAA, despite the median implied pool rating of BBB-. Most this
credit enhancement is likely to come from the equity enhancements instead of pool diversity, as top-10
borrower concentration within the pooled programs is high, with a median of 59%. A large factor driving
these high credit ratings is the low leverage levels that SRFs use to issue loans and bonds. In Fitch’s stress
tests, they estimate that 85% of their 33 rated programs could withstand 100% loan repayment defaults over
three four-year periods. SRF credit scores can be enhanced by additional measures, similar to municipal
bond banks, including: state aid intercepts, additional reserve funds, security measures in loan agreements,
and surveillance and enforcement procedures. High credit scores for SRF leveraged programs can result in
significant savings for SRF borrowers; borrowing at up to 3 percent below the market rate (Fitch 2016b;
Environmental Protection Agency 2016b; Oliver and Maduro Undated Draft).

     The success of the Clean Water SRF model has led it to be expanded and replicated at the federal and
state levels. In 1996, the federal government authorized an additional Drinking Water State Revolving Fund
program for public water systems, modeled on the Clean Water Act. This program focuses on water
provision, where providers are often private sector or non-profit; thus, the program expanded eligible
recipients. The new act also allowed for the clean water and drinking water funds to cross-collateralize their
obligation and transfer funds between programs States have also expanded the SRF model to include
additional innovations to expand the capital available for infrastructure, creating transportation SRFs in
State Infrastructure Banks using capitalization from federal funding from the Transportation Department
or from additional state revenues (Puentes and Thompson 2016).

     The SRF model differs from municipal bond banks in several key areas, including: the use of federal
grant funding, project application and selection criteria, and setting borrower interest rates. The municipal
bond bank model is not reliant on federal or state grants to capitalize loans; instead using the pooling
mechanism and credit enhancements to lower the cost of borrowing. SRFs, on the other hand, use federal
or state equity to raise their credit ratings and subsidize borrowing costs.47 In reviewing potential applicants
for loans, the municipal bond bank and SRF also differ in terms of their selection criteria. Municipal bond
banks can offer loans to all applicants, once they have satisfied criteria for creditworthiness and project
eligibility, as these loans can be automatically packaged into their next bond issue. SRFs, on the other hand,
will vary in procedures by states, using either a ‘first-come first-serve’ approach or evaluating projects
based on selection criteria and ranking based on state priorities. Finally, SRFs and municipal bond banks
vary in terms of procedures for setting interest rates. Municipal bond banks set interest rates based on
market rates and any additional interest rate surcharges needed to cover operational costs. SRFs on the other
hand, have wide discretion to set interest rates and often subsidize borrowers based on hardship criteria
(Kehew, Matsukawa and Peterson 2005; Puentes and Thompson 2016). Despite these differences, both
models have been effective at financing key infrastructure investments at the subnational level and
leveraging pooled financing mechanisms to lower the cost of borrowing.




47
  Without these capital injections, it is possible than SRF offering subsidized interest rates will begin to lose equity over
time, but it is also possible that the SRF could offer subsidized rates based on the pooling mechanism and credit enhancement
measures alone. A 1992 paper estimated that subsidized loans below market rates and inflation rates would reduce the total
loan capacity over time; while a 2007 study suggested that an SRF offering 1% interest rates could still maintain its loan
volume, but would need to raise interest rates to increase loan capacity (Puentes and Thompson 2016).
                                                  26


References
Anderson, Lars M. 2014. Local Government Finance in Europe - Trends to Create Local Government
Funding Agencies. Available at
https://www.researchgate.net/publication/273440189_Local_Government_Finance_in_Europe_-
_Trends_to_Create_Local_Government_Funding_Agencies

Congressional Research Service. Tax-Exempt Bonds: A Description of State and Local Government
Debt, by Driessen, Grant A. RL30638. Washington, DC, 2016. https://fas.org/sgp/crs/misc/RL30638.pdf

Copeland, Claudia, Steven Maguire and William J. Mallett. 2016. “Legislative Options in the 114th
Congress for Financing Water Infrastructure.” Washington, DC: Congressional Research Service.
https://fas.org/sgp/crs/misc/R42467.pdf

Environmental Protection Agency. 2016a. “Clean Water State Revolving Fund Program: 2016 Annual
Report.” Washington, DC. https://www.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2017-
03/documents/2016_cwsrf_annual_report.pdf

Environmental Protection Agency. 2016b. “State Revolving Funds and Water Infrastructure Financing.”
Presentation. Washington, DC. https://www.epa.gov/sites/production/files/2016-
05/documents/s.parsons_waterinfrastructureissues.pdf

Fitch Ratings. 2016a. “State Revolving Fund and Leveraged Municipal Loan Pool Criteria,” by Major
Parkhurst, Julie Garcia Seebach, Tim Morilla and Doug Scott. New York, Fitch Ratings, October 20,
2016.

Fitch Ratings. 2016b. “State Revolving Fund and Municipal Loan Peer Review: 2016,” by Julie Garcia
Seebach, Major Parkhurst, Doug Scott, and Tim Morilla. New York, Fitch Ratings: October 31, 2016.

Johnson, Bradley. 2005. “Introduction to Pooled Financing.” Prepared for USAID by Sequra/IP3 Partners
for the Pooled Financing Workshop, May 2005. Washington, DC: USAID.
http://pdf.usaid.gov/pdf_docs/Pnado996.pdf

Kehew, Robert, Tomoko Matsukawa and John Petersen. 2005. “Local Financing for Sub-Sovereign
Infrastructure in Developing Countries: Case Studies of Innovative Domestic Credit Enhancement
Entities and Techniques.” Discussion Paper No. 1, Infrastructure, Economics and Finance Department.
Washington, DC: World Bank.
http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTGUARANTEES/Resources/Local_Financing_for_Sub-
sovereign_infrastructure.pdf

Kentucky Infrastructure Authority. 2015. Audit Report.
http://wris.ky.gov/downloads/financial_statements/KIAFY15auditreport.pdf

Liu, Lili, with Otaviano Canuto, eds. 2013. Until Debt Do Us Part: Subnational Debt, Insolvency, and
Markets. Washington, DC: World Bank. https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/12597

Liu, Lili, Xiaowei Tian and John Joseph Wallis. 2013. “Caveat Creators: State Systems of Local
Government Borrowing in the United States” in Until Debt Do Us Part, edited by Otaviano Canuto and
Lili Liu, 539-590. Washington, DC: World Bank.
http://siteresources.worldbank.org/EXTPREMNET/Resources/489960-
1362149255773/UntilDebtCh14_United_States_State_Systems_Local_Government_Borrowing.pdf
                                                    27


Liu, Lili, with Juan Pradeli. 2012. “Financing Infrastructure and Monitoring Fiscal Risks at Subnational
Level.” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper #6069. Washington, D.C: World Bank

Liu, Lili. 2011. Subnational Debt Finance and Risk Management – International Experience. 2011.
Washington, D.C: World Bank

Liu, Lili, with Steven Webb. 2011. Law for Fiscal Responsibility for Subnational Discipline: International
Experience.” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper #5587. Washington, D.C: World Bank

Liu, Lili, with Michael Waibel. 2010. “Managing Subnational Credit and Default Risks.” World Bank
Policy Research Working Paper #5362, and Chapter 11 in Sovereign Debt and the Financial Crisis, ed.
Braga and Vincelette. Washington, D.C: World Bank

Liu, Lili. 2010. "Strengthening Subnational Debt Financing and Managing Risks." 2010. Review of
Economic Research, 46 F-9. Beijing

Liu, Lili, with Otaviano Canuto. 2010. “Subnational Debt Finance and the Global Financial Crisis.”
Economic Premise; No. 13. Washington, DC: World Bank.
https://openknowledge.worldbank.org/handle/10986/10186

Liu, Lili, with Michael Waibel. 2009. Subnational Borrowing, Insolvency and Regulations” In Macro
Federalism and Local Finance, ed. Anwar Shah. Washington, D.C: World Bank

Maine Municipal Bond Bank. 2017. General Bond Resolution Program Rating Agency Presentation,
2017B Spring Sale.
http://mmbb.com/documents/RatingAgencyPresentations/GeneralResolution.pdf

Maine Municipal Bond Bank. 2015. “Measures of Performance.” Presentation to the Annual Meeting,
September 25, 2015. http://mmbb.com/documents/MMBB_MOP.pdf

Maryland Department of Housing and Community Development. 2017. “How Local Government
Infrastructure Financing Works” Webpage accessed April 16, 2017 at
http://dhcd.maryland.gov/Communities/Pages/lgif/HowItWorks.aspx

Moody’s. 2013. “U.S. Municipal Pool Program Debt,” by Henrietta Chang, Julie Beglin and Anne Van
Praagh. New York: Moody’s Investors Service, March 29, 2013.

Moody’s. 2016. “New Issue - Moody’s Assigns Aa2 to Maine Municipal Bond Bank’s 2017 Ser. A
Bonds; Outlook Stable.” Credit Opinion. New York: Moody’s Investor Service, December 20, 2016.

New Hampshire Municipal Association. 2008. “New Hampshire Municipal Bond Bank Celebrates 30
Years.” In New Hampshire Town and City, November/December 2008.
https://www.nhmunicipal.org/TownAndCity/Article/133

New Hampshire Municipal Bond Bank. 2012. A Pooled Municipal Bonding Program.
http://www.nhmbb.org/pdf_documents/marketingbrochure.pdf

New Hampshire Municipal Bond Bank. 2016. “2016 Annual Report.”
http://www.nhmbb.org/images/pdfs/AR2016.pdf
                                                   28


New Hampshire Municipal Bond Bank. General Bond Resolution. Adopted July 14, 2005, as Amended
June 23, 2006.

Official Statement, Maine Municipal Bond Bank, $29,900,000 2016 Series C Bonds, dated October 6,
2016.

Official Statement, New Hampshire Municipal Bond Bank, $5,015,000 Series A Bonds, dated January 13,
2016.

Oliver, William and Christopher Mauro. Undated Draft. “Bond Banks, Revolving Funds and Guarantee
Programs for Local Government Infrastructure in the United States.” New York: UNDP.

Peterson, John. 1997. An Analysis of State Bond Banks. Arlington, Virginia: Council of Infrastructure
Financing Authorities, Monograph No. 9. http://www.cifanet.org/newsPDF/bb97report.pdf

Puentes, Robert and Jennifer Thompson. 2016. “Banking on Infrastructure: Enhancing State Revolving
Funds for Infrastructure.” Brookings-Rockefeller Project on State and Metropolitan Innovation.
https://www.brookings.edu/wp-content/uploads/2016/06/12-state-infrastructure-investment-puentes.pdf

S&P Global. 2006. “U.S. Public Finance: Moral Obligation Bonds,” by Victor M Medeiros, Jane H
Ridley, Liz E Sweeney. New York: Standard & Poor’s Global, June 27, 2006.

S&P Global. 2012. “U.S. Public Finance Long‐Term Municipal Pools: Methodology and Assumptions,”
by James M. Breeding, Scott D. Garrigan, and Liz E. Sweeney. New York: Standard & Poor’s Global,
March 19, 2012.

State of Maryland. “How Local Government Infrastructure Financing Works.” Official website, accessed
March 10, 2017: http://dhcd.maryland.gov/Communities/Pages/lgif/HowItWorks.aspx

U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission. 2012. Report on the Municipal Securities Market.
Washington, DC. https://www.sec.gov/news/studies/2012/munireport073112.pdf

United States Census. 2007. “Local Governments and Public School Systems by Type and State.”
https://www2.census.gov/govs/cog/2007/GovOrgTab03ss.html

United States Census. 2012. “Growth in Urban Population Outpaces Rest of Nation, Census Bureau
Reports.” United States Census Press Release.
https://www.census.gov/newsroom/releases/archives/2010_census/cb12-50.html

World Bank. 2014. Institutional investment in infrastructure in emerging markets and developing
economies. Washington, DC: World Bank Group.
http://documents.worldbank.org/curated/en/748551468337163636/Institutional-investment-in-
infrastructure-in-emerging-markets-and-developing-economies
